<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Fourteenth Session Rome, 4-23 November 1967</title>
<section>1</section>
I. FAO MEMBER NATIONS - as at 1 April 1968
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo, Dam Rap of the
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Dahomey
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia, The
Germany, Fed Rep of
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somali Republic
Spain
Sudan, The
Sweden Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunis
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Republic
United Kingdom
United Stets of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay Venezuela
Viet-Nam, Rep. of
Yemen Arab Republic
Yugoslavia
Zambia
<section>2</section>
II. FAO ASSOCIATE MEMBERS - as at 1 April 1968
Bahrain
Qatar
<section>3</section>
III. MEMBERS OF FAO COUNCIL
Independent Chairman Maurice Gemayel
The composition of the Council until 31 December 1968 is as follows
Afghanistan^1
Australia^2
Brazil^2
Canada^1
Central African Republic^3
Chile^3
Columbia^1
Costa Rica^1
Ethiopia^2
France^2
Germany, Fed Rep of India^2
Indonesia^2
Israel^2
Ivory Coast^1
Japan^2
Kenya^1
Mali^1
Nepal^2
Pakistan^2
Peru^3
Philippines^2
Romania^2
Somali Republic^2
Sudan The^2
Sweden^2
Tunisia^1
Turkey^3
Uganda^2
United Arab Republic^3
United Kingdom^2
United States of America^1
Uruguay^2
Yugoslavia^1
The composition of the Council from 1 January 1969 is as follows
Algeria^4
Afghanistan^4
Australia^4
Belgium^4
Brazil^4
Canada^4
Central African Republic^3
Chile^2
Colombia^4
Costa Rio^4
Ethiopia^2
France^2
Germany, fed Rep of^3
India^3
Indonesia^2
Iraq^4
Japan^2
Mali^2
Nepal^3
Nigeria^4
Pakistan^2
Peru^3
Philippines^3
Poland^4
Romania^3
Somali Republic^2
Sweden^2
Turkey^3
Uganda^2
United Arab Republic^3
United Kingdom^2
United States of America^1
Uruguay^2
Zambia^1
Term of office until 31 December 1968
^2Term of office until conclusion of fifteenth session of the Conference, November 1968
^3Term of office until 31 December 1970
^4Term of office until conclusion of sixteenth session of the Conference, November 1917
© FAO 1968
Printed in Great Britain
<section>4</section>
IV. The late viscount Bruce of Melbourne
Report - Fourteenth Session of the Conference, 4 - 23 November 1967
1. The Conference paid tribute to the late Viscount Bruce of Melbourne, one of the founding fathers of FAO. Lord Bruce had been Chairman of the FAO Council from 1947 to 1951.
<section>5</section>
V. In memoriam
2. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members named below who died in the service of the Organization since the Thirteenth Session of the Conference.
Name
Title
Duty Station
ACHARYA, Pundi (India)
Information Officer
Rome, Italy
CASTALDI, Quirino (Italy)
Duplicating Equipment Operator
Rome, Italy
CLAYTON, William (U.K.)
Animal Production Officer
Belize, British Honduras
COLTMAN, Charles (U.S.A.)
Information Officer
Rome Italy
DRENNAN, Denis (Ireland)
Rural Institutions Officer
Rome, Italy
EINARSSON, Herman (Norway)
Fishery Officer
Aden, Federation of South Arabia
GROWER, M.D. (India)
Accounts Clerk
New Delhi, India
SILFVERSTOLPE, Lars (Sweden)
Budget Officer
Rome, Italy
SWEEDE, Ingerborg (Germany)
Home Economics Officer
Rome, Italy
AMARO, Laurent (France)
Fishery Officer
Dakar, Senegal
BOLTS, Johann (Germany)
Associate Expert
Baghdad, Iraq
BUTCHER, W. (U.K.)
Technical Officer
Rangoon, Burma
CURNUTT, Harris (U. S. A. )
Information Assistant
Rome, Italy
DI GREGORIO, Orazio (Italy)
Personnel Assistant
Rome, Italy
GOBERT, Olivier (France)
Chief, Fellowships and Training
Rome, Italy
GRADEY, Irene (Canada)
Clerk-Stenographer
Rome, Italy
HAGUE, Douglas (U.K. )
Animal Health Officer
Bridgetown, Barbados
LUND, Knut (Finland)
Forestry Officer
Colombo, Ceylon
MOHAMMAD, Ghulan (Pakistan)
Consultant
Rome, Italy
ROMANELLI, Nicoletta (Italy)
Stenographer
Rome, Italy
SADEK, Moussa (U.A.R.)
Technical Officer
Rome, Italy
TESSI, Juan (Argentina)
Agricultural Officer
Rome, Italy
UPWARD, George (Australia)
Animal Production Officer
Alexandria, U. A. R.
<section>6</section>
VI. His holiness Pope Paul VI
3. The Conference requested its Chairman to send on its behalf a message of solidarity to His Holiness Pope Paul VI, wishing him an early recovery from his illness and the surgical operation of 4 November 1967.
<section>7</section>
VII. McDougall memorial lecture
4. The fifth in the series of lectures given at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by Professor G. Ugo Papi of Italy.
<section>8</section>
VIII. Procedural matters
A. Appointment of the chairman, vice-chairman, general committee and credentials committee
B. Agenda of the session
C. Arrangements for the session
D. Establishment of commissions and provisional timetable for the session
E. Appointment of the chairman and vice-chairman of commissions, and of officers of the technical committees
F. Committee-of-the-whole on the review of the organization's general structure
G. Resolutions committee of the conference
H. Right of reply
I. Verbatim records
J. Admission of observers
K. Verification of credentials
L. Informal meeting of non-governmental organizations
A. Appointment of the chairman, vice-chairman, general committee and credentials committee
5. The Council and the Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Chairman of the Conferences Jozef Winiewicz (Poland)
Vice-Chairman of the Conferences Mozart Gurgel Valente Jr. (Brazil)
Bruce Roy McKenzie (Kenya)
A. H. M. Shams-ud-Doha (Pakistan)
Members of the General Committee
Australia Lebanon
Chad United Kingdom
Colombia United States of America
France 
Members of the Credentials Committee
Dahomey Romania
Dominican Republic Somali Republic
El Salvador Tanzania
Italy Thailand
Nepal 
B. Agenda of the session
6. The Conference adopted the provisional Agenda circulated by the Council (C 67/1 - SECOND DRAFT), which included the additional items proposed by Member Nations and by the Council; these additions had been circulated 20 days in advance of the Conference Session, in accordance with Rule II-5 of the General Rules of the Organization, as document C 67/1-Add. 1.
C. Arrangements for the session
7. At its Forty-Eighth Session the Council had proposed the arrangements and tentative timetable for the Fourteenth Session of the Conference, which were circulated to Member Nations and Associate Members as document C 67/2. In the light of developments, the Council at its Forty-Ninth Session proposed some minor modifications and amplifications which were incorporated in a revised document C 67/LIM/15. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Council in these two documents, on the understanding that the timetable remained subject to modification in the light of the progress made.
D. Establishment of commissions and provisional timetable for the session
8. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish the usual three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and m of the Agenda (see C 67/2, pares. 40-42). It also agreed to the revisions in the timetable proposed by the Council in C 67/LIM/15.
9. The Conference concurred with the recommendations of the Council that the Council's report on the review of statutory bodies (C 67/LIM/10) be first considered in Commission II, together with any views on this item which the General Rapporteur on the work of the Technical Committees might wish to transmit to the Commission. The Chairman of Commission II would forward the views and recommendations of Commission II to the Chairman of Commission m so that Commission m could take these into consideration when dealing with Item 29 of the Agenda. The consequential change in the timing of the discussions in Commission m had been taken into account in the revised timetable for the Conference Session submitted by the Council in C 67/LIM/15.
E. Appointment of the chairman and vice-chairman of commissions, and of officers of the technical committees
10. In accordance with the Rule VII-1, the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
For Commission I N. El Ghorfi (Morocco)
For Commission II R.W. Phillips (United States of America)
For Commission III H. J. Scharmer (Federal Republic of Germany)
11. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers, and noted that the Council had appointed H. J. Kristensen (Denmark) General Rapporteur on the Work of the Technical Committees of the Conference.
12. The Conference further took into consideration the proposals of the General Committee in accordance with Rule XIII and General Rules of the Organization, and appointed:
M. Y. Qureshi (Pakistan) and M. Ristic (Yugoslavia)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I
N. A. R. Reichart (Argentina) and J. Keutcha (Cameroon)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II
J. Habtu (Ethiopia) and Y. Yano (Japan)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III
13. The following were also appointed the officers of the Technical Committees:
Technical Committee on Agriculture
Chairman: Dr. A.B. Coronel (Philippines)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. M. Y. Qureshi (Pakistan)
Second Vice-Chairman: Dr. Muhammed Hafiz Salim (Jordan)
Rapporteur: Mr. D.N.R. Webb (New Zealand)
Technical Committee on Forestry and Forest Products
Chairman: Sir Henry Beresford-Peirse (United Kingdom)
Vice-Chairmen: Mr. M.S. Hardjordarsono (Indonesia)
Mr. S.A. Aleem (Pakistan)
Rapporteur: Mr. M. L. S. B. Rukuba (Uganda)
Technical Committee on Information and Publications
Chairman: Dr. Octavian Fenesan (Romania)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. M. Witcher (United States of America)
Second Vice-Chairman: H.E. Nor El-Ghorfi (Morocco)
Rapporteur: Mr. Siribongse Boon-Long (Thailand)
Technical Committee on Nutrition
Chairman: Dr. P.K. Kymal (India)
Vice-Chairman: Prof. P. Roine (Finland)
Rapporteur: Miss D. F. Hollingsworth (United Kingdom)
Technical Committee on Economics
Chairman: Mr. W.M. Oakley (Australia)
Vice-Chairman: Mr. J.C. Amoafo (Ghana)
Rapporteur: Mr. J. Chonchol (Chile)
Technical Committee on Fisheries
Chairman: Dr. G.N. Mitra (India)
First Vice-Chairman: Mr. J.V. Alves de Araujo (Brazil)
Second Vice-Chairman: U Tint Hlaing (Burma)
Rapporteur: Mr. J. Adjetey (Ghana)
F. Committee-of-the-whole on the review of the organization's general structure
14. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendation that Item 6, "Review of the Organization's General Structure" be referred to a Committee-of-the-Whole which would report its findings to Commission I. The Conference appointed A. C. B. Maiden (Australia) Chairman of the Committee-of-the-Whole.
G. Resolutions committee of the conference
15. The Conference decided to establish a Resolutions Committee in accordance with the Council's proposals (C 67/2 Appendix IV, paragraphs 167-169). The Committee would comprise the Chairman of the Program Committee, M. Cépède, the Vice-Chairman of the Finance Committee, R. Gibb, and the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters, R. Rossow, together with the following four members of the General Committee:
Chad
Colombia
Lebanon
United Kingdom
16. The Conference appointed M. Cépède, Chairman of the Council's Program Committee, to be Chairman of the Resolutions Committee of the Conference.
17. The functions of the Resolutions Committee were to examine all draft resolutions whatever their origin before they were submitted to the Commissions or the Plenary of the Conference for approval, and where desirable revise or consolidate them, or recommend that the substance be incorporated in the text of the report.
18. The Conference agreed that in Commissions of the Conference, as well as in other bodies of the Organization, the number of resolutions should be kept to a minimum and that they be confined essentially to formal matters as follows:
(a) proposals of amendment of the Constitution, General Rules and Financial Regulations of the Organization;
(b) recommendations regarding the adoption of international conventions or agreements;
(c) establishment of commissions, committees and working parties of Member Nations and Associate Members or of individuals appointed in their personal capacity, and proposals regarding the statutes, terms of reference and reporting procedures of the foregoing bodies;
(d) convening of general, regional, technical or other conferences, consultations of ad hoc working parties, laying down their terms of reference and reporting procedures;
(e) recommendations or decisions involving commitments by the Organization or regarding certain financial matters such as Working Capital Fund, scale contributions, adoption of audited accounts;
(f) the adoption of the Program of Work and Budget for the ensuing biennium, covering the entire Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69. (It would therefore not be necessary for each Technical Committee to draft a separate resolution regarding the Program and Budget for the sector of work covered by the Committee concerned, although each Committee would be expected to include in its report an expression of views regarding the technical merits and balance of the Program).
19. The Resolutions Committee would be required to see that resolutions conformed with the above and also to draw attention to any constitutional, Program and budgetary aspects that needed to be taken into consideration in any draft resolutions proposed for adoption.
20. While the Resolutions Committee would examine all proposed resolutions in the light of its terms of reference, the Program of Work and Budget for the ensuing biennium was adopted by a single resolution and hence proposals already contained in that document did not require specific resolutions, except in so far as they varied from the original proposals. Similarly, certain statutory or formal resolutions would probably need very little change if any. Thus, the main work of the Resolutions Committee would concern resolutions which tend to alter the draft program or those which made recommendations to Governments.
21. The Resolutions Committee could not decide or amend, but merely recommend to the appropriate body what changes it considered should be made in the text. This it would do before approval by the body concerned. While this would normally mean that the Resolutions Committee should examine each draft resolution before discussion in the Commission or Plenary meeting, that is to say, between the time the resolution was moved from the floor and it was circulated in the working languages for debate, in a number of cases it would be evident that the resolution might not obtain the necessary support in the discussion. In such cases the Resolutions Committee might decide not to take time considering draft texts before the debate on the substance.
22. Accordingly, the Conference adopted the following system of operation for the Resolutions Committee:
(a) As soon as a resolution was proposed, the chairman of the body concerned would request the Secretariat to have it translated, brought to the attention of the Resolutions Committee and then circulated to the body where it would be discussed.
(b) The Resolutions Committee at that stage would choose between one of four alternatives, which it would indicate at the foot of the text prepared for distribution to the proposing body:
- If the text seems in order, the Committee would indicate this.
- If modifications or additions which did not alter the substance seemed necessary, the Committee would indicate them. These would in many cases concern constitutional, program or financial aspects.
- If the resolution did not cover a matter set out in pare. 18(a) to (f) above, the Resolutions Committee would suggest that the substance be incorporated into the narrative text of the Conference or Commission report.
- If there was doubt regarding reaching agreement on the substance of the resolution in the proposing body, the Resolutions Committee might request that the substance be debated by the proposing body, and that after this debate and the decision upon the substance, the draft resolution be returned to the Resolutions Committee for consideration.
23. In certain cases also, members of the Committee might be delegated to attend the debate where the resolution was discussed either to explain the Committee's views and reasons for any proposed changes, or to follow the debate so as to be able to inform the Resolutions Committee of the background when the text of the resolution comes before the Resolutions Committee.
24. The Resolutions Committee would not wish to delay the proceedings of the Conference. Since the texts of draft resolutions were to be circulated only after the Resolutions Committee had completed its examination, it would be necessary for the Committee to meet on the call of its Chairman.
25. Rule XI, paragraph 3, of the General Rules of the Organization required that formal proposals be introduced in writing, and should not be discussed or put to the vote until copies had been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding the meeting at which the proposal was to be adopted. The same rule, however, permitted the discussion and consideration of amendments to such proposals even though these amendments have not been circulated or had only been circulated on the same day. The Conference decided accordingly that to avoid the risk of additional delays in adoption of texts by the Commissions or Plenary any modifications which the Resolutions Committee might propose to resolutions should be treated as amendments under the foregoing proviso and considered, if necessary, on the day they were circulated by the Resolutions Committee.
H. Right of reply
26. The Conference recalled the decision of its previous sessions to the effect that, where a delegate wished to reply to criticism of his Government's policy he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so. The Conference confirmed this arrangement.
I. Verbatim records
27. Under the FAO rules, verbatim records were kept of Conference plenary and commission meetings, and right of delegates to suggest corrections to the records was specifically mentioned (Rule XVIII-2).
28. "Corrections" could mean either the correction of mistakes and typing errors, or amendment by the delegate of a word or phrase he had actually used. In practice, amendments were accepted only to interventions made by members of the delegation requesting the amendment. Delegates were requested to submit corrections within 48 hours of circulation of the draft verbatim record concerned.
29. During the 1959 Conference Session, the number of heads of delegation wanting to speak in the opening general discussion had been greater than the timetable would permit, and a request was made for those who would agree to insert their statements in the record without delivering it in Plenary. In 1961 and since then this procedure had been formally adopted by the Conference at its Sessions.
30. There had been other occasions also when delegates had inserted in the verbatim records statements which had not been delivered. While the Conference saw no objection in principle to the insertion of statements in the record when time did not permit them to be delivered, it recognised the difficulties which might arise if no occasion were given to delegates to reply to such insertions.
31. The Conference therefore decided to continue to permit the insertion of such statements on condition that:
(a) The Conference, Commission or the Committee-of-the-Whole was informed by its Chairman that a statement not actually delivered, or a substantive addition to a statement that had been delivered, was being inserted in the record;
(b) the provisional verbatim record containing the additional statement was circulated at least three days before the closure of the Session; and
(c) delegations attending the Session were given an opportunity to avail themselves of the right of reply by making a declaration relating to the additional statement prior to the closure of the session.
J. Admission of observers
32. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership and Associate membership to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference confirmed the Director-General's action.
33. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to send observers to this Session, and invited the representatives of such organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in the capacity of observers.
K. Verification of credentials
34. The credentials of delegations of 115 Member Nations and three Associate Members, including those of newly-admitted Member Nations and Associate Members, were found in order. One Member Nation had not submitted credentials.
35. The credentials of the Delegation of the Holy See, Permanent Observer to FAO, were found satisfactory.
36. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule m. 2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
37. The Conference requested that the various passages referring to credentials in the Basic Texts of the Organization, as well as the criteria established by previous sessions of the Credentials Committee, be clarified and integrated. Consequently, they are set out below, and the Conference recommended that they be specifically brought to the notice of the Member Governments in the letters of invitation to Conference sessions:
(a) Credentials should be in the form of letters bearing the signature of, or signed on behalf of, the Head of the State or Government or of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Resolution 1/51).
(b) In accordance with the General Rules of the Organization (pare. 4 of Rule XXI) full powers given to a Government representative to sign conventions and agreements can be issued also by the minister of the department concerned, and this had been construed to cover credentials for Conference sessions.
(c) In the absence of credentials signed by the authorities listed in (a) and (b) above, a communication signed by the Ambassador of the country concerned and accredited to the Italian Government is considered a valid credential since the Ambassador represents the Head of the State (see (a) above). In the Ambassador's absence this faculty devolves on the Chargé d'Affaires. However, in such cases neither the Ambassador nor the Charge d'Affaires may themselves be included in the Delegation, whereas those persons listed in (a) and (b) above may also designate themselves as representatives.
(d) Notes Verbales and telegrams or cables are not considered valid credentials because not fully signed (decision of the Credentials Committee during the Twelfth Session of the FAO Conference, as set out in Document C 63/LIM/68, and confirmed by the Credentials Committee of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference, as set out in document C 65/LIM/40).
(e) Undated credentials are acceptable only if they contain a reference to representation of the country concerned at the current Conference session.
(f) Credentials should indicate which representatives are accredited as Delegates, as Alternates, Associates, Advisers (pare. 1 of Rule III).
L. Informal meeting of non-governmental organizations
38. An informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Fourteenth Session of the Conference was convened on Monday 6 November 1967. The Forty-Ninth Session of the Council had nominated Mrs. G. van Beekhoff van Selms representing the Associated Country Women of the World, as Chairman. The meeting discussed possibilities of intensifying practical co-operation between FAO and non-governmental organizations.
<section>9</section>
IX. Major trends and policy questions in food and agriculture
A. Review of the organization's general structure
B. World situation and outlook
C. Indicative world plan for agricultural development (IWP)
D. Inter-agency study of multilateral food AID
E. Food production resources program
F. World food program
G. Freedom from hunger campaign
H. Skim milk powder in the world dairy economy
I. Article XI reports
A. Review of the organization's general structure
39. The discussion on this item was opened by the Director-General who referred to the origins and aims of the Review and to the procedure which had been followed. He also commented on the major areas of agreement and disagreement between the views expressed in the Report of the Review Team and his own. He concluded by saying that he felt that the material presently before the Conference on the subject was not enough to make possible the immediate implementation of an overall reorganization plan, but that considerably more study was necessary before such a plan could be worked out. In view of this, the Director-General expressed the view that the Council resolution was an adequate instrument for carrying out the study further permitting at the same time a certain degree of implementation during the biennium 1968/69 within the limits of the budget which the Conference adopted for that period.
40. The Conference agreed that the Review Team had done a very commendable job and also thanked the Director-General for his very valuable recommendations. While the Conference recognized that the work of the Review Team, of the Program and Finance Committees, the Council and the Director-General had produced a large amount of useful material, it agreed with the Council that the studies carried out so far on the question of the reorganization of FAO were not sufficient for it to reach a decision at this stage. Although the Conference agreed that the procedure proposed by the Council would be adequate, it felt nevertheless that the general debate on the subject which would be reflected in the verbatim records would be most appropriate in order to supply the Director-General, the ad hoc Committee on Organization, and the Council with the general feelings of -member countries on this question, and with certain guidelines and objectives. In this context, most delegations felt
that the work to be carried out under the procedure foreseen should use the Report of the Review Team as a starting point. However, other delegations felt that the recommendations of the Director-General should also be taken into regard but that in any event both could only be a skeleton on which to build on overall organization plan. The Conference agreed that whatever the basis used, those in charge of working out the plan should approach the matter in a pragmatic and flexible manner so as to permit adequate consideration of all the factors involved.
41. The Conference proceeded to a lively discussion of the issues involved in which representatives of 54 Member Nations expressed their views. Verbatim records of Member Nations views would be available for later use. The Conference fully agreed to proceed in accordance with the plan and timetable proposed by the Council.
42. There was full agreement to strengthen the FAO representation at the country level and the Conference decided that in cases where country representatives were needed they should be appointed as promptly as feasible within available financial resources. It was agreed that measures should be taken during the 1968/69 biennium to increase the number of country representatives both through the agreement which the Director-General had entered into with UNDP for the purpose of establishing senior agricultural advisers as well as by some redeployment of existing staff. Most delegations favored financing the country representatives, to the extent possible, through UNDP. However, some delegations felt that the appointment of FAO country representatives under the UNDP could lead to problems regarding lines of authority and therefore favored the appointment of FAO country representatives exclusively under the Regular Program. The question was raised whether the title of senior
agricultural adviser was the most appropriate.
43. The discussions regarding the functions and usefulness of regional offices were very frank. Many divergent and even opposite views were expressed. A number of delegations recommended that the present regional offices be abolished, while others suggested that new duties and functions be assigned to these offices and that they be strengthened. Many delegations expressed the view that the regional offices may not be needed in all areas and that the need for regional offices be separately considered in each case. It was generally agreed that there should be no implementation of budget increases proposed for regional offices until the plan of organization had been approved by the Council. The essential considerations in deciding on the structure in and for each region should be the political, economic, technical and social conditions of each region, and the requirements of relations with other regional organizations, particularly the United Nations Economic Commissions. There
was general agreement that these relations required substantial strengthening although the question was raised as to whether this strengthening could be best achieved through the regional offices, from Headquarters or through reinforced joint divisions with the Economic Commissions. The Conference agreed that the joint divisions with the Regional Economic Commissions should be continued and strengthened in accordance with proposals contained in the Program of Work and Budget for 1968-69. Under the circumstances the Conference felt that this matter required considerable further study and recommended that it should be approached in a pragmatic and flexible manner and that the solutions to be adopted need not necessarily have to be the same for all regions.
44. The Conference considered the idea of transforming all or part of the present technical regional staff into task forces which would be at the disposal of member countries for specific and concrete short-term missions such as the identification and preparation of Special Fund or investment projects, among others. This would provide for a more effective use of the outputted regional staff in relation to the requirements of Member Governments as regards the planning and timing of their activities. Several delegations felt that the proposal regarding task forces had considerable merits and deserved to be tried. It was suggested that such a trial could be evaluated after a certain period so that the results could be reviewed. Other delegations believed that the task forces were not the most effective manner of carrying out these functions.
45. Considering the important Development of FAO field activities under the different programs for which FAO is responsible, and the interrelations between the activities under the Regular Program and the field programs, the Conference examined the structure to be given to Headquarters first from the point of view of ensuring the most effective conduct of field operations. There was general agreement that in response to the Development requirements of Member Governments, FAO had become heavily involved in field operations and that this involvement should not only continue but required expansion.
46. Some delegations favored the Director-General's recommendations to establish a Department of Operational Policy and Co-ordination (OPCD) which would also provide the regional focus for field activities through regional desks and regional committees, while the technical divisions would retain responsibility for field operations. Other delegations, while agreeing with the essence of this approach, felt that the responsibility for the operation of multidisciplinary projects should be transferred to the OPCD. On the other hand, many delegations believed that neither of these solutions