<title>Upwelling and Fish Production</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT
This document has been prepared by D.H. Cushing of Lowestoft following proposals made at the 1967 and 1968 sessions of FAO's Advisory Committee on Marine Resources Research.
A major part of the work of the Fishery Resources and Exploitation Division of FAO's Department of Fisheries is concerned with the appraisal of the world's fishery resources. This appraisal has been carried out as the Division's contribution to FAO's Indicative World Plan. A meeting of consultants concerned with this work underlined the close connection between upwelling areas, areas of high primary production, and rich fishing grounds. The 4th Session of the Advisory Committee on Marine Resources Research (Res. 3.2.2) decided that it would be useful to request selected experts to prepare comprehensive essays on the present knowledge of physical, biological and fishery aspects of upwelling.
ACMRR also noted that a seminar sponsored by UNESCO/IOC and FAO might permit analysis of the questions raised by the IWP Working Party. Some members felt that at this stage it would be more useful to request selected experts to prepare comprehensive essays on present knowledge of physical, biological and fishery aspects of enrichment, for ultimate publication in a single volume by UNESCO and FAO.
Distribution
"Current Bibliography" entry:
FAO Department of Fisheries
Author
Regional Fisheries Officers
ACMRR Member
Selector SM
Cushing, D.H. (1969) 15-2M381
FAO Fish. tech. Pap., (84):40 p.
Upwelling and fish production
Upwelling. Currents - deep water currents. Carbon dioxide systems. Zooplankton - general. Fish - general. Indopacific South West. Indian Ocean. Indopacific Central. South China Sea.
DOCUMENTS OF THE FISHERY RESOURCES AND EXPLOITATION DIVISION OF FAO DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES
Documents which are not official FAO publications are issued in several series. They are given a restricted distribution and this fact should be indicated if they are cited. Most of them are prepared as working papers for meetings, or are summaries of information for use of member governments, organizations, and specialists concerned.
DOCUMENTS DE LA DIVISION DES RESSOURCES ET DE L'EXPLOITATION DES PÊCHES DU DÉPARTEMENT DES PÊCHES DE LA FAO
Des documents qui ne figurent pas parmi les publications officielles de la FAO sont publiés dans diverses séries. Ils font seulement l'objet d'une distribution restreinte, aussi convient-il de le préciser lorsque ces documents sont cités. Il s'agit le plus souvent de documents de travail préparés pour des réunions, ou de résumés d'information à l'intention des gouvernements des pays membres, ainsi que des organisations et spécialistes intéressés. Ces séries sont les suivantes:
FAO Fisheries Report FR/R (No.)
FAO Fisheries Circular FR/C (No.)
FAO Fisheries Synopsis FR/S (No.)
DOCUMENTOS DE LA DIRECCION DE RECURSOS PESQUEROS Y EXPLOTACION DEL DEPARTAMENTO DE PESCA DE LA FAO
Esta Subdirección publica varias series de documentos que no pueden considerarse como publicaciones oficiales de la FAO. Todos ellos tienen distribución limitada, circunstancia que debe indicarse en el caso de ser citados. La mayoría de los títulos que figuran en dichas series son documentos de trabajo preparados para reuniones o resúmenes de información destinados a los estados miembros, organizaciones y especialistas interesados.
Special groups of synopses are identified by symbols followed by classification numbers based on indexed code of "Current Bibliography":
SAST
Data concerning certain species and fish stocks.
MAST
Information on methods and subjects.
OT
Oceanographic data.
IT
Limnological data.
and
CART
Information concerning fisheries and resources of certain countries and regions (FID/S).
Des catégories spéciales de synopses sont identifiées à l'aide de symboles suivis des chiffres de classification basés sur le code d'indexation de la «Current Bibliography»:
SAST
Données sur certaines espèces et populations de poissons.
MAST
Renseignements sur des méthodes et des sujets.
OT
Données océanographiques.
IT
Données limnologiques.
et
CART
Renseignements sur les pêcheries et les ressources de certains pays et régions (FID/S).
Grupos especiales de sinopsis se distinguen con las siglas siguientes, seguidas por números de clasificación que se basan en las claves de los índices de la "Current Bibliography":
SAST
Datos relativos a ciertas especies y poblaciones.
MAST
Sinopsis sobre métodos y materias.
OT
Sinopsis sobre oceanografía.
IT
Sinopsis sobre limnología.
Y
CART
Información sobre los recursos acuáticos vivos de algunos países y regiones (FID/S).
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper FR/T (No.)
Special groups of Technical Papers are identified by:
RE
Indexed lists of experts and institutions drawn from registers maintained by the Fishery Resources and Exploitation Division.
CB
Lists of periodicals, special sections of "Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries," special bibliographies and papers concerning documentation problems.
MFS
Provisional editions of "FAO Manuals in Fisheries Science."
Some documents also have another identification, if, for example, they have been contributed to a meeting for which papers have been numbered according to another system.
Des catégories spéciales de documents techniques sont identifiées à l'aide des symboles suivants:
RE
Listes indexées d'experts et institutions tirées des registres tenus à jour par la Division des ressources et de l'exploitation des pêches.
CB
Listes de périodiques, des sections spéciales de la «Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries», des bibliographies particulières et des articles sur les problèmes de documentation.
MFS
Editions provisoires des «Manuels FAO de science halieutique».
Il arrive que certains documents portent d'autres numéros d'identification, comme c'est le cas s'ils ont été préparés pour une réunion dont les documents ont été marqués à l'aide d'un autre système.
Grupos especiales de documentos técnicos se identifican por las siglas siguientes:
RE
Listas índices de expertos y de instituciones tomadas de los registros que se llevan en la Dirección de Recursos Pesqueros y Explotación.
CB
Listas de periódicos, secciones especiales de la «Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries», bibliografías especiales y trabajos relativos a los problemas de documentación.
MFS
Ediciones provisionales de los «Manuales de la FAO de Ciencias Pesqueras».
Algunos documentos tienen también otra identificación si, por ejemplo, son contribuciones a una reunión cuyos documentos han sido marcados con arreglo a otros sistemas.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
It has long been known that the upwelling areas in the oceans are rich and that large fish populations live there. The annual catch of anchoveta off Peru of about 8 million (M) tons grew very sharply and there are still enough fish to support the birds. Much of the world's coastline in subtropical seas is in upwelling areas; here fish live in profusion, belying the myth of tropical deserts in the sea. This paper is an attempt to estimate the potential yield from the upwelling areas of the world.
<section>3</section>
2. PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
In each ocean there are two subtropical anticyclones, one north and one south of the equator. In each, the western boundary current is swift, narrow and intense (up to 4 knots in the northern hemisphere) and the eastern boundary current is broad and slow (about ½ knot) and it tends to be somewhat reduced in salinity because it originates in rainy areas. There is upwelling on the eastern boundaries where the winds tend to blow parallel to the coast towards the equator (Wooster and Reid, 1963). Our first generalization is that upwelling is found in the eastern boundary currents of the subtropical anticyclones (Hutchinson, 1950). Except in the special case of the Somali Current, the western currents are too stable to allow upwelling to take place on the scale found in the eastern currents. In higher latitudes where the circulation is cyclonic and when the wind blows parallel to the coast, it intensifies the cyclonic circulation and makes upwelling unlikely. The second
generalization, justified in section 3, is that the biological effectiveness of upwelling is confined to the tropics and subtropics. Upwelling areas tend to lie off desert country and the coastal climate is at times foggy and at times windy.
As the water is blown offshore at an angle to the coast it is moved towards the equator. At about 100 km offshore there is often a convergence where the water sinks and, a little further offshore, a divergence, generating a secondary source of upwelling above the thermocline (Hart and Currie, 1960). There are often large swirls in fixed positions, between local upwelling systems (Reid, Hoden and Wyllie, 1958). The current flowing towards the equator is compensated by a countercurrent below about 200 m flowing towards the pole (Gunther, 1936; Reid, Hoden and Wyllie, 1958; Hart and Currie, 1960). Further, there may be narrow surface countercurrents generated inshore during the period of upwelling (Reid, Hoden and Wyllie, 1958; Wyrtki, 1963). The depth of the whole upwelling system is shallow and its offshore boundary is imprecise.
Figure 1 is a diagram of an ideal vertical section through an upwelling area (adapted from Hart and Currie, 1960 and Bang, in press). Above 200 m the water moves towards the equator and the upwelling system lies within this zone; below it the countercurrent moves towards the pole. The coastal upwelling is bounded between 50-100 km offshore by a cell of convergence and divergence. This is the region which Sverdrup (1938) put his dynamic boundary. Inshore of this boundary there is a region of slow mixing of old and new upwelled waters, and offshore of it there is a region of divergence, a secondary form of upwelling. The "roller bearing" of convergence and divergence (Hart and Currie, 1960) is also an agent of offshore transport. The secondary upwelling offshore of this boundary is associated with the wind stress alone, and is generated by the vorticity of the wind stress. The divergences along the equator and elsewhere are created by the same agency (Hidaka, 1958). More
recently Yoshida (1967) has attempted to unify the two phenomena, secondary upwelling and coastal upwelling, in one theoretical frame. There tend to be divergences along the poleward boundary of the subtropical anticyclones, at the western ends of the equatorial currents and along the equatorial boundary of the southern anticyclones; similarly there are convergences along the eastern equatorial currents, particularly in summer along the equatorial boundary of the northern anticyclone (Hidaka and Ogawa, 1958). But there are also upwelling areas where the equatorial currents are formed; the Costa Rica Dome is the most well known, at the root of the North Equatorial Current in the North Pacific, but there are analogous phenomena in the East Atlantic and East Indian Oceans.
Figure 1. A diagrammatic vertical section of an upwelling area. The full line represents the up - welling and offshore drift to the "roller bearing" of convergence and divergence at about 100 km. Because the upwelling system drifts towards the equator, the upwelled water moves outwards at a slight angle to the coast.
Figure 2 is a diagram of the upwelling systems in an ideal ocean, based on observations in the Pacific showing the coastal upwellings in the eastern boundary currents, the divergences and convergences in the equatorial current system and the eastern dome. Also shown are the divergences on the poleward boundaries and offshore of the coastal upwellings. Between the Equatorial Countercurrent and the North Equatorial Current there is a zone of convergence (Cromwell, 1958; Hidaka and Ogawa, 1958 and Wyrtki, 1966). The system is not centered precisely on the equator, but with some seasonal variation, is offset somewhat to the north, so that the Equatorial Countercurrent occurs between 5° and 10°N. The Cromwell Undercurrent lies precisely at the equator and above it are found the divergences in the South Equatorial Current; it is possible that the biological effects of divergence are enhanced by upwelling above the Undercurrent.
Figure 2. Diagram of the distribution of upwelling in an eastern boundary current
Figure 3 is a diagram of the seasonal cycle of upwelling in an eastern boundary current and in the equatorial system. It is based partly on Wooster and Reid's (1963) estimates of Ekman transport normal to the coast. It shows the movement towards the pole of the coastal upwelling systems from spring to autumn as the subtropical high intensifies, and the strengthening of divergence along the equator in winter and spring. The diagram does not show that events in the southern hemisphere are bigger and more persistent, which they are. This may be because stronger winds originate in the Southern Ocean, or because the coastlines have the best shape for the seasonal distribution of the direction of the trade winds. The distribution of divergences and convergences is taken from Hidaka and Ogawa's (1958) charts, an example of which for the Pacific is given in Figure 12.
Figure 3. Diagram of the seasonal cycle of upwelling in the eastern boundary currents and in the equatorial system
There are wind driven upwellings and geostrophic upwellings, both in coastal areas and in oceanic areas. Coastal upwelling is generated by winds blowing parallel to the shore towards the equator, as in the major upwellings, or is generated geostrophically by the tilt of a current, as in the Somali Current (Stommel and Wooster, 1965). Some areas may include both wind-generated upwellings and geostrophic upwellings, as for example, the Malabar Coast (Darbyshire, 1967). There is a specialized form of upwelling off Cabo Frio in Brazil where warm salty water offshore sinks and is replaced inshore by cooler less salty water and this process is assisted by northeast winds (Emilsson, 1961). Oceanic upwelling includes both the divergences due to the vorticity of the wind stress, all around the subtropical anticyclones, and the geostrophic upwellings within the equatorial system itself, as for example above the Undercurrent and in the domes.
<section>4</section>
3. THE BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
In the temperate waters of the high latitude cyclones (>45°), the pattern of production cycles is dominated by seasonal changes. Production starts when the critical depth becomes greater than the depth of mixing (Sverdrup, 1953). (The critical depth is that at which production integrated from the surface to that depth equals the integrated respiration.) Subsequently, the rate of production is governed by the ratio of compensation depth (the depth at which the rate of production equals the rate of respiration) to depth of mixing (Cushing, 1962) and therefore is determined by the amount of sunlight, and the strength of the winds and other factors causing mixing, all of which vary seasonally. The upwelling areas in low latitudes are characterized by rather deep photic layers and production increases as the water rises. But, in high latitudes, photic layers are often shallow and so it would be hard to distinguish an effect of upwelling from a normal production cycle.
It is necessary to make this distinction because the cause of high production in subtropical upwelling areas and in the Antarctic is often attributed to the associated presence of nutrients (Hentschel and Wattenberg, 1930; Deacon, 1937). The algal reproductive rate can fall as the nutrients become reduced. Riley (1946), on the basis of an experiment by Ketchum (1939), suggested a level of 0.55 m g-atoms P.PO[4]/l to limit algal reproductive rates. The plastic bag experiments in the Pacific of McAllister, Parsons and Strickland (1960) and Antia et al. (1963) show that such a limit must be at a very much lower level, and not only in phosphorus. A production cycle in the North Sea was shown to be completed with little reduction in nitrate, phosphate or silicate, and no reduction in algal reproductive rate (Cushing, 1963; Cushing and Nicholson, 1963) and was thus determined by grazing animals. This does not mean that nutrient lack never limits production, but that its function
is that of a fail-safe device in the system, rather than that of a universal limit; in other words, if the grazing animals are absent for one reason or another, production must stop as the nutrients run out. So the very high values of nutrients found in the Antarctic and all over the upwelling areas do not limit the production, nor can they accelerate it. The persistence of production in an upwelling area is due not to the presence of excess nutrient but to persistent addition of living material. There is an argument that production might still be limited by an unnamed nutrient, but it is an infinite regress.
The production cycle in an upwelling area resembles that in temperate waters. The cool water originates from depths of less than 200 m and it contains a resident and sparse population of plants and animals, very like those in temperate waters in early spring. In the photic layer the algae start to divide; as in temperate waters, the Increase in animal production is caused by the increase in plant population, and must follow it in time. This delay may be as much as half a generation. It is this delay which allows the production of large stocks of plants, and later, of animals, as in temperate waters. This is in contrast to the deep ocean, where there is no sudden increase in the production rate of plants, so that they do not get out of phase with the animals, and there are low stocks (Cushing, 1959). If mixing were complete and rapid, the new algal production would be eaten by older animals, derived from earlier production, as it upwelled. So if upwelling is to be productive,
mixing should be rather a slow process, and since the structures are so readily detected, it is.
If the production cycle in an upwelling area were similar to the temperate one, a bell-shaped curve of production would be expected as a function of distance upwelling similar to the temperate curve as a function of time. At the surface the quantity declines in distance from a maximum at the point of upwelling. The photic layer is usually fairly deep, up to 50 m, and the rate of upwelling is rather slow, of the order of 1 m/d (McEwen, 1929; Hidaka, 1954 and Yoshida, 1955). So production must rise slowly from the bottom of the photic layer taking many days to reach the surface. In the first days, from the 1 per cent light level to the 5 per cent light level, the increase in production is necessarily very slow, but it increases exponentially as upwelling proceeds. Because the depth of the photic layer is many times the daily upwelling distance, the peak production is reached near the surface not far from the point of upwelling. The problem is set out formally in a later
section.
On reaching the surface, the plant and animal populations must move on the surface away from the point or line of upwelling. Because the rate of upwelling is a very small proportion of the current speed, such movement must be at a rather slight angle to the coast. The chance of mixture, because of the complex physical structures, is high. The production along this line of movement, angling away from along the coast to the offshore divergences, appears to be high and to decrease only slowly with distance. If the production cycle is symmetrical, it will continue the drift offshore for about the same period of time as the water takes to rise in the upwelling process. At ½ knot, an upwelling which took 30-50 days to rise through the photic zone might drift 300-600 miles before the decay process was complete.
The coastal upwelling zone is bounded by the offshore divergence at about 100 km. But divergences continue to seaward and the boundary eventually becomes physically imprecise. The boundary in zoo-plankton (Thrailkill, 1956, 1957, 1959, 1961 and 1963) or surface phosphate phosphorus (California, Department of Fish and Game, 1958) is often far beyond the offshore divergence, perhaps hundreds of kilometres. Because the biological processes have not been examined in detail, the nature of decay process to seaward is not understood. As a convention the limit of the upwelling area is taken as the point where the quantity of zooplankton or phosphate phosphorus is half the maximum from the coast. Zooplankton quantity is used as a convenient index of summed production over a period; phosphate phosphorus is used because it correlates so well with the zooplankton (Holmes, Schaefer and Shimada, 1957).
The positive correlation, first shown by Hentschel and Wattenberg (1930), has been confirmed by Reid (1962b) over the whole Pacific Ocean. If phosphorus is converted to algae, in its turn converted to animal flesh, one might expect an inverse correlation over a time period. If distance from the coast indicates time from the point of upwelling, the inverse correlation should be obvious in the horizontal distributions of phosphorus and zooplankton. When phosphorus is used in the production cycle, it is converted to animal flesh, organic residue (dissolved and particulate) and a stock of algae. So the stock of algae is possibly a transient component in the system (Harvey et al., 1935). The phosphorus in the water at any point, P[R], may be considered as a residue of productive processes, P[R] < P[T] the initial quantity available for production, i.e. the quantity available at 200 m in an upwelling area. Then, P[T] - P[R] = P[U], the minimum quantity used in production. Strictly
we would expect P[U] to be directly correlated with Z, the quantity of zooplankton; also, since P[R] = P[T] - P[U] we might expect an inverse correlation between P[R] and Z, which is not observed. Let us define P[U] in more detail, distinguishing the part of production locked up in the plants, P[p], that absorbed into animal flesh, a P[U] and that part which is regenerated by animal grazing, b P[U]. Then P[R] = P[T] - P[p] = a P[U] + b P[U]. If we then suppose that b P[U] > a P[U] and note that P[p] is small compared with P[R], the correlation between P[R] and Z is explained. It is not surprising because the turnover rate of phosphorus in lakes was shown to be rapid (Hayes and Coffin, 1951). The same processes probably occur in the sea and Cushing and Nicholson (1963) suggested a turnover rate for phosphorus off the northeast coast of England of perhaps three times a month.
The simplest way of assessing the production in the upwelling areas is to estimate gC/m²/d from radiocarbon measurements for a region and time period. Koblents-Mishke (1965) has used all the radiocarbon measurements made in the Pacific and has combined the surface observations in situ measurements in such a way that all measurements were used. Her chart of primary production in the Pacific is unique and includes measurements made in upwelling areas and along the equator. Observations have been made elsewhere, off South Africa (Steemann Nielsen and Jensen, 1957), off East Africa and Arabia (Ryther et al., 1967), and in the eastern Indian Ocean (Angot, 1961), all in upwelling areas. Such observations will be averaged.
For physical and biological reasons, the biology of upwelling areas will be studied in the subtropical anticyclones. The cycle of production in an upwelling area is considered essentially as a temperate cycle rising slowly from the bottom of a fairly deep photic layer. Because of a slow and continuous mixture, with continuous addition of living material at the coast and offshore, the distribution of biomass in an upwelling area is fairly uniform, in so far as biological systems can be uniform. Because divergences continue far offshore beyond the boundary at 100 km, the width of the upwelling area biologically is considered to extend beyond the obvious physical boundaries. The width will be estimated from zooplankton and phosphorus distributions, which are correlated, an explanation for which is given. Then within each area and season primary and secondary production will be estimated for a number of upwelling areas.
<section>5</section>
4. THE WIDTH OF THE UPWELLING ZONE
In section 3, it was noted that the zone of biological production was probably wider than that of coastal upwelling. An attempt is made here to make a better estimate of the width of the zone of production as ratio to the width of the coastal upwelling.
The thirteen-year mean temperatures at 10 m off California and Baja California, from 1950 to 1962, are shown in Figure 4, (Lynn, 1967). Because of the intense sampling in the area as part of the Calcofi programme, the distributions are well established. The physical boundary to the coastal upwelling has been drawn by eye where the isotherms tend to run parallel to the coast. From Baja California to Point Conception, the boundary is about 100 km offshore, but from Point Conception to Cape Mendocino it may be nearer 200 km. Lynn has examined the same data in much more detail. All the temperature data were fitted to a harmonic regression by date. The high correlation of temperature with date shows the stable areas, whereas upwelling is shown by low correlation coefficients.
Figure 4. Mean temperature off California at 10 m for the years 1950-62, Lynn (1967); the heavy broken line was drawn by eye where the isotherms lie parallel to the coast
Figure 5 shows the distribution of correlation coefficients and the line has been drawn by following the poor coefficients (using r <.75 as a criterion) at roughly 100 km offshore. Another way of showing the upwelling areas is given in Figure 6, showing the months of occurrence of minima in temperature on the fitted regression curves, the figure shows the average position of upwelling by months. The areas shown are much closer to the biological boundaries and perhaps they indicate the direction of drift offshore from the coast.
Figure 5. Distribution of correlation coefficients of temperature on date at positions off California fitted to a harmonic regression (Lynn, 1967). The heavy broken line was drawn by eye using the coefficient of determination
Figure 6. Months of occurrence of the minima of the harmonic regression of temperature on date off California (Lynn, 1967)
The width of the production zone can be examined in the zooplankton distributions off California from 1950-1959 (Thrailkill, 1956, 1957, 1959, 1961 and 1963). A typical distribution is given in Figure 7; the broken line is drawn at a median density. The width of the zooplankton zone was tabulated by year and area and averaged for the ten years, ranging from 200-500 km. When the estimates from the temperature distributions are compared with those from the distributions of zooplankton, the ratio - width of productive zone to width of physical upwelling - is 2.5. To treat all upwelling areas in the same way, the width is estimated from surface temperature distributions, like that in Figure 5, and is raised by 2.5.
Figure 7. A typical distribution of zooplankton off California (Thrailkill, 1956); the broken line is drawn at a median density
<section>6</section>
5. THE RELATION BETWEEN PRODUCTION AND RATE OF UPWELLING
The ascending velocity in upwelling, W[h], can be estimated in a number of ways, but because it is low, 0.1-3.0 m/d (McEwen, 1929; Yoshida, 1955; Hidaka, 1954; Posner, 1957; Wyrtki, 1964) no direct measurements are available. Wooster and Reid (1963) show that the Ekman transport off northern Peru in winter is the greatest of all the upwelling areas. It might follow, therefore, that the production in northern Peru in winter was the greatest. However, the quantities of carbon and zooplankton are no greater there than in other upwelling areas (see Table I); indeed, the data show the quantity of production to be less in northern Peru than in other major upwelling areas.
The simplest view of the upwelling production cycle is to consider it as starting at the bottom of the photic layer and continuing as the water rises. As production starts from low quantities, the cycle in the upwelling area resembles the temperate cycle rather closely. Heinrich (1961) suggests a generation time for the zooplankton in the upwelling areas of about 40 days, so effective grazing should start about 20 days after the start of upwelling. So the peak of the production cycle should occur at or near the surface, at or near the line of upwelling. A more complex case occurs if the plant production becomes vulnerable by mixture to zooplankton arising from earlier production. Jones and Folkard (1968), in their sections of the Canary Current, show distributions of physical properties which might bring the vertically migrating zooplankton inshore towards the line of upwelling.
Let us consider production in the rising water, without grazing. From Steele and Menzel (1962),
where I[o] is the average radiation at the surface in g cal/cm²/d (Steele and Menzel's figure of 180 g cal/cm²/d for the Sargasso Sea has been used);
Z is depth in m;
k is the extinction coefficient (the value k = 0.1 has been used, ignoring its possible increase with increasing production);
a is a constant (=0.48);
p is the daily production in gc/m³/d.
Let Z[p] be the depth of the photic zone, hence
where W[h] is the ascending velocity in m/d.
Between time t and t + d t,
then the total production, in gC/m²/d, as water upwells from the bottom of the photic layer (Z = Z[p], t = 0) to the surface (Z = 0, t = Z[p]/W[h]) is
I am grateful to my colleague, Mr. J.G.K. Harris, for the development of equations (2) to (5).
Figure 8 shows the relation between total production during ascent (for two depths of photic layer) and ascending velocity. Ignoring grazing the slower the ascending velocity the greater the production during the ascent, irrespective of the depth of the photic layer. Let grazing become effective after 20 days. Then with a photic layer 20 m deep, grazing starts at the surface with an upwelling of 1 m/d, and if it is 100 m deep it starts at the surface with an upwelling of 5 m/d. So the upwelling production cycle, well grazed, can reach a peak at the line of upwelling at the surface. It is obvious from Figure 8 that an upwelling velocity of <0.5 m/d will give the production generating its own grazing capacity at the surface. A greater upwelling velocity, irrespective of the depth of the photic layer, means that the production has not gone on for very long (less than half a generation time), when it reaches the surface and may become vulnerable to the greater grazing capacity
of other animal populations. Perhaps the faster rate of upwelling off Peru modifies the production cycle in this way, leading to rather lower standing crops than expected.
Figure 8. Relation between total production, p, during ascent and ascending velocity, W[h], (in m) for a range of depths of the photic layer.
Figure 9 shows a vertical section of carbon production (Japan, Science Council. National Committee for IIOE, 1966) from Java to Western Australia during the period of upwelling off Java. It is a section of a dynamic process, but we may imagine the upwelling entraining northwards and slowly increasing its production as it rises. It is not confirmation of the process imagined above, but an illustration of how such a system might work. A series of sections (like that in Figure 9), closely spaced in time, and on a smaller horizontal scale could be used to analyze the production cycle in an upwelling area and even estimate the rate of upwelling.
Figure 9. A vertical section of carbon production in mg C/m³/d, off Java during the period of upwelling (Japan, Science Council. National Committee for IIOE, 1966)
<section>7</section>
6. DESCRIPTION OF AREAS
6.1 The main areas
6.2 The equatorial system
6.3 Domes
6.4 Upwellings in the Indian Ocean and Indonesian region, including the South China Sea
In this section the upwelling areas are examined in more detail. The first subsection covers the main areas of upwelling in the eastern boundary currents. The second examines the equatorial systems. The domes are treated in the third. In the fourth are grouped all the upwellings in the Indian Ocean and Indonesian area, because they are dominated by the monsoon system.
The U.S. Navy Hydrographic Office Publication 225 (1944), the World Atlas of Sea Surface Temperatures, gives charts by months. From them each upwelling area can be identified, and its length and width for eac