<title>Fisheries Management and the Limitation of Fishing</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
PREPARATION OF THIS PAPER
This paper gives some results of studies on the problems of fishery management being carried, out by the Fish Stock Evaluation Branch and other units of FAO. It is hoped that these studies of general problems will assist and complement the work of regional fisheries bodies and others concerned with solving specific problems.
Distribution:
FAO Department of Fisheries
FAO Regional Fisheries Officers
Members of COFI
Fishery Commissions
Selector SM
"Current Bibliography" entry:
Gulland, J.A. (1969), 16-6M625
FAO Fish. tech. Pap., (92):13 p.
Fisheries management and the limitation of fishing
Fishing mortality - measurement, control. Single quota regulations. Fishing licences.
DOCUMENTS OF THE FISHERY RESOURCES AND EXPLOITATION DIVISION OF FAO DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES
Documents which are not official FAO publications are issued in several series. They are given a restricted distribution and this fact should be indicated if they are cited. Most of them are prepared as working papers for meetings, or are summaries of information for use of member governments, organizations, and specialists concerned.
DOCUMENTS DE LA DIVISION DES RESSOURCES ET DE L'EXPLOITATION DES PÊCHES DU DÉPARTEMENT DES PÊCHES DE LA FAO
Des documents qui ne figurent pas parmi les publications officielles de la FAO sont publiés dans diverses séries. Ils font seulement l'objet d'une distribution restreinte, aussi convient-il de le préciser lorsque ces documents sont cités. Il s'agit le plus souvent de documents de travail préparés pour des réunions, ou de résumés d'information à l'intention des gouvernements des pays membres, ainsi que des organisations et spécialistes intéressés. Ces séries sont les suivantes:
FAO Fisheries Report
FR/R (No.)
FAO Fisheries Circular
FR/C (No.)
FAO Fisheries Synopsis
FR/S (No.)
DOCUMENTOS DE LA DIRECCION DE RECURSOS PESQUEROS Y EXPLOTACION DEL DEPARTAMENTO DE PESCA DE LA FAO
Esta Subdirección publica varias series de documentos que no pueden considerarse como publicaciones oficiales de la FAO. Todos ellos tienen distribución limitada, circunstancia que debe indicarse en el caso de ser citados. La mayoría de los títulos que figuran en dichas series son documentos de trabajo preparados para reuniones o resúmenes de información destinados a los Estados Miembros, organizaciones y especialistas interesados.
Special groups of synopses are identified by symbols followed by classification numbers based on indexed code of "Current Bibliography":
SAST
Data concerning certain species and fish stocks.
MAST
Information on methods and subjects.
OT
Oceanographic data.
IT
Limnological data.
and
CART
Information concerning fisheries and resources of certain countries and regions (FID/S).
Des catégories spéciales de synopses sont identifiées à l'aide de symboles suivis des chiffres de classification basés sur le code d'indexation de la «Current Bibliography»:
SAST
Données sur certaines espèces et populations de poissons.
MAST
Renseignements sur des méthodes et des sujets.
OT
Données océanographiques.
IT
Données limnologiques.
et
CART
Renseignements sur les pêcheries et les ressources de certains pays et régions (FID/S).
Grupos especiales de sinopsis se distinguen con las siglas siguientes, seguidas por números de clasificación que se basan en las claves de los índices de la «Current Bibliography».
SAST
Datos relativos a ciertas especies y poblaciones.
MAST
Sinopsis sobre métodos y materias.
OT
Sinopsis sobre oceanografía.
IT
Sinopsis sobre limnología.
y
CART
Información sobre los recursos acuáticos vivos de algunos países y regiones (FID/S).
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper FR/T (No.)
Special groups of Technical Papers are identified by:
RE
Indexed lists of experts and institutions drawn from Registers maintained by the Fishery Resources and Exploitation Division.
CB
Lists of periodicals, special sections of "Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries", special bibliographies and papers concerning documentation problems.
MFS
Provisional editions of "FAO Manuals in Fisheries Science".
Some documents also have another identification, if, for example, they have been contributed to a meeting for which papers have been numbered according to another system.
Des catégories spéciales de documents techniques sont identifiées à l'aide des symboles suivants:
RE
Listes indexées d'experts et institutions tirées des registres tenus à jour par la Division des ressources et de l'exploitation des pêches.
CB
Listes de périodiques, des sections spéciales de la «Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries», des bibliographies particulières et des articles sur les problèmes de documentation.
MFS
Editions provisoires des «Manuels FAO de science halieutique».
Il arrive que certains documents portent d'autres numéros d'identification, comme c'est le cas s'ils ont été préparés pour une réunion dont les documents ont été marqués à l'aide d'un autre système.
Grupos especiales de documentos técnicos se identifican por las siglas siguientes:
RE
Listas índices de expertos y de instituciones tomadas de los registros que se llevan en la Dirección de Recursos Pesqueros y Explotación.
CB
Listas de periódicos, secciones especiales de la «Current Bibliography for Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries», bibliografías especiales y trabajos relativos a los problemas de documentación.
MFS
Ediciones provisionales de los «Manuales de la FAO de Ciencias Pesqueras».
Algunos documentos tienen también otra identificación si, por ejemplo, son contribuciones a una reunión cuyos documentos han sido marcados con arreglo a otros sistemas.
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Direct experience in many fisheries, confirmed by theoretical studies, has shown the serious effects that uncontrolled fishing can have on fish stocks, and on the fisheries based on them. The scientific studies have shown the value of proper management and regulation, and that management measures can he divided into those controlling the total amount of fishing, and those affecting the size or other characteristics of the fish caught (e.g. size limits, minimum mesh sizes of trawls, etc.). This note is only concerned with the first of these.
The biological consequences of control of the amount of fishing have been well described in a number of papers (Beverton and Holt 1957, Schaefer 1954) and do not need repeating in detail. However, although it has been the common experience of bodies concerned with fisheries management that the practical and economic consequences of measures taken to limit the amount of fishing have often been much less beneficial than the simple biological analysis would predict, few studies have been made of practical difficulties of limiting fishing. Some of the more obvious problems, e.g. of a greatly shortened season with a single quota system have of course become widely appreciated.
The biological reasons for wishing to control fishing can be directly shown by a simple curve relating the amount of fishing, strictly the fishing mortality coefficient, to the average long-term catch taken by that fishing mortality. The precise form of this curve will vary with the stock of fish concerned, and with adjustments that may be made to the composition of the catch (e.g. by mesh regulation), but it will generally lie between the two extremes shown in Figure 1 - (a) a curve with a pronounced maximum, and a sharp fall for rates of fishing beyond the maximum, and (b) a curve which tends to flatten out, but still rises, if only very slowly, for quite high fishing rates, and has no clear maximum.
For fisheries with a type (a) yield curve there can be large benefits if the stock is over-fished (e.g. at point A) by restricting fishing and thus increasing the catch: these benefits will occur whether or not the reduction of the amount of fishing allows a reduction in the costs of fishing. In type (b) curves there can be no increase in catch, but there may still be benefits, possibly considerable, if costs can be reduced.
The potential benefits may be seen more clearly if, taking a more representative curve, such as (c) in Figure 1, the fishing mortality is expressed in terms of the cost of fishing, and the catch in value. To a first approximation, if nothing is done to affect the efficiency of fishing operations, total costs will be proportional to the fishing mortality, and the value of the catch to the total weight. This latter assumption ignores, inter alia, the fact that with increased mortality the average size, and hence often the price per kg, will be lower. Also with fewer age-groups present in the catch, year-to-year fluctuations due to year-class variations will be more pronounced which may also tend to reduce the value of a given average annual catch. The assumption is also implicitly made that the elasticity of demand is unity, but since an increasing proportion of fishery products are being supplied to a comprehensive world-wide market (fish meal, shrimps, frozen fish sticks,
etc.), changes in the supply from a single stock can make little difference to the price.
A curve relating costs to value, such as Figure 2, can then be derived. Also shown in Figure 2, is the line of equal costs and value. In the absence of regulation fishing will tend to stabilize at the point P where the line outs the curve.^1^/ If in the example of Figure 2, fishing is reduced to give the maximum catch, point Q, then there will be some benefit from the increased catch (QX), but there will also be a benefit (PX) from reduced costs - provided the efficiency is not altered. Often, as in the figure, this benefit can be greater than that from increased catch. Also, if the fishing is further reduced, say to R, then the further reduction in costs (RY) is possible which will be considerably greater than the reduction in value (QY). For fixed economic conditions a point giving the maximum net economic return (value less costs) can be defined. Since economic conditions do vary this point is not absolutely fixed, and cannot be used as the uniquely definable objective of
fishery management in place of the objective of maximum physical yield which also has both biological and economic shortcomings (Gulland 1968). However it will always be true that in all situations (with a few trivial exceptions) it is desirable on economic grounds to fish at less than the rate giving the maximum physical yield.
^1^/ This may be an optimistic view. Many fisheries are now developing very rapidly. Since the stocks may take some time to react to increased fishing, and investment policy is commonly based on past catch rates (at possibly much larger stocks), the fishing effort (in terms of fleet size, etc.) can easily overshoot the equilibrium position and take a long time to return.
FIG. 1
FIG. 2
The close interrelation between biology and economics, and the economic implications of the presence or absence of regulations, using the same or similar arguments to those above, has been recognized by biologists for at least 30 years (Graham 1935, Beverton 1953) and have more recently been forcibly pointed out by a number of economists (Crutchfield 1959, Gordon 1954, Scott 1955).
The full benefits of regulating the amount of fishing therefore require the satisfaction of two conditions - reduction of the fishing mortality coefficient, F, to the desired level, and ensuring that this reduction of F is achieved with the minimum loss in the efficiency of the fishing operations.
The preceding analysis assumes that the only variable factor affecting the fish stocks is the amount of fishing, but other, environmental, factors can have big effects. One of these is the variation in recruitment, the number of young fish reaching commercial sizes. The strength of year-classes (the numbers in each annual brood) can vary greatly and the causes of these variations are not clearly understood. For this reason (among others) scientific assessments are often presented in terms of the yield per recruit; usually the yield per recruit from a given fishing mortality is less effected by environmental factors than is the yield.
These natural fluctuations cause the desirable catch (on almost any criterion) to vary from year to year, but the desirable fishing mortality e.g. that giving the maximum long-term yield in weight, is more constant. However, a fishing mortality which is the optimum when year-class strengths are average may be too high when weak year-classes are present in the fishery, since it may result in too low a spawning stock; it may therefore be necessary to reduce the fishing mortality when year-classes are poor, and possibly to increase it when good year - classes are present. This agrees with economic considerations - it is worthwhile to incur extra costs to get a bit nearer the maximum physical yield when this yield is large. This effect is in addition to the increase in total yield which will occur, even for a fixed fishing mortality, when a good year-class occurs, and which may require a bigger vessel or shore capacity to handle it.
<section>3</section>
2. MEASUREMENT OF FISHING MORTALITY
The fishing mortality (F) cannot be easily measured, at least over a short period. Control of F is therefore achieved by controlling some other quantity which is more easily measured and therefore controlled. The choice lies between catch (C) and fishing effort (f), e.g. total number of boats times the duration of fishing, which are related to fishing mortality by the two equations:
C = B x F ................ (1)
F = qf ...................... (2)
where B = abundance of the population and q = catchability coefficient
The implicit assumption made in controlling fishing mortality in terms of catch (or effort) is that B (or q) is constant, or that changes in B (or q) are known. Changes can be of two types - essentially random fluctuations, and trends. Particularly with long-lived species year to year fluctuations may not be very serious, even if not predictable. If the mortality in one year is high, because weak year-classes are present (for a fixed catch) this can be balanced by reduced mortality (lower catch or nominal effort) in the next, provided there is adequate administrative machinery to detect the occurrence and to make the necessary adjustments to the permitted level of catch or effort.
One major source of changes in population abundance - varying strength of year - classes - has been noted above. Typically a year - class enters the fishery when from one to five years old, and can make a substantial contribution to the catches for the next two to ten years. Forecasts of the abundance of the stock in one year can therefore be made from the information on the abundance and age composition of the commercial catch in the previous year, and these predictions will include all but the youngest fish. These can often also be predicted by research surveys of young fish, e.g. by the trawl surveys of young cod in the Barents Sea, and for long-lived fish quite accurate forecasts of abundance (excluding the effects of the removals by fishing) can therefore be made for several years in advance. The main practical problems are: first of providing the necessary machinery for rapid analysis of one season's results (catch rates, age composition, etc.) and subsequent
adjustment of the permitted level of catch in subsequent seasons; and second, obtaining adequate estimates of the strength of year-classes among the youngest fish; if year-class strengths vary greatly and the fish are in the fishery for only a short time so that the strength of the year-class newly recruiting to the fishery can have a big effect on the total abundance, these latter estimates may have to be quite accurate and may require extensive surveys by research ships of the pre-recruit fish.
Even if natural (non-fishing) factors cause little change in abundance, a fixed catch limit can be very dangerous. The catch quotas set by the International Whaling Commission in the period after the Second World War (15,000 - 16,000 Blue Whale Units) were initially only just greater than the combined sustainable yield of the two main species (blue and fin whales). However, as the catches were too high, the stocks declined, and the nearly constant catch quota resulted in fishing mortality rates which exceeded the desirable rate to a greater and greater extent.
The control of the amount of fishing in terms of fishing effort would in principle prevent this happening. Thus, in the Antarctic, the number of catchers and the length of the season both increased during the period as the industry had to work harder to maintain the total catch. A limit on the number of catcher-days would thus have apparently kept the fishing mortality closer to the near-optimum level of 1946/8. However, even under the existing (catch-quota) regulations the power and efficiency of the catchers increased, and the enforcement of a constant number of catcher-days would have still permitted some rise in fishing mortality. In fact, it is very probable that regulation in terms of catcher-days would have in later years accelerated this process. Since 1962, there has been an agreement between the countries concerned to divide the overall quota. If this division had been in terms of effort, i.e. in numbers of vessels or of catcher-days, it would be greatly in the
interests of each country to increase the catching power of its vessels, and hence increase the fishing mortality caused by its fixed share of nominal effort. The total fishing mortality would thus have increased beyond the desired limits. A better control of mortality could be achieved by the use of a rather more complex measure of effort, e.g. catcher days x gross tonnage of catcher, but it is unlikely that any simple and readily controlled measure of effort would take into account all the increase in catcher efficiency.
The control of mortality through effort control, e.g. in terms of number of days fishing, is subject also to other difficulties similar to those incurred when controlling mortality through catch, with additional difficulties due to the need for inter-calibration of effort statistics. The catchability coefficient, q, is no more likely to remain constant than the population abundance, so that measurement of fishing mortality in terms of fishing effort presents similar problems as the measurement in terms of catch. The variations in catchability coefficient, like the variation in population abundance, have to be measured, and, so far as possible, predicted. These variations have two groups of causes - natural and man-made. Generally natural fluctuations in catchability or "availability" are less violent than year-class fluctuations, but can be quite large. For example during cold winters in the North Sea soles can be much more easily caught than normally - an increase of
several times in the fishing mortality per unit fishing effort; control in terms, say, of the number of hours fishing could allow serious over-fishing during a prolonged cold winter. Thus the winter of 1962/3 was doubly disrupting to the sole fishery - over supply during the winter, with a drastic fall in prices, followed by a shortage of fish in the summer, due to previous unusually heavy exploitation (and also unusually high natural mortality due directly to the cold).
Man-made changes in q can be larger, and will have more serious consequences on attempts to control mortality. Any statistics that can be readily collected concerning fishing effort will provide only an approximate measure of fishing mortality. For some gears, e.g. long-lines, an available unit of effort - e.g. the number of hooks times the number of sets made - may bear a fairly constant ratio to the mortality caused and improvements in fishing technique will be such as to increase the number of hooks set per boat or per man, rather than in the mortality caused by 100 hooks. For other more active gears, such as trawls or purse-seines (which take a major and increasing share of the world catch), the measure of both fishing power and fishing time (fishing effort equals fishing power multiplied by time) is less certain. For purse-seines (and increasingly for trawls, especially fished in mid-water), much of the time is spent searching for suitable concentrations of fish.
Improved equipment (e.g. echo sounders, sonar) is continually increasing the effectiveness of an hour or a day spent searching.
Similarly the real fishing power of the average vessel in a fleet is being continually increased by building larger vessels, with more powerful engines, improved gear, etc. Some correction for this is possible by taking into account the various characteristics of ship and gear. This calibration is particularly useful in analyzing past data, especially when the introduction of new gears, or new ships, has taken place over a period. Thus several analyses have shown that, in a particular year, catches (and therefore the mortality caused) by trawlers of different sizes are proportional to both gross tonnage, and horse-power of the engines (Beverton and Holt 1957, Gulland 1956). This result is important when the average size, or power, of the ships in a fleet is increasing, but does not show whether these have been increasing in real fishing power of a vessel of a given size from one year to the next.
Such difficulties will exist in any fishery, but will be redoubled if the control of mortality involves any allocation. Then it will be greatly to the interest of each person receiving an allocation, presumably in the form of so many units of effort, to ensure that the mortality caused by his units (and hence the catch taken) is maximized.
The simplest case is a fisherman with a licence to operate one trawler; he will then build the biggest one feasible. This might be controlled by limiting the size to so many gross tons; then a bigger engine would be fitted. In turn the nominal horse-power might be controlled, but the engine run flat out (the extra catch making up for increased maintenance and replacement costs). Though the framer of the regulations may catch up with the ingenuity of the fisherman, it is more likely that the latter will keep one jump ahead. In any case, the vessel and gear and the methods of operations will be designed more to maximise the catch within the limits of nominal effort set by the regulations, than to maximise the catch from a given total of costs or to minimise the costs of taking a certain catch. To this extent the fishery will operate at less than its possible efficiency, and the magnitude of this inefficiency is likely to continually increase.
Changes in q, through improvements in gear, etc., will thus affect the total fishing mortality caused. If precise calibrations cannot be made, it may be possible to make reasonable forecasts of the likely increase in efficiency, q, for the fishery as a whole and take this into account when setting the limit to the total effort. For instance, if the efficiency is likely to increase at 3% per year, then the total allowed nominal effort should be reduced. However, in any complex fishery, involving several fleets using different gears, or different types of vessel, it is most unlikely that the improvements in gear changes in q, will be the same for all segments of the fishery. Therefore, the above adjustments, reducing the overall effort quota by, say, 3% per year to allow for the average increase in efficiency, while maintaining the fishing mortality at about the desired level, will not ensure that the shares taken by different segments of the fishery remain the same. This can
be done only by determining the change in q separately for each group of vessels. In this, as in other matters, justice must not only be done, but also be seen to be done. For example if there are two fleets, trawlers (with effort controlled in terms of ton-days - tonnage of trawler times days at sea), and long-liners (number of hooks times frequency of use) it is almost inevitable that the long-line fishermen will suspect the trawlermen of achieving a greater increase in efficiency than is accounted for by any increase in tonnage, while the trawlermen may claim that their fishing power has gone up less than the tonnage. Conversely there will be suspicions that the fishing power of long-lines is not properly measured by the number of hooks. A related aspect of this is that the more precise measures of fishing effort rely on statistics of fishing time (e.g. number of hours spent fishing - with the net on the bottom in the case of trawls) which have to be provided by the
fishermen (e.g. in log books) and cannot be easily checked independently. ("Black boxes" are being developed which, attached to an otter-board can record the depth and duration of each haul, but these are still a research tool). Also many of these log-books and other records provide one of the fundamental bases for the scientific study of the stock. If the form of the regulations encourages the falsification of the records, the research will suffer.
The basic check on whether two fleets have maintained the relative magnitudes of the fishing mortality caused by each is the ratio of the catches. For any year, or fishing season, the mean abundance B of equation (1) has a single value, applicable to all fleets, i.e. denoting the catches and mortalities caused by two sections of the fishery by subscripts.
C[1] = B x F[1]
C[2] = B x F[2]
whereas the corresponding forms of equation (2) are
F[1] = q[1] f[1]
F[2] = q[2] f[2]
where q[1], q[2] may have very different values, and vary in different ways from year to year.
For example, if in the base period of a management programme two fleets have taken equal catches, then they will have reduced the mortality caused by them to the same extent in some later year if, and only if, their catches are also equal in that year. There is an exception to this, if during the period taken as a unit for regulation (normally a year) there are big fluctuations in the population abundance (not availability) and in the time of operation of the two fisheries, so that it is not correct to take B as the same for both. An example of this is a gantlet - type fishery, e.g. of fish going upstream to spawn, with two fisheries at different positions in the migration route. In such a situation management practice is best formulated in terms not of fishing mortality but of the percentage of the stock starting on the migration. Then relative catches would again be the best measure of the relative percentages taken by two fisheries.
It appears therefore, that in a fishery in which several groups of fishermen participate, fishing mortality is best measured, and the targets of regulation set, in terms of catch. This is indeed what has been done in all the major international agreements concerned with limiting fishing on single species or groups of closely related species - c.f. Pacific halibut, Antarctic baleen whales, eastern Pacific tuna, Pacific salmon, etc. Only where a complex of species is concerned has some measure of fishing effort been used, c.f. controls on the number of vessels under some of the agreements concerning the bottom fisheries in the East China Sea.
The choice of the measure used to set a limit to the amount of fishing is only the first step; the second, and more difficult, is the choice of the control mechanism to ensure that this limit is not exceeded.
<section>4</section>
3. CONTROL OF FISHING MORTALITY
Whatever indirect measure of fishing mortality is used, there remains a choice in the way the amount is controlled. If the mortality is higher than desired, then the amount can be reduced in several ways.
(i) stop everyone from fishing for some of the time
(ii) stop some people from fishing for all the time (limited entry)
(iii) allow all to fish all the time (or most of the time) but limit the efficiency of operations
(iv) some combination of these
The third of these clearly prevents the costs of fishing to be reduced in proportion to the reduction of fishing mortality, and thus loses much of the possible benefit of regulations. However, in one form or another (prohibitions on trawling, on the use of monofilament gill-nets, limitations on the size of ship) such methods have been widely used, especially in national programmes of fishery management.
Restrictions on gear efficiency may be of value when other regulations giving greater economic benefit cannot be employed. For instance, whenever the yield/effort declines sharply beyond some maximum point (e.g. in the simple Schaefer model, or when the recruitment is significantly reduced by reduction in adult stock), there will at least be a gain in total catch by preventing the mortality increasing beyond the value giving the maximum.
There may in some circumstances even be some economic benefit in restricting the type of gear in comparison with having no regulations at all. Suppose a group of fishermen is fully exploiting a stock of fish, and that they have no easily available alternative employment. A new method of fishing - e.g. with purse-seines instead of gill-nets - might give improved efficiency and for an individual fisherman his increased catches would (so long as the others used the old gear) greatly exceed the additional costs of the new gear. However, if all use the new gear (and if one starts the others will have to follow), the long-term effect will be that the same total catch is shared among the same people, who will have the extra costs of the new gear.
The prohibition of the use of the most effective gear may therefore be better than doing nothing, though less desirable than allowing the most effective gear with other methods of regulation - unless the objectives of regulation are, for example, to maximise employment until those displaced can be fitted into other jobs. This method will not be discussed in more detail here.
<section>5</section>
4. SINGLE QUOTA REGULATIONS
The first method (no fishing by anyone for part of the year) or "single quota" system is at present the most widely used form of control in international fisheries. Since it is often associated with a predetermined catch quota (e.g. in Antarctic whaling, or yellowfin tuna in the East Pacific), it has sometimes been treated as being identical with control in terms of catch rather than effort. In principle, there is no reason why the single quota should not be defined in effort units - e.g. the quota for the yellowfin might be set at an effort of 30,000 standard days, rather than at a catch of 100,000 tons, fishing stopping when the effort quota is expected to be reached. Conversely, as discussed below, the amount of fishing can be controlled in terms of catch without necessarily involving a single quota system.
The system has some clear advantages. It is non-discriminating - or at least if there is discrimination, e.g. giving some advantage to those who can get the bigger share of the quota while the season lasts, the regulatory body is not explicitly involved in making a discrimination, i.e. between those who can fish, and those who cannot, or in determining the share of those who can. It is also comparatively easy to enforce. During the open season there are no restrictions, and there is little incentive for the misrepresentation of total catch, or other statistical data - e.g. of fishing effort, or exact location of catch, both of which are important elements for scientific study of the stocks. A complete prohibition of fishing during the closed season is much easier to police than a partial closure, with fishing permitted to only certain fishermen. It is even easier if the number of landing places is restricted, and the control is expressed, in terms of landing rather than
catching. Thus the season for the yellowfin tuna is in terms of landing as a function of sailing date - those vessels sailing before the closing date can land unlimited yellowfin, those sailing later can only land small quantities of yellowfin (up to 15%) among their catches of skipjack or other unregulated tunas. There is no limit to the period or amount of fishing by the first group, until they have filled their holds, and land the fish; nor is there an explicit control of fishing by the second group, provided they land no more than 15% yellowfin; the timing of the end of the open season takes these two elements of yellowfin catch into consideration. On the first appearance the enforcement of the regulations needs no more than routine inspection o