Forest Genetic Resources Working Papers.
State of Forest Genetic Resources in Sudan.
Prepared for The sub- regional workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998) By.
Abdel Rahman Gorashi.
A co-publication of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC and ICRAF.
December 2001.
Danida Forest Seed Centre.
Forest Resources Division FAO, Rome, Italy.
Working Paper FGR/20E.
STATE OF FOREST GENETIC RESOURCE IN SUDAN.
Prepared for The sub- regional workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998).
Abdel Rahman Gorashi Forests National Corporation, Khartoum, Sudan.
A co-publication of.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Sub-Saharan Africa Forest Genetic Resources Programme of the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (IPGRI/SAFORGEN) Danida Forest Seed Centre (DFSC) and International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) December 2001.
Working papers FGR/20E.
The current publication « State of the Forest Genetic Resources in Sudan » is issue of country national report presented at The Sub- Regional Workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998). It is published with the collaboration of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC and ICRAF, as one of the country and regional series which deals with the assessment of genetic resources of tree species in the Sahelian and NorthSudanian Africa and identification of priority actions for their Conservation and Sustainable Utilisation.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC or ICRAF, concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Quantitative information regarding the status of forest and tree resources, including genetic resources, has been compiled according to sources, methodologies and protocols identified and selected by the author. Data comparison between countries using different recording methodologies and sources may not be possible. For standardized methodologies and data on forest resources, please refer to FAO, 2001. State of the World's Forests 2001 ; and to State of Forest Genetic Resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa & Regional Action Plan for their Conservation and Sustainable Use. Working papers FGR/2E, FAO, IPGRI & ICRAF. FAO, Rome, 2001. Official information can also be found at the FAO Internet site (http://www.fao.org/forestry/Forestry.asp). For further information please contact: Oscar Eyog-Matig, IPGRI/SAFORGEN Programme Coordinator c/o IITA 08 BP 0932 Cotonou, Benin. Tel.: +229 350188 / 350553 / 350600 Fax: +229 350556 E-mail : o.eyog-matig@cgiar.org.
Citation Gorashi A. 2001 State of Forest genetic Resources in Sudan. Sub-Regional Workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998). Forest Genetic Resources Working Papers, Working Paper FGR/20E. Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Cover: Photo: O. Eyog-Matig.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND ECOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS.
Geographic position of the country Sudan, the largest country in Africa, lies entirely within tropical zone. Its area is approximately 2.5 million km² surrounded by the Red sea from the east and 8 countries on the other sides. The population was estimated as 28 million growing at a rate of nearly 3% per annum. Population of the urban areas is about 34% with 14% in the capital Khartoum. Nomads constitute 14% of the population.
Socio-economic information Population density is 11.2 inhabitant/km² with an annual rate of change (1995-2000) of 2.2% according to FAO (1999). Fig.2 shows the density distribution patterns within the country. Annual growth of GDP (1990-1995) is 6.8%.
Fig.1: Administrative map of Sudan.
Ecological information The physiography of the country is simple, with climatic and vegetation distribution in belts extending across the country from east to west. Sandy soils constitute about 60% of the country distributed in the northern and North-East and the western parts. The heavy clay soil of the central and eastern part of the country constitutes about 30%. The remaining 10% are red soils, characteristics of the southern part of the country. Annual rainfall varies between O in the north and 1500 mm in the south. Variation in annual rainfall and soil type has produced various vegetation types from desert in the northern zone to closed high forest in the most southern part of the country. The country is consequently divided into seven vegetation zones on the basis of rainfall and soil. Starting.
from the north to the south, these zones are: desert (zone 1), semi-desert (zone 2) rainfall woodland savannah on clay soil (zone 3), low rainfall woodland savannah on sand (zone 4), high rainfall woodland savannah (zone 5), special forests (zone 6) and the montane forests (zone 7). Topography effect is confined to small areas that are the hilly, mountains and the river Nile tributaries (Andrews, 1948). The central part of the country with rainfall confined to rainy season (3-5 month) is dominated by deciduous drought tolerant tree species. Soil effect is demonstrated by Acacia senegal that thrives on annual rainfall of 400 mm in sand while it requires 600 mm in the heavy clay soils. The vegetation zones of the forests have been further delineated into seed zones by the National Tree Seed Centre (NTSC) according to ecological conditions as described in the NTSC publication n°6. Approximately half the area of the country (50.5%) is desert and semi-desert. If the term dryland is to denote areas of evapotranspiration in excess of total rainfall, then the whole of Sudan is a dryland with the exception of riverine areas, the most southern parts of the country and some of the mountains. Forests and woodland range from Savannah woodland, in areas of annual rainfall of about 400 mm to tropical high rainfall forest which are mainly in the southern mountains. The arid parts carry only scanty vegetation and woody species are confined to few acacias in the seasonally flooded areas. The low rainfall savannah houses the main species currently utilized like Acacia senegal, the gum arabic producing tree and Acacia nilotica of the riverine forests. Other important species are Anogeissus leiocarpus, Terminalia spp., Combretum spp, Bowswelia spp. and some palms mainly Hyphaene sp. and Borassus spp. The high rainfall savannah areas contain the most valuable forests of the country that have largest potential of producing sawn timber.
STATE OF FOREST GENETIC RESOURCES.
Phytogeography of the country The forest ecological zones are similar to those described by Harrison and Jackson (1958). The desert (zone 1) This zone embraces vast areas of northern Sudan, approximately 29% of Sudan total area. The annual rainfall is less than 75 mm and with red sandy soil. Woody vegetation is around the Nile banks and seasonal watercourses, mainly Acacia tortilis, Ziziphus spina-christi, Boscia senegalensis, and Cadaba farinosa. Towards the southern part of the desert, where increased rainfall permit, woody species like Indigofera bracteolata and Fagonia cretica are found scattered all over. Along the Nile bank the tree species present are Acacia nilotica, Faidherbia albida and Acacia seyal. Semi-desert (zone 2) This zone constitutes about 19.6% of the area of the country. Annual rainfall ranges from 75 mm in the north to 300 mm in the southern fringe. According to soil type, the vegetation is subdivided into:.
Desert scrub: Acacia tortilis and Maerua crassifolia are dominant species with the following species: Acacia radiana, Caparis decidua, Ziziphus spina-christi, Balanites aegyptiaca, and Salvadora persica. Semi-desert on clay soils: the main species is Acacia mellifera. Semi-desert on sand soils: the tree vegetation composed mainly of Acacia radiana, Acacia mellifera, Commiphora africana, Leptadenia pyrotechnica, Cassia acutofolia and Calotropis procera. Acacia senegal appear in the wetter parts of the south. Acacia mellifera-Commiphora sp. desert scrub in the middle part of the greator Kordofan and Darfur. Acacia glaucophylla and A. etbaica in the lower slopes of the southern parts of the red sea hills.
Low rainfall woodland savannah (zones 3 and 4) It covers 27.6 % of the country on clay and sandy soils with annual rainfall between 300 mm and 800 mm. It is subdivided into two zones according to soil type: · The clayey areas (zone 3): the main species are Acacia mellifera, Commiphora africana, Boscia senegalensis, Acacia seyal, Balanites aegyptiaca, Dalbergia melanoxylon, Combretum hartmannianum, Anogeissus leiocarpus, Boswellia papyrifera and Sterculia setigera. The sandy areas (zone 4) the main species are Acacia raddiana, Faidherbia albida, Adonsonia digitata, Acacia Senegal, Maerua cassifolia, Combretum cordofanum, Dalbergia melanoxylon, Albizia spp, Sclerocarya birrea, Terminalia spp. and Tamarindus indica.
High rainfall woodland savannah (zone 5) The main species of this zone are: Khaya senegalensis, Combretum hartmannianum, Parkia africana, Daniellia oliveri, Isoberbinia doka and Anogeissus leiocarpus. Special forest Types (zone 6) These forest types lie within the low rainfall savannah or even the semi-desert areas. They are mainly around the rivers and seasonal watercourses. The most important species is Acacia nilotica, Ziziphus spina-christi, Faidherbia albida, Hyphaene thebaica, Borassus aethiopum, and Oxytenanthera abyssinica. Montane forests (zone 7) Four important mountain masses occur in the Sudan, which are the Red sea Hills in the east, Jebel Marra in the west, and Imatong and Didinga mountains in the south. They occupy less than 1% of the country, with minor and introduced species.
Utilization patterns of forest species The forest tree species in Sudan have economical, ecological, and recreational values. The woody products from the forestry sector are sawn timber, round poles, and fuelwood. The Forest Product Consumption Survey (1995) showed that the total annual consumption of.
wood in Sudan was 15.77 million m3. Fuelwood share was 87.5%, as the most important direct benefit from the forest. Ecologically forest tree species stabilize sand dunes in the fragile system in the semi-desert region, ameliorate soil through nitrogen fixation, and provide natural ecosystems for wildlife and conservation of biodiversity. Fuel wood Fuelwood contributes 78% of the energy balance of Sudan; the rest are 8% oil, 8% generated electricity and 6% agricultural residues. However, the 8% of the oil balance consume all the export returns of the Sudan. Rural inhabitants use most of the tree species in the low rainfall savannah for fuelwood (wood and charcoal). Removal of dead trees and branches is permitted for people living around forests. Forest authorities direct the commercial logging of mostly Acacia nilotica and Acacia seyal for firewood and charcoal for supply to the cities.. This is mostly from thinning and branches of Acacia nilotica in the reserved riverine forests, and clearing of Acacia seyal and other acacias from areas allocated for agriculture. Saw timber The main wood products are building poles, sawn timber in the form of railway sleepers, construction and joinery elements. The study showed that the household sector uses 89.4% of the total wood produced while industrial, commercial and service use amount for 10.6%. Sawn timber is mainly from Acacia nilotica and other species of the high rainfall savannah woodland zone like: Isoberlinia doka, Khaya grandifoliola, Milicia excelsa, Khaya senegalensis, Olea hochstetteri, Afzelia africana, Daniellia oliveri, Sclerocarya birrea, Podocarpus milanjianus and Acacia nilotica. Non-woody products Non-woody products contribute significantly to Sudan exports (19.35% of the total exports). Other forest products of importance to rural communities are honey, fruit, fibers, food, fodder, medicinal materials, dyes and as tannin material. Gum arabic from Acacia senegal and other acacias generate income for farmers and contribute significantly to Sudan exports. Badi (1993) provides an exhaustive list of about 100 species bearing non-woody products used as food, oil, fodder, gum, fibre, medicine, and tannin agents. Policies are now towards reducing the consumption of wood as an energy source and increase their use as sawn timber for furniture. Research is encouraged to identify uses of woody and non-woody products for high commercial values.
Threats The Sudan forest tree vegetation cover was estimated as 40% in 1901 of the total area, 3436% in 1958 (Harrison and Jackson 1958), and decreased to 19% in 1990 as estimated by the FAO. It decreased further to 13.7% according to the recent surveys (Abdelnour and Abelmagid, 1997). Man has been the most powerful and persistent factor that caused the deforestation and disturbance of Sudan natural ecosystems. The main human activities that are threatening the.
tree species and endangering some of them are unregulated cutting for timber and fuelwood, clearing of forestland for agriculture, overgrazing of livestock, burning and civil wars. About 80 per cent of Sudan's population derives its living from crop farming or grazing. Approximately 5 percent of the country's land area is used for arable cultivation; large areas are used for seasonal grazing. The chief food crops include sorghum (durra), millet, wheat, rice, sesame, cassava, potatoes, beans, bananas, sugar cane, and groundnuts (peanuts). Cotton is Sudan's leading cash crop; it is produced in large amounts in the Gezira region between the Blue and White Niles. The livestock population in 1995 included about 35 million chickens, 23 million sheep, 22 million cattle, 16.5 million goats, and 2.9 million camels. Livestock production is carried out mainly through nomadic pastoralism using traditional practices (Libanis, 1998). During the 1970s large-scale mechanized production of sorghum was introduced in eastern Sudan, in the area between the Blue Nile and Atbara rivers. Production increased hugely, particularly in 1994, enabling Sudan for a while to become an exporter of the grain, but at the cost of soil erosion, and increased desertification (Libanis, 1998). The demand for wood, mainly for fuelwood, is high in the north beyond the allowable cut. The situation in the north is becoming more critical due to extensive clearing for large scale mechanized farming operation, and overgrazing. If current rate of clearing for wood and agriculture continues, there will be no forest in the low savannah regions shortly. The civil war in the south is posing a serious threat to forest resources. Apart from that the non-human factors threatening the forest tree species and consequently the genetic resources are drought, natural tires, and insects. In addition, the drought of the 1980's affected tree spp seriously in the low rainfall savannah areas and arid zones.
MANAGEMENT OF FGR.
In situ conservation activities Protected areas The forest resources are unevenly distributed between the north and south, between the states, and between provinces within states. Only, 32% of the forests exist in the north while 68% are in the south. However, the population distribution is opposite to that of forest with 72% of the population lives in the north and 28% in the south. This resulted in high pressure on the forest resources in the northern parts of the country. The forest reserves are generally those areas where the cutting of trees is concentrated and replanting made immediately after felling. The constituted and gazetted forest reserves covered 1.278.000 ha by 1979, distributed as: 167,000 ha in the semi desert, 547,000 in the low rainfall woodland savannah and 564,000 in the high rainfall woodland savannah. The reserved area was increased substantially after 1993 (following the Rio declaration) to reach 8 million ha (2.8% of the country area) distributed in the different vegetation replanting zones. Due to the control of cuttings of trees and replanting using bulk seeds from natural stands, the genetic resources are reasonably conserved. Forests legislation also controls tree cutting outside forest reserves with the objective of forest reserves. This measure of concentrating felling within the reserves reduces the pressure on natural stands and consequently helps in conserving genetic resources.
Bio-reserves, exclusively for wildlife, are distributed in the different vegetation zones. Eight national parks were established with a total area of 8.5 million ha. The parks are administered by the Department of Wildlife, whose ordinance established in 1953, prohibits the felling of trees. The national parks therefore contribute significantly to the conservation of genetic resources especially in the low savannah woodlands in the north, which had been degraded as a result of over cutting. Forest enrichment or plantation Reforestation and afforestation programs run by the Forests National Corporation (FNC) is one of the activities that result in conservation of resources. Except in few cases, seeds are from the natural stands collected as bulk by inhabitants for the FNC. The National Tree Seed Centre (NTSC), under the FRC, has identified and described 79 sources in an area of about 6,000 ha. The NTSC also collects seeds for the FNC from natural stands.
Ex situ conservation activities An ex situ conservation program based on tree seed storage has recently been established. This program also entails a long-term strategy consisting of establishment of seed sources to ensure good quality seeds in the long run. A National Tree Seed Centre (NTSC) was established in 1990 under the FRC with the objectives of providing of seeds for the FNC afforestation and reforestation programs and resource conservation. The consumption of forest tree seed was estimated as 135 tons per year and expected to reach 600 tons, shortly. A. senegal accounts for almost 65% of the present seed use, followed by A. nilotica, A. seyal, and A. mellifera. The exotic species account for less than 10% of the present use.
Selection and genetic improvement Beside the introduction of exotic species, mainly Eucalyptus spp. that started in 1915 little effort has been made in tree improvement. The few attempts include: · · Identification of high-gum- yielding trees of Acacia senegal in 1967 from the gumbelt areas and planting their progenies in a progeny test in western Sudan which was not followed properly. Establishment of irrigated schemes: Eucalyptus camaldulensis seed orchard for irrigated schemes.
Provenance trials and studies are concentrated on Acacia senegal, Acacia seyal, Acacia nilotica and Faidherbia albida. Genetic studies, tree improvement activities and germplasm conservation efforts are minimal and limited to Acacia senegal, Acacia nilotica, Faidherbia albida and Eucalyptus camaldulensis.
National priority species The most important species according to their products and values are: Acacia senegal, Acacia nilotica, Acacia seyal, Acacia mellifera, Eucalyptus spp and Khaya senegalensis.
Prosopis chilensis, an introduced species, was once considered as a priority species because of its drought tolerance and fuelwood supply. Due to its invasion to agricultural land, measures are taken to eradicate it from the country.
POLICY, PLANNING AND INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM.
National forest policy Laws of conservational nature were enacted in 1901, 1908 and 1917. They placed the full custody of the forests on the government to avoid the misuse of the genetic resources. Wood harvesting was limited to species that are sure to regenerate naturally like Acacia nilotica. Creation of forest reserves was started in 1923 and tree harvesting for commercial use was confined these reserves. The Governor of Sudan issued the first forest policy statement. This defined the role and relationship between the states and the central government. It called for the reservation of 15% of the area of the country as forest. It also emphasized importance of conservation of the forest germplasm. The policies and laws evolved and changed with the country political changes but mainly remained with conservational nature. The latest policy revision was issued in 1986 with a prime objective of reserving and developing the forest resources. The policy raised the goal of forest reserves to 20% of the country area. Accordingly, new forest laws were enacted in 1989 to enforce the new policies. Item 17 of the law gave the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry the right to ban the cutting of any tree spp. that is endangered or requiring some special attention. Several directives were issued to protect the following tree species and banning their cutting: Acacia senegal (if density is more than 50%), Balanites aegyptiaca, Commiphora africana, Dablergia melanoxylon, Hyphaene thebaica; Salvadora persica (roots), Sclerocarya birrea and Sterculia setigera. A new policy was formulated in 1997 due to national changes and the international agreements especially the Rio declaration in 1992. The policy calls for: · · · · · To assign 25% of the country to natural resources mainly forestry, To limit felling and use of trees for domestic products to areas where regeneration is assured, Replanting according to sustainable use, To limit local people rights and privileges from the reserved forests and To promote private, communal and rural forest.
Laws and others rules Sudan attended UNCED in Rio in 1992 and signed the conventions on biological control and agreement on climate. In 1994 it also signed the convention to combat desertification. The country is committed to abide by those conventions.
Institutions involved in FGR The ministry of Agriculture and Forestry: Forest National Corporation (FNC) Conservation of the forestry resources and consequently that of the forest genetic resources as carried by the Forest National Corporation (FNC) as part of the ministry. The FNC is the custodian of the country forest resources by law and it evolved through the past years. In 1901 the Woods and Forests Department was created as a pioneer governmental institution. Its major objective was to supply fuelwood for the steamers and first forest laws were then enacted. Then it developed into a Forest Department that observed conservational measures. Tree planting was effected using indigenous and exotic species. Important species introduced included Tectona grandis, Eucalyptus spp., and Azadirachta indica between 1919 and 1934. Reservation of forests started in 1923. The Forest Department evolved into the Forests National Corporation (FNC), which is a parastatal body in 1989. The FNC is technically responsible for all forests in the Sudan and is responsible for the protection of forest areas adjacent to the desert, watercourses and streams and watersheds. It shares the forestry administrative responsibilities of other forests with the 26 State governments. The FNC provide technical assistance to local communities managing village and communal forests and to companies, organizations and individuals running private forests. Also, the FNC is responsible for the forest in the national parks, which are managed by the Wildlife Department. The Native or Tribal Administration aided the Forest authorities in conservation of forests. The Native Administration backed by the laws and using its own local wisdom has been very instrumental in tree conservation.
TRAINING AND RESEARCH CAPACITY BUILDING AND REINFORCEMENT.
Research on FGR The Forest Research Centre (FRC) was transferred in 1975 from the Forest Department to become a component of the Agricultural Research Corporation under the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to conduct forestry research. Also the National Research Centre under the Ministry of Higher education is conducting research in forest related issues 5.2.Training Academic institutions offer B.Sc. and postgraduates programs and undertake research in forestry and genetic resources conservation: · · · University of Khartoum offers B.Sc. (Honours) in Forestry after five years academic program emphasizing management, and conservation with courses in forest genetics. Postgraduate programs in M.Sc and Ph.D. have also been established. University of Sudan offers B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in forestry, Other universities, including Juba University, offer B.Sc. (Honours) and M.Sc. in natural resources and environmental.
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION Following the directive in the nonbinding Forestry Principles issued by the conference of the UNCED in Rio in 1992, Sudan received assistance from UN Global Environmental Facility (GEF) to sensitize the local communities on the importance of conserving genetic resources, combating desertification and observing the environmental balance. The Sudan is also an active member of the IGAD, African Environmental Ministerial Council and Arab Environmental Ministerial council.
SELECTED REFERENCES.
Abdelnour, H.O., Abdelmagid, T.D. 1997. The Human activities in the Sudan during the 20th century and its effect on the forests of the Sudan. Andrews, F.W. 1948. The vegetation of the Sudan. Agriculture in the Sudan 1948 Badi, K.H. 1993. Study on consumption of forest products: an exhaustive list of forest species bearing non-wood forest products GCP/SUD/049/NET, Khartoum, Sudan. Forest National Corporation (FNC).? Reports 1990-1998. Khartoum, Sudan Harrison, M.N. and Jackson, J.K. 1958. Ecological classification of the vegetation of the Sudan. Sudan Government, Khartoum, Sudan. Libanis. 1998. Sudan country guide. http://libanis.net/c/sd/guide/economy.shtml Smith, J. 1949. The distribution of Tree species in relation to rainfall and soil texture. Sudan government, Khartoum, Sudan.
Name of species Acacia mellifera Acacia nilotica Acacia senegal Acacia seyal A. tortillis raddiana Adansonia digitata Ailanthus excelsa Albizzia amara Albizzia aylmeri Anogeissus leiocarpus Azadirachta indica Balanites aegyptiaca Borassus aethiopum Boswellia papyrifera Callitris gluca Conocarpus lancifolius Cordia africana Cupressus lucitanica Dalbergia melanoxylon Dalbergia sissoo Diospyros mespiliformis Eucalyptus camaldulensis Eucalyptus microtheca Faidherbia albida Hyphaene thebaica Khaya senegalensis Lannea fruticosa Parkinsonia aculeata Pseudocedrela kotchii Sclerocarya birrea Sterculia setigera Tamarindus indica Terminalia brownii Terminalia laxiflora Ziziphus spina-christi Key Va lue:.
Species of current socio economic importance.
Species with clear potential or future value.
Species of unknown value given present knowledge and technology Utilization: ti timber production; po posts, poles, round wood; Va lue code 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 ti x po x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x xp wo x x x x x Present, future or potential use nw pu fo fd sh ag co x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x am xx x x x xr.
pu wo nw Fo fd sh ag co am xx.
pulp and paper fuelwood, charcoal; non-wood products (gums, resins, oils, tannins, medicines, dyes...) food; fodder; shade, shelter; agroforestry systems; soil and water conservation; amenity, aesthetic, ethical values; other (specify).
Species/ecological zones Reserve, natural park >10000 >10000 >1 0 0 Stands in situ, ex situ Protected natural stands >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 >10000 Protected planted stands Villages fields, homeste ads Experimental tria ls.
Acacia mellifera Zone 3 Acacia nilotica Zone 6 Acacia senegal Zone 3 Zone 4 Acacia seyal Zone 3 Zone 6 Acacia tortilis Zone 2 Adansonia digitata Zone 3 Zone 4 Ailanthus exclesa Zone 6 Albizia amara Zone 3 Zone 4 Albizia aylmeri Zone 3 Anogeissus leiocarpus Zone 3 Azadirachta indica Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 4 Zone 6 Balanites aegyptiaca Zone 3 Zone 4 Borassus aethiopum Zone 6 Boswellia papyrifera Zone 7 Callitris gluca Zone 7 Conocarpus lancifolius Zone 3 Cordia africana Zone 3 Cupressus lucitanica Zone 7 Dalbergia melanoxylon Zone 3 Zone 4 Dalbergia sisso Zone 6.
Diospyros mespiliformis Zone 3 >500 Eucalyptus camaldulensis Zone 2 >10000 Zone 3 >10000 Zone 6 >10000 Zone 7 >10000 Eucalyptus microtheca Zone 3 >10000 Zone 6 >10000 Faidherbia albida >100 Zone 3 <100 >1000 Zone 4 >1000 Zone 6 >1000 Hyphaene thebaica Zone 6 >10000 >10000 Khaya senegalensis Zone 5 >10000 Zone 6 >10000 Zone 7 <100 Lannea fruticosa >100 Zone 3 >10000 Zone 4 >1000 Parkinsonia aculeata Zone 6 >1000 Pseudocedrela kotchyi Zone 3 <100 >500 Sclerocarya birrea Zone 3 >10000 Sterculia setigera Zone 7 >10000 Tamarindus indica Zone 3 <100 >1000 Terminalia brownii Zone 3 >10000 Terminalia laxiflora Zone 3 >10000 Ziziphus spina-christi <100 Zone 3 >10000 Zone 4 >10000 Zone 6 >1000 >10000 Number of individual trees in each category per zone was estimated for all the species. Major ecological zones: Zone 1 : Desert Zone 2 : Semi-desert Zone 3 : Low rainfall savannah (LRS) on clay Zone 4 : Low rainfall savannah (LRS) on sand Zone 5 : High rainfall savannah (HRS) Zone 6 : Special areas Zone 7 : Montane forests.
Species and populations degree of management and security.
Managed for Wood, Soil non water wood protecti producti on on Unmanaged but Anima l grazin g Used and harveste d.
Threatened by (causes) Enviro nment Clearing Overg razing by infrast ructur e By other factors Degree of security.
Species/ecological zones Acacia mellifera Zone 3 Acacia nilotica Zone 6 Acacia senegal Zone 3 Zone 4 Acacia seyal Zone 3 Zone 6 Acacia tortilis Zone 2 Adansonia digitata Zone 3 Zone 4 Ailanthus exclesa Zone 6 Albizia amara Zone 3 Zone 4 Albizia aylmeri Zone 3 Anogeissus leiocarpus Zone 3 Azadirachta indica Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 4 Zone 6 Balanites aegyptiaca Zone 3 Zone 4 Borassus aethiopum Zone 6 Boswellia papyrifera Zone 6 Callitris gluca Zone 7 Conocarpus lancifolius Zone 3 Cordia africana Zone 3 Cupressus lucitanica Zone 7 Dalbergia melanoxylon Zone 3 Zone 4 Dalbergia sisso Zone 6 Diospyros mespiliformis Zone 3 Eucalyptus camaldulensis Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 6 Zone 7 Eucalyptus microtheca Zone 3 Zone 6 Faidherbia albida Zone 3 Zone 6.
Protect ed in parks.
Used and grazed.
Hyphaene thebica Zone 6 Khaya senegalensis Zone 5 Zone 6 Zone 7 Lannea fruticosa Zone 3 Zone 4 Parkinsonia aculeata Zone 6 Pseudocedrela kotchii Zone 3 Sclerocarya birrea Zone 3 Sterculia setigera Zone 7 Tamarindus indica Zone 3 Terminalia brownii Zone 3 Terminalia laxiflora Zone 3 Ziziphus spina-christi Zone 3 Zone 4 Zone 6.
Number of individual trees in each category per zone was estimated. Number after slash refer to level of protection and security Major ecological zones: Zone 1: Desert Zone 2: Semi-desert Zone 3 : Low rainfall savannah (LRS) on clay Zone 4 : Low rainfall savannah (LRS) on sand Zone 5 : High rainfall savannah (HRS) Zone 6 : Special areas Zone 7 : Montane forests Degree of security 1: Low risk of genetic erosion 2,3,4: intermediate risk of genetic erosion 5: High risk of genetic erosion.
