Forest Genetic Resources Working Papers.
State of Forest Genetic Resources in the dry north of Nigeria.
Prepared for The sub- regional workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998) By.
Peter I. Oni.
A co-publication of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC and ICRAF.
December 2001.
Danida Forest Seed Centre.
Forest Resources Division FAO, Rome, Italy.
Working Paper FGR/16E.
STATE OF FOREST T GENETIC RESOURCES IN NIGERIA.
Prepared for The sub- regional workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998).
Peter I. Oni Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria, Ibadan Nigeria.
A co-publication of.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Sub-Saharan Africa Forest Genetic Resources Programme of the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (IPGRI/SAFORGEN) Danida Forest Seed Centre (DFSC) and International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF).
Working papers FGR/16E.
The current publication « State of the Forest Genetic Resources in the dry north of Nigeria » is issue of country national report presented at The Sub- Regional Workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998). It is published with the collaboration of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC and ICRAF, as one of the country and regional series which deals with the assessment of genetic resources of tree species in the Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa and identification of priority actions for their Conservation and Sustainable Utilization.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO, IPGRI/SAFORGEN, DFSC or ICRAF, concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Quantitative information regarding the status of forest and tree resources, including genetic resources, has been compiled according to sources, methodologies and protocols identified and selected by the author. Data comparison between countries using different recording methodologies and sources may not be possible. For standardized methodologies and data on forest resources, please refer to FAO, 2001. State of the World's Forests 2001 ; and to State of Forest Genetic Resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa & Regional Action Plan for their Conservation and Sustainable Use. Working papers FGR/2E, FAO, IPGRI & ICRAF. FAO, Rome, 2001. Official information can also be found at the FAO Internet site (http://www.fao.org/forestry/Forestry.asp). For further information please contact: Oscar Eyog-Matig, IPGRI/SAFORGEN Programme Coordinator c/o IITA 08 BP 0932 Cotonou, Benin. Tel.: +229 350188 / 350553 / 350600 Fax: +229 350556 E-mail : o.eyog-matig@cgiar.org.
Citation Oni P.I. 2001. State of Forest genetic Resources in the dry north of Nigeria. Sub-Regional Workshop FAO/IPGRI/ICRAF on the conservation, management, sustainable utilization and enhancement of forest genetic resources in Sahelian and North-Sudanian Africa (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 22-24 September 1998). Forest Genetic Resources Working Papers, Working Paper FGR/16E. Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Cover. Photo: Oscar Eyog-Matig.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND ECOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS.
Geographic position of the country The dry region of Nigeria lies between Latitude 13°N and 11°S and Longitude 4°W and 14°E, covering a band of 342,158 km² or 85% total land area of Nigeria (Thulin, 1966; FAO, 1979). The land area occupied by the region is probably by far the largest single agricultural land use in Nigeria covering six states of the Federation.
Socio-economic information The rural population in 1997 was 58.71% of a total population of 118.4 million inhabitants with an annual rate of change (1995-2000) of 2.8 % (FAO, 1999). The per capita income in 1995 was 260 dollars with an annual growth rate of GDP (1990-1995) of 1.6 % (FAO, 1999). The major sectors of employment are agriculture, services and industrial concerns.
Ecological information The region is characterized with lower precipitation than evapo-transpiration with an annual rainfall of about 400-1140 mm. There are only 2- 7 months with rainfall in excess of 50 mm in most parts of the region. The landscape is characterized by parklands with patchy grasslands dotted with naturally slow growing, drought tolerant and tire hardy indigenous woody tree. The dry region is further sub-divided into three ecological zones (A, B, C) on the basis of rainfall and vegetation: · Zone A (southern) consists of Kaduna north - Zaria (11°10'N, 7° 38'E). It is a Guinea savanna zone with 1200-1600 mm of annual rainfall. · Zone B (central) consists of Kano-Jigawa (12°03'N, 8°32'E), a Sudan savanna zone with 1000 ­ 1300 mm of annual rainfall. · Zone C (Northern) is made up (Katsina, 13°01'N, 7° 41'E) and Sokoto (13° 04'N, 05° 16' W) Jigawa and Bornu State 12° 30'N, 13° 05'E and Yobe state (11° 42'N, 11° 02'E). It is a Semi Arid region with less than 1000 mm annual rainfall.
STATE OF FOREST GENETIC RESOURCES.
Phytogeography of the country According to FAO/UNEP (1981), wood and shrub-lands occur on the largest part of the Guinea, Sudan and Sahel zones of Nigeria. Tree vegetation is generally rare in the Sudan and Sahel zones while it is more common in the Guinea and the derived savanna zones. The vegetation of these two latter zones is cursively presented as follows: " In the Guinea zone, Acacia spp. are relatively rare, and trees which are completely bare in the dry season are rare. Large areas in the northern and median Guinea zones are dominated by Isoberlinia doka, and one distinction between the northern and the median guinea zones is the association of Uapaca togoensis and Bridelia ferruginea in the latter but not in the former. In the southern Guinea zones Isoberlinia doka is much rarer, and Daniellia oliveri is a very abundant tree (though it occurs in the others zones). The tree vegetation of the derived savanna zone is broadly similar to that of the southern Guinea zone, though the grass composition differs".
The broadleaved woodland is mainly composed of Annona senegalensis, Vitellaria paradoxa, Cussonia barteri, Daniellia oliveri, Isoberlinia doka, Lannea acida, Monotes kerstingii, Prosopis africana, Terminalia avicennioides, Uapaca togoensis. The Sahel zone is characterized by small, widely dispersed, small-leaved trees, particularly Acacia species such as Acacia tortilis subsp. raddiana, Acacia seyal, Acacia nilotica and in the northern parts Acacia Senegal. A fairly high proportion of the trees are deciduous in the dry season. Some characteristic species (through not confined to this zone) are Anogeissus leiocarpus, Sclerocarya birrea, Combretum micranthum and Guiera senegalensis. Interpretation of radar imagery distinguishes the following (predominantly) shrub vegetation types: · "Dense shrub grassland" and "shrub grassland" which offer a woody cover of shrub like Combretum spp., Guiera senegalensis, Acacia species, Calotropis senegalensis and Boscia senegalensis, sufficient to classify them as wooded formations; · "Thorny", "non-thorny" and "mixed" "shrubland and thicket" with the same species as indicated above for the shrub grassland formations; · "Wooded shrub grassland" (in the Guinea zone) with Combretum spp., Terminalia spp., Anacardium occidentale, Lophira lanceolata, Afrormosia laxiflora and scattered trees of the guinean savanna.
Utilization patterns of forest species Within the Northern dry region of Nigeria dietary habits are similar with slight variations influenced by cultural backgrounds. All the trees selectively protected in the parklands provide one or combinations of the following tangible and intangible services: food items (edible fruits, nuts, leaves, flowers, livestock fodder, fuel wood, medicine, aesthetics, shade, agricultural tools and cooking utensils, avenues, and other services such as ropes, fibres, tannin, manure, latex gums and oils. Patterns of utilization are quite similar for the entire region and fall within various headings mentioned above. However more trees are protected for their medicinal values and food.. Fuel wood (fuel energy and heating) are equally of importance. With the exception of Adansonia digitata and Calotropis procera, all species are utilized as fuel wood obtained from prunings, complete felling or pollarding. All the component parts of the tree featured daily and regularly in the food security and dietary habits of the people with some quantity for market as income. Many of the cattle farmers still rely substantially on these trees for lopped fodder, while the fruits, shells are also fed to the livestock. Shade provision is unique with Parkia biglobosa, Adansonia digitata and Tamarindus indica along side with Mangifera indica due to their broad canopies. Currently, income from the sales of fruits of Parkia biglobosa, Vitellaria paradoxa, Adansonia digitata, Tamarindus indica and Balanites aegyptiaca and Acacia seyal account for 30 - 45% of the farmers income. Commonly known exotics including Mangifera indica, Anacardium occidentale and Azadirachta indica are on a par with most the indigenous trees and are equally protected. Soil fertility sustenance is secondary role from some of these trees through litter falls.
Ecological zone Item Medicine Food Fuelwood Industrial Soil conservation Medicine Food Fuelwood Industrial Soil conservation Medicine Food Fuelwood Industrial Soil conservation Percentage representation (%) 50 35 20 <5 1-3 45-50 35-40 10-15 <5 1-2 45-50 25-40 10-15 5-8 1-3.
Zone A (Zaria) southern. Guinea savanna zone.
Zone B (Kano-Jigawa) central. Northern Sudan zone.
Zone C (Sokoto-Bornu) Northern. Semi arid region.
Threats Inadequate fuel wood supply, low precipitation, and desertification encroachments from the Sahel the conservation of forest genetic resources in the Northern semi-arid region of Nigeria. Demographic pressures and rapid urbanization are not perceived as major culprits. The increasing rate of uncontrolled over-exploitation of many of the woody trees species in the region particularly for fuel wood energy is becoming an area of major concern. The demand for poles and small timber and shifting cultivation are minor sources of threats. The presence of Azadirachta indica, Anogeissus leiocarpus and Piliostigma thonningii in most of the parklands is significant in meeting fuel wood supply along with the exotics. Low income levels of most inhabitants predispose them from having access to alternative sources of energy (kerosene and domestic gas). Generally, the parklands are ageing and are less dense compared to what they were two decades ago. In some cases certain size classes for these woody tree species are difficult to assess due to poor regeneration. Other recognizable threats to forest genetic resources within the region include over-grazing, which encourages sand dunes, and wind erosion. In many areas within the region, the absence of enrichment planting is visible for most indigenous woody trees species.
MANAGEMENT OF FGR.
In situ conservation activities Protected areas and sacred forests Forest genetic resources of this region are traditionally protected and conserved on farm lands within the scattered agroforestry enclaves of the people. The total land area under forest reserve for the region is put at 342, 158 Km². While the Sahel savanna covers an area of 31,468 Km² (CFAD, 1979). Within the region some of the species are protected in parks and fetish grooves arising from mythological reasons, which forbids the cutting of some species such as Adansonia digitata and Tamarindus indica, Acacia senegal and Faidherbia albida. In the central part of this region (Kano) there is 'Falgore Game Reserve', which harbours many of.
these trees including Isoberlinia doka, Khaya senegalensis, Vitex doniana, Anogeissus leiocarpus, Tamarindus indica, Detarium microcarpum and Pterocarpus erinaceus. Table 2: Distribution pattern of threats to forest trees in the sub-Saharan zones.
Ecological zone Item Illegal felling Demographic Industrial Plantation forestry Drought Others (insects) Demographic lndustrial Plantation forestry Illegal felling Drought Others (insects) Demographic lndustrial Plantation forestry Illegal felling Drought Others (insects) Percentage representation (%) 45-65 10-15 5 15-20 10-20 <5 10-15 15-20 25-35 40-55 10 <2 2-5 5-10 20-35 35-45 20-35 >3.
For example, trees on farmland in Katisina state were put at 3, 915 km² in 1992. Ex-situ and in-situ conservation work started for Parkia biglobosa in 1993 and ninety-four accessions have been collected and conserved in the seed gene bank at the headquarters of the Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria (FRIN) with fifty-four accessions belonging to the rest of West Africa (Sarumi et al., 1995). The distribution of forest reserves in 1983 in the region is indicated in Table.
Table 3: Areas of forest reserves as at 1983.
State Total land area (km²) Kaduna (now Kaduna and 69,392.85 Katsina) Kano 43,743.94 Sokoto 91,960.06 Borno 199,132.17.
Source: Onochie 1983.
Area of reserve (km²) 8,825.19 1,979.79 20,358.21 1,823.50.
% of Reserve forest to land area 12.72 4.52 22.17 4.00.
Traditional agroforestry parklands systems Most commonly observed agroforestry systems involve near pure stands of some of the following species especially Parkia sp. and Vitellaria sp. in south-central zone and Tamarindus-Anogeissus-Parkia in the northern zone. Most of these were derived from remnants of long time protective land use and manipulations of elements of the original vegetation in favour of the indigenous multipurpose trees in the farming systems.
Forest enrichment or plantation Strict natural reserves or plantations for any of the indigenous tree species are rare across the region. However stands of these indigenous trees may be found within some of these plantations.
Ex situ conservation activities Seed banks Most afforestation projects in the region are dominated by exotic species and seed supply and demand can be considered as relatively adequate. However seed supply for most of the indigenous tree species are grossly inadequate due to poorly managed seed orchards, intensive collections and utilization by farmers and in-adequate facilities for seed collections and storage by both the state and national forestry organizations. The interest of the farmers to plant indigenous trees is still low due to their slow growth, which had equally affected the replenishment of the old mother tress in the parklands. Most farmers prefer the cultivation of arable food crops to growing of indigenous fruit trees. In addition many of the woody species producing edible fruits are intensively harvested both for food and cash with very little quantity preserved for planting. In almost all parts of the region, supply of seedlings of indigenous woody trees are in limited supply. In recent times, following the report of Nigeria Environmental Study Action Team (NEST, 1990) and the advent of Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) and National Centre for Genetic Resources Conservation and Biotechnology (NACRAB), the trend is changing. In addition, a number of NGOs are now involved into ex situ and in situ conservation of the forest genetic resources. These organisations include the Nigeria Conservation Foundation (NCF), the Centre for Research and Development in Natural Resources and Environmental Development (CENRAD), and Plant Diversity Research Organization (PDRO). Some orchards exist in state and federal Department of Forestry and Forestry Research stations in the region along with ex-situ conservation for some of the indigenous trees for seed collections and progeny trials. Species including Parkia biglobosa, Vitellaria paradoxa, Adansonia digitata, Tamarindus indica, Entada africana, Moringa oleifera and Diospyros mespiliformis. Acacia senegal and Acacia nilotica are receiving attention. Periodically, seeds collected are processed and distributed to the seed sections of the Agricultural Development Projects, which maintain direct contact with farmers (stakeholders). The National Agricultural Research Project (NARP, World Bank Assisted) of which the Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria (FRIN) is a part has recently embarked on 1 million seedlings production for afforestation and agroforestry projects and some indigenous trees are included to meet up this region seedlings supply.
Source: The Green light magazine 1992.
Seedlings production in 1992 649,400 2,078,100 2,800,000 2,020,000 3,478,940.
Ex-situ conservation work started for Parkia biglobosa in 1993 and ninety four accessions have been collected and conserved in the seed gene bank in FRIN with fifty four accessions belonging to the rest of West Africa (Sarumi et al., 1995). The major problem in conservation work has been funding and under-maintenance of storage facilities. Currently the country has two properly equipped seed centres with professional and trained support staff. These centres are the main sources of seed collection, storage and handling for all user groups. More sophisticated equipment are required for seed harvesting, cleaning, handling, processing, sorting, drying and storage. Information documentation is inadequate, old-fashioned, cumbersome and often not standardized. Gene bank management, exploration methodologies and computer skills are also the priorities. Forest plantation Except for Acacia senegal commercially exploited for gum arabic with plantations existing in Yobe and Domo states, other plantations are mainly for afforestation and shelterbelts planted up with exotics including Pinus spp, Eucalyptus spp., Gmelina arborea, Azadirachta indica and Senna siamea.
Selection and genetic improvement Few trial plots exist for Parkia biglobosa, Vitellaria paradoxa and Tamarindus indica in both the southern (Zaria) and northern (Katsina and Sokoto) zones. The Savanna Forestry Research Station of FRIN established these plots. In the northern zone (Katsina and Sokoto) trial plots are in place for Moringa oleifera, Parkia biglobosa, Acacia nilotica, Tamarindus indica, and Vitex doniana. They were established through the EEC/ Katsina state Arid Zone Project. Some form of deliberate plantings exist for a number of these species by both the farmers (seedlings supplied by local and state Forestry Departments) and direct planting by the State Forestry as demonstration plots or woodlots while the local governments have established small afforestation projects and enrichment plantings either as monoculture on the farmers plots or around homesteads. Instances of some of these trees forming a component of avenues along the major roads are also in practice. Most of the forestry sector, pre World Bank assisted NARP Project were not adequately funded by the national government. However, since the onset of NARP, many areas have been cultivated with indigenous fruit trees, including the establishment and evaluation of provenance trials. Small-scale seedlings establishment are also in existence. The impact of NARP as it relates to indigenous fruits trees in the Northern Sub-Saharan region is however yet to be fully felt.
National priority species All stakeholders showed consistent preference for the following species: Adansonia digitata, Acacia seyal, Acacia nilotica, Acacia Senegal, Anogeissus leiocarpus, Azadirachta indica, Anacardium occidentale, Balanites aegyptiaca, Borassus aethiopum, Ceiba pentandra, Combretum microcarpum, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, Diospyros mespiliformis, Faidherbia albida, Guiera senegalensis, Gmelina arborea, Hyphaene thebaica, Lawsonia inermis, Lannea acida, Khaya senegalensis, Moringa oleifera, Mangifera indica, Parkia biglobosa, Piliostigma thonningii, Pterocarpus erinaceus, Pinus spp., Salvadora perica, Senna siamea, Tamarindus indica, Vitellaria paradoxa, Vitex doniana. Highly valued naturalised exotic fruits trees including Mangifera indica, Psidium guajava, Anacardium occidentals, Azadirachta indica and Citrus spp., were however not included in the list.
POLICY, PLANNING AND INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM.
National forest policy The country has a well-guided policy towards forestry conservation and management especially on sustainable resources utilization. However, like in other countries, many policies are characterized with ambiguity and inconsistency in execution. The policy recognizes that forests should be reserved for the purpose of improved water supply, maintenance of soil stability, provision of grazing and recreational use in addition to the vital purpose of wood production (Omiyale, 1990). In the region policies on fuel wood production, shelterbelt and windbreaks, desertification control, agro-silvo-pastoral and production of building poles and small timber are in place.
Laws and other rules Nigeria has been a part of the global effort on plant genetic resources conservation. This situation has been clearly demonstrated by its involvement in the various international treaties signed since 1968 (OAU) and the recent Convention on biological diversity in 1992 (Sarumi et al., 1995). Laws forbid indiscriminate bush burning, illegal felling, over-exploitation, overgrazing and planting of another tree where one mature one is removed. However insincerity and bureaucratic procedures affect their proper implementation and monitoring. Farmers are aware of the law against illegal felling and over-exploitation and the consequences of such action, but do not seem worried. Adequate education and proper orientation of the farmers are major hindrance to the implementation of relevant legislation. Appropriate agencies exist in overseeing and supervising land clearing operations, but the legal framework is defective of many execution procedures. Nigeria had also being a party to many other initiatives towards the conservation of forest genetic resources at the international and national levels. International treaties relating to conservation of plants in which Nigeria is a party include: -African Convention for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (Came into force in 1974) -Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage; Paris 1972 -UNESCO -Convention on international Trade in endangered species of Wild Flora (CITES) Washington 1973 -Convention on Bio1ogica1 Diversity 1992 -F AO.
Institutions involved in FGR The genetic resources programme of the country is under the Ministry of Science and Technology. In the last ten years the Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria (FRIN), State afforestation stations, Federal Department Forestry, State and local forestry stations and selected Universities and voluntary organisations in the region have embarked on various research efforts to conserve genetic resources, through appropriate agroforestry systems compatible with fruit trees for the Northern Sub-Saharan region. However, due to the desertification problems, attention continue to be given to the afforestation and shelterbelts using exotics species.
Workshops, seminars and conferences and campaigns have been part of major afforestation strategies.
TRAINING AND RESEARCH CAPACITY BUILDING AND REINFORCEMENT.
Research on forest genetic resources Provenance evaluation trials of exotic species and establishment of seed orchards started in 1960s. Work has been completed for provenance studies and evaluation of native species e.g. Acacia senegal and Acacia nilotica. Research is also been completed on phenology, fruit characteristics, seeds problems and nursery techniques for some multipurpose trees including Adansonia digitata, Parkia biglobosa and Moringa oleifera. There is an on-going research programme on shelterbelts, wind breaks, sand dunes, fixation and amelioration of microclimate for agricultural production within the region. Research work is currently in progress in some of the research stations and institutions and within and outside the region on provenance selections, evaluation, vegetative propagation, clonal and progeny studies while aspects of population distribution and phenology have been completed for Parkia biglobosa under EEC (European Economic Community) fund. Extensive work has been done on variability of Acacia sp. and Parkia biglobosa.
Training As a result of the activities of IUFRO 1987, training in aspects of breeding including species biology, vegetative propagation, clonal and progeny studies and orchard management have been given to some field staff. Presently the region has several Strict Natural Reserves . Most of the research stations are also equipped with storage facilities for forest genetic materials. As indicated earlier, what remains are funds for maintenance and repairs. Many institutions also exist within the region where staff can be trained in various aspects of forest genetic conservation including tissue culture while the Centre for Genetic Conservation (NACGRAB) also enjoys some training facilities in this field.
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION Within the last fifties years various International organizations and institutions have assisted in the afforestation programme of the Northern Sub-Saharan region of Nigeria especially with the coming of UNDP/FAO in 1964 when the Savanna Forestry Research Station was established. The institutes have put many areas of unproductive forest reserves to productive plantations of exotics species including Pinus spp, Eucalyptus spp., Tectona grandis, Gmelina sp., Acacias spp. and Azadirachta indica. The European Economic Community (EEC) and Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) have played various roles in tree nurseries' establishment, training of field extension staff, planting of fruit trees on a variety of sites, establishment of shelter belts and village woodlots in rural areas. It is worth noting, however, that, the activities of some of the organizations have indirectly promoted the erosion of genetic resources of several indigenous species through use of exotic species and monoculture plantations. On the part of the Federal Government of Nigeria, efforts are being made to complement the efforts of these agencies through the setting up different community forestry programmes, education of the masses on the dangers of deforestation, regulations of grazing habit of livestock, promotion of tree planting campaigns and legislation back their activities. Renewed efforts on extension services geared towards the conservation of forest genetic resources of this region also in motion.
SELECTED REFERENCES.
Cosstaler, G. Iyamabo, D.E. Krugman, S. L and Fugalli,.
1991. Tree improvement and Silvopastoral Management in Sahelian and North Sudanian Africa Problems, Needs and Research Proposals. IUFRO pp 147-155, 196 p. FAO/UNEP. 1981.Tropical forest resources assessment project (in the framework of GEMS). Forest resources of Tropical Africa. Part II: Country briefs. FAO, Rome, Italy. FAO, 1984. Appendix 8 Forest genetic resources priorities 8 Africa Report of the Fifth Session of the Panel of Experts on Forest Genetic Resources. Rome, Ita1y 8-11 December 1981, pp 52-100 FAO Rome. 101 p. FAO. 1999. State of the world's forests. Rome, Italy Federal Department of Forestry, 1983. Nigerian Forestry Statistics 1983. 30 p Leaky R B. and Sommons, A. J. 1998. The domestication and commercialization of indigenous trees in agroforestry for the alleviation of poverty Agroforestry Systems .38 165-176 Momodu, A.B. Otegbeye, G.O. & Igboanugo A.B 1997. The priority mu1tipurpose tree species (MPTs) of the arid and semi-arid areas of Nigeria: Identification, distribution and ethonobotanica1 values. Seminar paper de1ivered at the Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria Conference Hall Ibadan, June, 19 1997 Otegbeye, G .O & Oje, S. A 1995 Seed collection and handling activities of Savanna Forestry Research Station, Seed section, Nigeria. Forest Genetic Resources No 23 FAO, Rome 1995 Omiyale, O. 1990. Potentia1s of Arid Zone in Nigeria. Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria 25th-30th, 1990 Putter, A. 1994. Safeguarding the forest genetic basis of Africa 's traditional crops. Proceeding of CTA/IBGRI/KARI/UNEP Seminar, 5-9 October 1992 Nairobi Kenya. pp 65-74,210 pp Sarumi, M.B, Ladipo D.O Denton, L. Olapade E.O. Bagaru K. & Ughasoro C 1995. Plant Genetic Resources Conservation in Nigeria. Country Report prepared for the International Programme for Plant Genetic Resources (ICPPGR) F AO Federal Republic of Nigeria Thulin, S 1970. Wood requirements in the savanna regions of Nigeria. FOR/NIG.16 Tech Reports F AO, Rome 43 pp. The Greenlight Magazine 1991-1994 Young Forester club publication EECIFGN Katsina Afforestation Project School Programme Katsina State. FAO.
fd x x x x x x x x x x x x.
sh x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x -.
ag x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x.
co x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x -.
am x x x x x x x x x x x x x.
xx x x x x x x x -.
Key Value:.
Species of current socio economic importance.
Species with clear potential or future value.
Species of unknown value given present knowledge and technology Utilization: ti timber production; po posts, poles, round wood; pu pulp and paper wo fuelwood, charcoal;.
nw Fo fd sh ag co am xx.
non-wood products (gums, resins, oils, tannins, medicines, dyes...) food; fodder; shade, shelter; agroforestry systems; soil and water conservation; amenity, aesthetic, ethical values; other (specify).
Species/ecological zones Acacia senegal Acacia nilotica Adansonia digitata Anogeissus leiocarpus Annona senegalensis Azadirachta indica Reserve, natural park >10,000 individual s >1000 individual s >100 >100 >100 >10,000 Stands in situ, ex situ >10,000 >10,000 >1000 >1000 >500 >10000 Protected natural stands >1 0 0 0 >1 0 0 0 >1000 >1000 >1000 <5 0 0 Protected planted stands >10,000 >10,000 >1000 >1000 >500 >10000 Villages fields, homesteads >1 0 0 0 >1 0 0 0 >100 >500 >100 >1 0 0 0 Experimental tria ls Over 100 provenances and 500 trial plots Over 50 provenances and 500 trial plots 25 provenances and 60 trial plots, 10 clones 10 provenances and 15 trial plots 5 provenances Over 100 provenances and several trial plots more than 30 clones 10 provenances and 60 trial plots Data not available 60 provenances and over 100 trial plots, 15 clones Not available 15 provenances Not available No worked done yet Not available 18 provenances, 10 trial plots and 5 clones Not available 5 provenances 15 provenances and 12 trial plots Over 100 provenances and 300 trial plots Over 100 provenances and several trial plots 10 provenances Not available Not available Over 100 provenances and several trial plots, 25 clones 15 provenances.
Anacardium occidentale Albizia lebbeck Balanites aegyptiaca.
Borassus aethiopum Bombax costatum Ceiba pentandra Calotropis procera Carrisa edulis Diospyros mespiliformis Dododnea viscosa Delonix regia Entada africana Eucalyptus camaldulensis Faidherbia albida Ficus platyphylla Ficus thonningii Ficus ingens Gmelina arborea.
Guiera senegalensis.
18 and 15 trial plots Not available 30 provenances and 3 clones.
Hyphaene thebaica Khaya senegalensis.
Leuceana leucocephalla Lannea barteri Landolphia owariensis Nauclea esculentus Moringa oleifera Mangifera indica Parkia biglobosa Phoenix dactylifera Piliostigma thonningii Prosopis africana Pterocarpus erinaceus Ximenia americana Tamarindus indica Tectona grandis Vitellaria paradoxa Vitex doniana Ziziphus spina-christii.
10 provenances and 3 clones 10 provenances and 3 clones Not available Not available 30 provenances and 5 clones 14 provenances and 3 clones 94 provenances and 43 clones 5 provenances and 2 clones 10 provenances and 2 clones 5 provenances 15 provenances Not available 25 provenances and 8 clones Not available 35 provenances and 5 clones 15 provenances and 5 clones 5 provenances.
* Estimated Tree density.
