Forestry Outlook Studies in Africa (FOSA).
Million Bekele Please note that the views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the institutions. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style. June 2001.
Ethiopia is largely an agrarian country with over 90% of its population living in rural areas. Of the currently estimated population of 62 million, the subsistence agricultural sector engages nearly 85% of the work force. Agriculture is the cornerstone of the economy contributing about 53% of the GDP and accounts for more than 90% of all exports. The low level of productivity of the agricultural sector, coupled with the recurrent drought has made the country poor with a per capita income of US$ 106 per annum. The annual growth rate of the GDP has been sluggish averaging about 4.9% in 1994/95 (CSA, 1995). In an agrarian society like Ethiopia, forestry can play significant role in economic development. The forestry GDP as a proportion of the whole economy and in relation to agriculture has been very low. The share of forestry in the GDP varied between 2% and 2.6% from 1971 to 1985 and declined to 1.9% between 1986 and 1987. The share of forestry in the agricultural GDP varied between 3.8% and 4.8% during 1971-1985 and declined to 3.7% in 1986 and 1987. If direct consumption of commodities such as fuel wood and charcoal and the indirect contributions of forests to watershed management and soil conservation as well as that of forest products utilised in other manufacturing and construction activities are considered in the calculation, the contribution of forestry to the total GDP and agricultural GDP will be much higher amounting to about 10% and more (EARO, 1998). Forestry's contribution to employment generation is not documented. Most forestry operations are undertaken in rural Ethiopia and a large number of labourers are required for forest nursery operations, afforestation and for the construction and maintenance of roads. This is a major source of income for the rural people. People also profit from forestry employment through firewood, charcoal collection and sales, incense and gum collection. Fuel wood production is by far the largest employment generator accounting for nearly 50% of the total forestry employment, followed by afforestation contributing for about 34%. Forest industry employment amounted to about 2.2% of the total work force in the country and contributed 2.8% to employment in the agricultural sector in 1988/1989 (EFAP,1992). The major cause of deforestation is rapid population growth, which leads to an increase in the demand for crop and grazing land, wood for fuel and construction. Lack of viable land use policy and corresponding law also aggravated the rate of deforestation. New settlements in forests are increasing from time to time and hence resulted in the conversion of forested land into agricultural and other land use systems. At present, the few remaining high forests are threatened by pressure from investors who are converting the moist evergreen montane forests into other land use systems such as coffee and tea plantations. The average volume per hectare for closed high forests is estimated to range from 30-120 m3 per hectare and 5-50 m3 per hectare for open forests. The woodland is estimated to have an average volume of 10-50 m3 per hectare. On the other hand, the annual incremental yield from all available forest is estimated at 14.4 million m3 while the demand is 47.4 million m3 for the year 1992 (EFAP, 1994). Although precise figures are not available, it is estimated that about 24 million m3 of wood is produced annually of which some 10% is used for industrial and building purposes and the remainder for fuel wood and charcoal 2.
There are a number of problems facing the forestry sub-sector. The forest resources have been declining both in size and quality. The high forests which used to cover 16% of the land area in the early 1950s were reduced to 3.6% in the early 1980s and further declined to 2.7% in the early 1990s. The information of MoA (1999) compiled for forest resources assessment 2000 indicated that forests available for wood supply are over 14 million hectares and those not available for wood supply are estimated to cover an area of over 20 million hectares. In general, underlining causes of deforestation are poverty, population growth, poor economic growth and the state of the environment. The federal and regional governments of Ethiopia recognise the economic and social values of forests and support their conservation and management for sustainable use. However, there is no comprehensive federal policy that covers either land use or forest management. Proclamation No. 94/1994 that was issued to provide for the conservation, development and utilisation of forests is currently serving as the forest policy statement of the country. Despite the fact that the proclamation has been issued six years ago, it did not help much to relieve the pressure from the forests, probably due to the absence of enforcing mechanisms. A formal forest policy is lacking and the frequent restructuring of the sub-sector has led to the discontinuation of planned activities. The Forestry sub-sector is also confronted by problems which are related to the macroeconomic situations and other factors like the reorganisation of the forestry institutional systems. Over the past decades, there have been numerous restructuring of institutions related to forestry. There were separations and re-unification of the sector with agriculture several times. The natural resources sector has been at a level of ministry, vice ministry and at present a team. Currently, the forestry sector at a federal level has a lower organisational profile in the Ministry of agriculture. Budget allocations and staff resources are often inadequate to monitor forest resources effectively and to ensure sustainable management. The trend towards decentralisation and devolution of forest management responsibilities to the local governments could not be effective due to low capacity of the sector at all levels. The current capacity of the sector is constrained especially at the regional level due to the absence of an appropriate management structure, the inadequate allocation of budget and the high level of encroachment for expanding agricultural land and illegal settlements. In order to abate the pace of deforestation and environmental degradation and establish a sustainable forest resource use and development, the Government of Ethiopia has planned to formulate a regional program on forest conservation and development. The program is expected to address the following development objectives: Increase the supply of forest products on a sustainable basis, including sawn timber, fuel wood, poles, fodder, and non-timber forest products. Increase agricultural production through reduced land degradation and increased soil fertility. Conserve forest ecosystems, including genetic and wildlife resources; and Improve the welfare of rural communities.
INTRODUCTION.
Current status of the forestry sector Ethiopia is largely an agrarian country with over 90 % of its population living in rural areas. Of the currently estimated population of 62 million, the subsistence agricultural sector engages nearly 85 % of the work force. Agriculture is the corner stone of the economy contributing about 53 % of the GDP and accounts for more than 90% of all exports. The low level of productivity of the agricultural sector, coupled with the recurrent drought has made the country poor with a per capita income of US $ 106 per annum. The annual growth rate of the GDP has been sluggish averaging about 4.9 % in 1994/95 (CSA, 1995). In an agrarian society like Ethiopia, forestry can play significant role in economic development. The forestry GDP as a proportion of the whole economy and in relation to agriculture has been very low. The share of forestry in the GDP varied between 2% and 2.6% from 1971 to 1985 and declined to 1.9 % between 1986 and 1987. The share of forestry in the agricultural GDP varied between 3.8% and 4.8% during 1971-1985 and declined to 3.7% in 1986 and 1987. If direct consumption of commodities such as fuel wood and charcoal and the indirect contributions of forests to watershed management and soil conservation as well as that of forest products utilised in other manufacturing and construction activities are considered in the calculation, the contribution of forestry to the total GDP and agricultural GDP will be much higher amounting to about 10% and more. (EARO, 1998) Forestry's contribution to employment generation is undocumented. Most forestry operations are undertaken in rural Ethiopia and a large number of labourers are required for forest nursery operations, afforestations and for the construction and maintenance of roads. This is a major source of income for the rural people. People also profit from forestry employment through firewood, charcoal collection and sales, incense and gum collection. Fuel wood production is by far the largest employment generator accounting for nearly 50% of the total forestry employment, followed by afforestation contributing for about 34%. Forest industry employment amounted to about 2.2 % of the total work force in the country and contributed 2.8 % to employment in the agricultural sector in 1988/1989 (EFAP,1992) The major cause of deforestation is the rapid population growth, which leads to an increase in the demand for crop and grazing land, wood for fuel and construction. Lack of viable land use policy and corresponding law also aggravated the rate of deforestation. New settlements in forests are increasing from time to time and hence resulted in the conversion of forested land into agricultural and other land use systems. At present, the few remaining high forests are threatened by pressure from investors who are converting the moist evergreen montane forests into other land use systems such as coffee and tea plantations. The average volume per hectare for closed high forests is estimated to range from 30-120 m3 per hectare and 5-50 m3 per hectare for open forests. The woodland is estimated to have an average volume of 10-50 m3 per hectare. On the other hand, the annual incremental yield from all available forest is estimated at 14.4 million cubic meters while the demand is 47.4 million cubic meters for the year 1992 (EFAP, 1994) Although precise figures are not available, it is estimated that about 24 million m3 of wood is produced annually of which some 10 % is used for industrial and building purposes and the remainder for fuel wood and charcoal.
There are a number of problems facing the forestry sub-sector. The forest resources have been declining both in size and quality. The high forests which used to cover 16% of the land area in the early 1950s were reduced to 3.6 % in the early 1980s and further declined to 2.7 % in the early 1990s. The information of MoA (1999) compiled for forest resources assessment 2000 indicated that forests available for wood supply are over 14 million hectares and those not available for wood supply are estimated to cover an area of over 20 million hectares. In general, underlining causes of deforestation are poverty, population growth, poor economic growth and the state of the environment. The federal and regional governments of Ethiopia recognize the economic and social values of forests and support their conservation and management for sustainable use. However, there is no comprehensive federal policy that covers either land use or forest management. Proclamation No. 94/1994 that was issued to provide for the conservation, development and utilization of forests is currently serving as the forest policy statement of the country. Despite the fact that the proclamation has been issued six years ago, it did not help much to relieve the pressure from the forests, probably due to the absence of enforcing mechanisms. A formal forest policy is lacking and the frequent restructuring of the sub-sector has led to the discontinuation of planned activities. The Forestry sub-sector is also confronted by problems which are related to the macro-economic situations and other factors like the reorganization of the forestry institutional systems. Over the past decades, there have been numerous restructuring of institutions related to forestry. There were separations and re-unification of the sector with agriculture several times. The natural resources sector has been at a level of ministry, vice ministry and at present a team. Currently, the forestry sector at a federal level has a lower organizational profile in the Ministry of agriculture. Budget allocations and staff resources are often inadequate to monitor forest resources effectively and to ensure sustainable management. The trend towards decentralization and devolution of forest management responsibilities to the local governments could not be effective due to low capacity of the sector at all levels. The current capacity of the sector is constrained especially at the regional level due to the absence of an appropriate management structure, the inadequate allocation of budget and the high level of encroachment for expanding agricultural land and illegal settlements. In order to abate the pace of deforestation and environmental degradation and establish a sustainable forest resource use and development, the Government of Ethiopia has planned to formulate a regional program on forest conservation and development. The program is expected to address the following development objectives: Increase the supply of forest products on a sustainable basis, including sawn timber, fuel wood, poles, fodder, and non-timber forest products Increase agricultural production through reduced land degradation and increased soil fertility Conserve forest ecosystems, including genetic and wildlife resources and Improve the welfare of rural communities 5.
Objectives of the study The objectives of the study are: To collect, review and interpret existing information on the status and trends of forestry sector and the factors affecting the development of the sector To present a possible path for future development of the forestry sector through the year 2020. To survey the demographic, economic and social features and trends in the country with a view to their likely impact on the forest sector. To envisage the future direction for the development of the sector.
THE CHANGE DRIVERS.
2.1 2.1.1 External factors Population Growth.
With a current population of 62 million and growing at a rate of 2.92 % per annum and a land area of 1.1 million square kilometres is characterised by subsistence agriculture and extremely high population growth in the face of declining agricultural productivity. According to the census of 1984, the population of Ethiopia was 42.2 millions which was growing at 2.95 % per annum (CSA, 1985). By mid 1990, the population was estimated at 50.6 million of which about 89 % lived in rural areas (CSA, 1990). The population in 1994 was 53.5 million which grew to 61.7 million in 1999 of which 85% are rural and 15% are urban(CSA,1999). Based on the projection made by Anders et, al. 2000, the population is expected to increase to 102 million by year 2020. The high population growth is driven by a high fertility rate of about 6 children per year. The same report indicated that there has been a change in the annual population growth rate from 2.18 % between 1955 and 1960 which increased to 2.43 % between 1975 and 1980. The growth rate then changed to 2.45 % between 1995 and 2000. It is expected to grow to 2.49 % between 2015 and 2020. In addition, the current population density of 57 persons per square kilometre is expected to increase to 93 persons per square kilometre by the year 2020. The rural population alone is expected to reach over 84 million from the current 54 million. Similarly, the urban population is expected to increase to 34.4 million from the current population of 11.6 million. The structure reflects a high dependency ratio with about 45.4 percent of the total population under the age of 15 years and 3.2 % aged 65 and above (NMSA, 2000).
Ethiopia today has approximately 10.2 million households with about 5.2 persons per households. Urban households are smaller than rural households with a high dependency on agriculture. If all other factors remain unchanged, the remaining forest land are likely to be converted to agricultural land. The increase in both human and livestock population has led to decreased holdings of arable land. Arable land per capita declined significantly. In 1994/95, about 61 % of farming households cultivated less than one hectare of land. Only 1 % of the farmers own holdings greater than 5 hectares and these are likely to be concentrated in the sparsely populated areas with low agricultural potential. The increase both in the rural and urban population means that there will be more pressure both on forest and agricultural lands. This also means an increase in the demand for forest products. As a result, deforestation will continue and all the positive functions of forests will disappear. The increase in urbanization also calls for more wood for construction. Unless appropriate forest policy and existing environmental policy are in place and effective, these trend will continue unabated. If all other factors remain unchanged, the remaining forest land is likely to be converted to agricultural land. The forest area per capita is decreasing which will reduce the services rendered by the forests. Unless the technologies used result in increasing agricultural productivity, the pressure on forests will steadily increase. There will be a decreasing forest-population ratio in the years to come.
Economic Growth.
Ethiopia is one of the least developed countries in the world. The gross domestic product (GDP) in 1997 was USD 6,181 million at market prices and exchange rate. GDP with baseline scenario, at high growth scenario and low growth scenario is as shown in Table 1 (NMSA, 2000).
GDP for baseline, high growth and low growth scenarios Year 1997 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 GDP US Mil. Dollars (A.) 6,381 6,211 5,937 5,676 5,426 5,187 GDP US Mil. Dollars (B) 6,381 6,713 7,304 7,948 8,648 9,411 GDP US Mil. Dollars (C). 6,387 6,245 6,024 5,811 5,606 5,407.
The country's economy is heavily dependent on agriculture for generating employment, income and foreign exchange. The dominant sectors and their contribution to GDP in 1994 were 49.7% for agriculture 11.2% for industry and 39.1% for services (NMSA, 2000). Ethiopia has been restructured from a unitary and highly centralized state into a federal one whereby the regional administrations are entitled to plan and execute their own development activities. The economic aspects of these policies stress the liberalization of the economy to become market-oriented. The previous centralized economic planning and decision making, which gave total authority on the economy to the state has been abolished. The decentralization and devolution process that Ethiopia has undergone in the last few years has resulted in new political and administrative institutions. The introduction of a federal system has changed the balance of power in favour of the regional states, which have the legislative, executive and judicial powers The poor performance of the economy over the last two decades demonstrated itself through declining rates of economic growth. The annual average GDP growth rate ranged from -5.2 in 1992 to 4.9 in 1993. The average growth rate in GDP from 1990 to 1997 is -.
The annual growth rate for GDP per capita is estimated at -2.6 % and the average GDP per capita is estimated at $ 106 (Anders et al, 2000). Economic growth and agricultural growth are constrained by the deteriorating forest resource base in particular and the environment in general. In addition to the degradation of forests, the most pressing environmental problems are land degradation, including soil erosion as well as the loss of soil fertility and bio-diversity. The availability of foreign exchange is one of the major requirements for an increase in GDP which is limited by the decline in productivity of the agriculture sector and a high rate of population growth. The low rate of growth in the agriculture sector is aggravated by inappropriate land use practices, which focus on extensive land use. In Ethiopia, the major export commodity is coffee, which on average accounts for 65% of the foreign currency earnings. In an attempt to increase foreign exchange earnings, the government opted to increase the area under coffee through clearing of forests in the south-western part of the country. The industrial sector is not much better than the agriculture sector. It did not show growth and less labour is absorbed by the sector. The shift of labour employment from the agriculture to the industrial sector is not substantial showing the poor performance of the economy. An estimated 50 % of the population lives below the absolute poverty line. More than 13 million people living in the rural areas are classified as food insecure who are unable to meet their subsistence requirements even in years of normal rainfall. The economically active rural population was estimated to have grown by more than 3 percent per annum between 1985 and 1995. Around 550,000 persons were added to the labour force each year. The absorption of such a large labour force into productive employment has remained one of the major challenges for the government. The central concern is the widespread poverty which is mainly determined by poor performance of the economy. Declining standard of livelihood of the farming communities and their close dependence on forests and woodlands have led to clearing for subsistence farming, cutting of trees for fuel wood and charcoal production both for consumption and sale, construction 8.
material and over-grazing. High population growth is a reflection of the incidence of poverty and is, at the same time, a key factor in the accelerating deterioration of the natural resource base particularly, forests. Environmental degradation, in turn, severely constrains production and productivity of the agricultural sector and, therefore, the growth of the overall economy. With population increasing faster than the economy, the per capita income declined, and this, in turn has adverse effect on forests. This means that the population growth in the agricultural sector is high which led to an increase in the ratio of population to land, causing overgrazing, deforestation, environmental degradation and reduction in agricultural productivity.
Development in the Agriculture Sector.
Socio-economically, agriculture at subsistence level is the mainstay of the economy and contributes 53 % of the GDP, 90% of the export earning and 85% of the employment and livelihood. Because of the importance of agriculture for the overall economy of the country, and its particular importance to the livelihoods of the bulk of the rural poor, the government has based its long term development strategy on Agriculture Development Led Industrialisation (ADLI). This strategy views agriculture as the primary stimulus to generate employment and income for the poor. The strategy relies on promoting small scale crop and livestock production, intensification and diversification of farm enterprises, strengthening rural institutions, enhancing the availability of rural credit, grass root participation and creating community awareness in development. Over the past many years the agricultural sector of Ethiopia showed a very low growth rate. Total food production ranged between 5.05 million metric tons (1985) and 10 million metric tons (1996). The overall food production showed a trend of steady increase followed by a trend of decrease (1991-1994) (FDRE, 1996). According to the Land Use Planning and Regulatory Team of the MoA, about 66 % of the land area is potentially arable. Despite the big potential, only less than 20 % or an estimated 16 million hectares is presently under crops. About 20,000 to 30,000 hectares of crop land is abandoned annually because cropping can no longer be supported on the highly degraded areas. The highlands (above 1500m above sea level) which amount to about 44% of the highland mass. are the greatest economic asset of the country. They shelter about 88 % of the total population and account for over 90% of the economic activity, including about 95% of the cultivated lands and 67% of the livestock population. Close to 60% of the highlands exhibits slopes in excess of 30%. The country has a significant potential for irrigation. An estimated 3.6 million hectares of land area is irrigable from surface water alone. Agriculture which is dominated by smallholder peasant agriculture accounts for more than 95% of the total food production. These sector is dependent on natural rainfall and traditional farming methods with a very limited use of improved technologies. The food production trend is very much correlated with the rainfall pattern. Land degradation is a constraint affecting improvements in agricultural production and 9.
hence food security for the population. Total crop production on private peasant holdings was 25% below the 1996/97 and 10% below the 1994/95 levels (CSA, 1997/98). The performance of the agricultural sector has been poor. Its annual growth rate for the past 20 years has never exceeded 2% while the population growth rate is now about 2.9 % per year. Agriculture registered negative growth rates in 1991/92 (-2.7%), 1993/94 (-3.6%), and 1997/98 (-11.4%) while during the same period population grew at an annual rate of 3 % (DPPC, 2000). According to the current estimate of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, 52% of the total population is thought to be food insecure or below the poverty line (FDRE, 1996). The Government of Ethiopia has drafted a food security strategy for the country in November 1996 to increase food production through the diffusion of simple technology packages within small holder institution in areas of reliable rainfall. The extension package includes improved seeds, fertilizers and better crop husbandry methods. Livestock development is also a high priority of the Government through the intensification of small holder dairy farming. Intensification of agricultural production through the use of fertilizer, improved seeds and chemicals can have a favourable impact on labour absorption. In the future, the availability of agricultural land per capita is likely to decrease which will result a continued and increased pressure on rural resources including the remaining forests and woodlands unless improvement in agricultural productivity is made through intensification of agricultural lands. The anticipated growth in agriculture would come from opening up new lands for cultivation through expanded irrigation in low lying areas. Other strategies also include marketing infrastructure, promotion of irrigation etc. which all aim at increasing agricultural production.
Change in Energy Use and Their Implications on Forest Resources.
The energy sector remains heavily dependent on wood for fuel. Despite the poor documentation on the production and consumption of wood fuel (EFAP, 1994) estimated that wood provided 78% while dung and crop residues providing 16% of the energy required. However, national figures conceal considerable regional and local variation in both supply and consumption patterns. This could be due to the varying fuel wood prices and costs of supplying alternative energy sources which also have large influence on the consumption pattern and the level of biomass consumption. Even though per capita energy consumption is among the lowest in the world, the gap between sustainable fuelwood supply and demand is constantly widening. The current fuelwood deficit is estimated to be about 47 million m3. The demand of households for forest products in many areas exceeds by far the annual incremental yield from the existing forest resources. The importance of woody biomass energy in the rural sector is unlikely to diminish in the foreseeable future, since it will be difficult to provide supplies of modern energy to most of the rural areas. The fuel wood demand and supply projection made by EFAP (1994) indicates that the current demand for fuel wood is 58 million m3 whereas the supply is 11 million m3. The same projection 10.
for fuel wood for the year 2008 indicated a supply of 9.8 million cubic meters against a demand of 74.9 million cubic meters showing a deficit of 65 million m3 of wood. The projection made for the year 2020 indicated that the demand will reach to 100 million m3 against a supply projection of 7.7 million m3 envisaging a deficit of 92.3 million m3. The major user of energy is the household, accounting for 89% of the overall energy consumption of the country. The consumption in energy is directly correlated with the size of population and with the availability of bio-mass. There is a considerable variation in the consumption of modern energy which is a function of the degree of urbanization. In Ethiopia, energy expenditure constitutes a significant portion of the total expenditure of households. The estimated energy consumption is 2.1 kg of wood fuel equivalent per person per day. Statistics show that both rural and urban demand for wood energy has increased and is expected to increase due to the growing populations and macro-economic changes. Use of fuel wood has increased as an indirect result of the removal of all subsidies since all alternative sources of energy are based on subsidized prices which reversed the progress made in reducing pressures on the natural forests. Today many people have been forced to revert to wood energy for their domestic needs. The recent tariff increase for electricity have a dramatic effects on the natural resources base where by many consumers of electricity have switched back from the use of electricity to biomass fuels to meet the cooking requirements, thereby contributing to the diminishing forest cover. The shortfall between available supply and actual demand of wood fuel is usually met through the use of dung and agricultural residues, but at the cost of agricultural productivity. The subsequent use of these substitute fuels competes with their use as organic fertilizer, and consequently exerts pressure on the agricultural sector where sustainable agricultural production could be threatened. Besides the long term measures to enhance the supply of fuel wood, the pressure on traditional energy supplies can only be alleviated in the near and medium term by measures that promote the end-use energy efficiency, increase the supply of woody biomass resources through the involvement of the individual farmers in planting trees in farm forestry.
Industrial Development and its Implications on Forestry.
One of the major reasons for underemployment of labour in rural Ethiopia is the lack of employment opportunities in the non-agricultural sectors. Even though employment in the manufacturing sectors seems to be growing, industrial employment absorbs only a small fraction of the available labour force. The shift of employment from the agricultural to the industrial sector was not substantial which shows the poor performance of the economy. The population growth in the agricultural sector was high. This was not offset by a commensurate growth in the industrial sector. This led to an increase in the ratio of population to land, causing overgrazing, deforestation and reduction in agricultural productivity. The manufacturing industry is small accounting for some 5 % of GDP and contributing only about fifteen % of export earnings in 1990/93. About 75 % of the value added income from industry came from medium and large scale state owned enterprises, with the remainder contributed by small scale private enterprises (CSE, 1997). 11.
The industry sector strategy has a number of objectives which are related to the forestry sector development. The strategy for industrial development is expected to have a considerable impact in alleviating poverty and reducing pressure on forest resources through various incentives such as, building infrastructure, electric power generation and road network and off-farm employment in the rural sector through the creation of labour intensive technology. Since 1992, industrial production has been peaking up and a number of new factories are being constructed both by the private and public sectors. The opportunity for employme