Forestry Outlook Studies in Africa (FOSA).
MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND TOURISM.
Please note that the views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the institutions. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
Michel Vielle Rome, July 2001.
SUMMARY A Brief on the Forestry Outlook Study1.
by Michel Jacques de Ker Sauzon Assistant Director of Forestry Ministry of Environment and Transport PO Box 445, Mahé, Seychelles Fax: 248-22 45 00 forestry@seychelles.net; doe@seychelles.net.
Forestry Contribution The forestry sector is generally perceived as marginal. The sectoral GDP contribution, including wood industries, is no more than 0.4%. However, the indirect economic and environmental benefits of the sector are considerable. Institutional Framework The Forestry Section of the Division of Environment under the Ministry of Environment and transport is responsible for the controlling and management of the forest resources of the country. The Forestry Section has been mainly concentrated on production forestry and plantation establishment. The trend has now moved to forest management of conservation areas. There is a forest policy document but the main policy framework is provided by the Environmental Management Plan of Seychelles and the National Land Use Plan. There are several acts and ordinances regulating forestry. However, part of the legislation is outdated or has not been ever enforced. For example, not a single forest reserve has been gazetted which effectively prevents the enforcement of respective legislation. Recommendations It is recommended that the forests of Mahé, Praslin, Curieuse, La Digue and Silhouette be classified in four zones and managed according the following management objectives: ha · Biodiversity Zones · Catchment/ Biodiversity Zones · Catchment/ Production Zones · Production Zones Total Conservation of biodiversity Conservation of water, soil and biodiversity Conservation of water and soil, and production Production of wood and non-wood forest products 2,050 6,420 5,730 520 14,720.
FOSA website available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/FON/FONS/outlook/Africa/AFRhom-e.stm.
Based on the proposed economic and environmental objectives and respective forest sector priorities, the following strategic guidelines are proposed: · Define clear forest policy and improve and make use of legislation. · Improve the planning, coordination and monitoring capacities of the forest administration. · Promote formal education, on-the-job training, and short courses on special subjects. · Mobilise human resources also outside the Forestry Section. · Build up revenue sources for financial sustainability. · Promote tree growing outside forests. · Re-orient nurseries to produce more seedlings of indigenous species. · Support the crafts, sawmilling and other industries using wood and non-wood raw materials. · Participate actively in regional cooperation programmes. Respective development programme is proposed to be implemented. The emphasis is on sustainable management and conservation of the various forest zones, and on institutional strengthening, particularly human resources development. The development programme is divided into 5 main programmes with 15 sub-programmes:.
Conservation of Biodiversity: - Integrated Management of Biodiversity Zones - Propagation of Endemic Trees and Ex Situ Conservation.
Conservation of Soil and Water Resources: - Integrated Management of Catchment Zones - Protection of River Reserves.
Production of Forest Products: - Management of Production Zones - Management of Trees Outside Forests - Sawmilling - Carpentry and Crafts Industries - Non-wood Forest Products.
Forest Protection: - Forest Fire Contingency Plan.
Strengthening of Institutions: - Forest Policy and Legislation - Forest Administration - Human Resource Development - Financing - Monitoring, Information Systems, Research and Planning.
INTRODUCTION.
This FOSA document has been prepared to determine the outlook of Forestry resources for the country in the year 2020. In Seychelles, the responsibility to prepare the report was given to the Forestry Section of the Ministry of Environment, being the sector with the portfolio for forestry issues. The section under the guidance of the FOSA focal point carried out various interviews and held a national consultative workshop with the participation of key stakeholders to have their views on the outlook of forestry in Seychelles. To simplify the matter prior to the workshop, a questionnaire was sent to all stakeholders involved so that they can understand before hand the concept that was to be discussed and hence get them better prepared for the discussion. This proved very fruitful in the end. The report is divided into two parts, a description of the actual state of forest resources and a forecast of the likely state of those same resources in the year 2020.
2.1 ACTUAL STATE & TRENDS OF FOREST RESOURCES COUNTRY BACKGROUND.
The Republic of Seychelles comprises a group of 115 islands located in the Western Indian Ocean between 4° and 11° South of the equator. Its land area is 45,500 ha and territorial sea (Exclusive Economic Zone) covers an area of 1,374,000 km². The capital, Victoria, situated on the island of Mahé, is located 1,150 km Northeast from the furthermost island, the atoll of Aldabra, 1,590 East km from Mombassa in Kenya and 900 km North from Madagascar. 41 islands are granitic with rugged topography. They include the so-called inner islands, of which Mahé (15,500 ha), Praslin (3,800 ha) and La Digue (1,000 ha) are the most important ones. All the granitic islands are situated within a distance of 50 km from Mahé. The rest of the islands are coralline, raising only few meters above the sea level. The population of 70,400 is concentrated on the inner islands of Mahé (60,400), Praslin (5,600) and La Digue (1,900). It is notable that the 74 coralline islands support a population of only 300 people. The average annual growth rate of the population (1988-1991) was 0.8%, which is well below the developing country average. The GNP per capita is US$ 5,100 (1991). The country is classified in the middle-income group, and consequently has limited access to concessional development financing resources. However, due to the economy's vulnerability to external shocks and its small size, Seychelles has been able to attract grants and soft loans from various international and bilateral sources. 2.2 FORESTRY SITUATION.
The forestry sector is generally perceived as marginal. The sectoral GDP contribution, including wood industries, is no more than 0.4%. However, the indirect economic and environmental benefits of the sector are considerable. The amenity provided by the forests is.
extremely important for the tourism industry. The extremely vulnerable water supply is highly dependent on the vegetation cover provided by forests. It is estimated that the forest area is 40,600 ha, i.e. 90% of the land area. About 90% of the forests are natural. Plantations, including casuarina forests, cover about 4,800 ha. More than 45% of the forests are within national parks or other conservation areas. The growing stock is estimated at 3.1 mills. m³. Due to the large conservation areas and poor accessibility, only 0.7 mills. m³ is accessible in the main islands. The respective annual allowable cut is estimated to be 13,700 m³. The demand, particularly for saw logs, is estimated to grow rapidly. The sustainable supply potential of timber to meet the growing demand will be endangered if no investments in more intensive forest management are done. The main forest management problems include housing encroachment due to land pressure, invasive exotic plant species competing with endemic and indigenous species for the habitat, and prevention and control of forest fires, which have had disastrous effects on soil and water conservation. The main utilisation problems are the difficult access to the forests, low productivity of both harvesting and processing, and consequently high extraction costs. 2.3 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK.
The Forestry Section of the Division of Environment under the Ministry of Environment and transport is responsible for the controlling and management of the forest resources of the country. The Forestry Section has been mainly concentrated on production forestry and plantation establishment. The trend has now moved to forest management of conservation areas. There is a forest policy document but the Environmental Management Plan of Seychelles and the National Land Use Plan provide the main policy framework. There are several acts and ordinances regulating forestry. However, part of the legislation is outdated or has not been ever enforced. For example, not a single forest reserve has been gazetted which effectively prevents the enforcement of respective legislation. 2.4 RECOMMENDATIONS.
Based on the proposed economic and environmental objectives and respective forest sector priorities, the following strategic guidelines are proposed: · Define clear forest policy and improve and make use of legislation · Improve the planning, co-ordination and monitoring capacities of the forest administration · Promote formal education, on-the-job training and short courses on special subjects · Mobilise human resources also outside the Forestry Section · Build up revenue sources for financial sustainability · Promote tree growing outside forests · Re-orient nurseries to produce more seedlings of indigenous species · Support the crafts, saw milling and other industries using wood and non-wood raw materials · Participate actively in regional co-operation programmes.
Respective development programme is proposed to implement. The emphasis is on sustainable management and conservation of the various forest zones, and on institutional strengthening, particularly human resources development. The development programme is divided into 5 main programmes with 15 sub-programmes: · Conservation of Biodiversity Integrated Management of Biodiversity Zones Propagation of Endemic Trees and Ex-Situ Conservation · Conservation of Soil and Water Resources Integrated Management of Catchment Zones Protection of River Reserves · Production of Forest Products Management of Production Zones Management of Trees Outside Forests Saw milling Carpentry and Crafts Industries Non-wood Forest Products · Forest Protection Forest Fire Contingency Plan · Strengthening of Institutions Forest Policy and Legislation Forest Administration Human Resource Development Financing Monitoring, Information Systems, Research and Planning 2.4.1 Forestry Sector in National Development.
The granitic islands of Seychelles, which are of continental origin, are some of the oldest oceanic islands in the world. Their flora and fauna have evolved, through tens of millions of years of isolation, to have a very high level of endemism (>50%). The environmental importance of forest cover is now emphasized on conservation of biodiversity, ecosystems and scenic beauty, all of which are important ingredients of Seychelles as a tourist destination and as a globally significant site of unique species, i.e. biodiversity conservation. The growing population and the expanding tourism activity have increased the demand for water to levels where shortages are occurring and major infrastructure investments in dams are required to ensure adequate water supply. Forests play a key role in watershed management and erosion control and these activities now deserve a high priority in the country's development programmes. The economic importance of the forestry sector is generally perceived as marginal. The sectoral GDP contribution, including wood industries is no more than 0.4% (1990) but it has been increasing during the last few years. The Value Added in the sectoral gross output is significantly higher in forestry than in the economy on average. This adds to the justification of the utilization of forest resources in a sustainable way for meeting the country's internal demand. Tourism is the most important sector of the economy and accounts for nearly 17% of the GDP, 41% of foreign exchange revenues, and contributes significantly to economic growth, both directly and indirectly. It is emphasized that tourism is highly dependent on the attractive.
nature and scenic beauty of the nation, which are, to great extent, based on the forests. Consequently, one could say that, at least partly, the tourism sector is dependent on the forestry sector. Of the total supply of wood and wood products no more than a quarter is met by domestic supply while the balance is imported. The respective import bill in 1991 was SR 23.0 mill. If the imports of wooden furniture (SR 2.4 mill.) and paper and paper products (SR 20.7 mill) are considered, it appears that the sector's share of the country's total imports amounts to 5.1%. This also corresponds to the negative balance-of-payment effect, as the sector's direct contribution to exports, excluding souvenir industry, is practically zero. About three quarters (74%) of total demand of wood and wood products are absorbed by intermediate consumption, mainly in building construction and furniture, which indicates the importance of downstream effects of these products to the national economy. The demand for fuel wood appears to be rapidly dwindling due to rural electrification and expanding use of kerosene also in the rural areas. The employment effect of forestry activities is estimated at 350 person-years or about 1.5% of the working population. In addition, there are about 820 carpenters (1987 Census) and about 150-200 persons employed by various woodworking industries. Wood is also an important raw material for handicraft industries, which have important employment effects. 2.4.2 Land Use.
Land-Use Trends: The Government of Seychelles has adopted a conspicuously conservationist policy towards land use and natural resource utilization. There is also a pronounced environmental awareness among the public at large. This is incontestably a positive phenomenon in the highly sensitive environment of Seychelles where the isolation, very limited land base, difficult topographic conditions and fragile ecology set unusual constraints for the economy and the environment. Shortage of land, particularly arable land and land suitable for construction is indeed a major development constraint in Seychelles. Conservation areas (Strict Nature Reserves, Special Nature Reserves, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, National Parks, Marine National Parks) cover already 40% of the land area. This is internationally a very high figure. Consequently, it is likely that no major increase in these areas is to be expected. Forest areas, including catchment forests, are mainly under the jurisdiction of the Forestry Section (FS) of the Division of Environment (DOE). Some of these areas face encroachment pressure, particularly for housing and related road construction. On the other hand, old abandoned cinnamon, vanilla and even some coconut plantations have been converted into forest plantations, or are in the process of spontaneous reforestation, mainly by exotic tree species. Land Tenure: Private farmers own most of the agricultural lands. Forest areas, both production and catchment forests are owned both by private people and the government, who owns the greater part.
Policy Context.
Environmental Management Plan of Seychelles (EMPS) 1990-2000: The Government of Seychelles was one of the first countries in the world to adopt sustainable development as a national policy. The government prepared the Environmental Management Plan of the Seychelles (EMPS) as the blueprint of this policy. EMPS provided overall policy framework, and proposed an investment programme worth of SR 360,405,000 over the period of 1990-2000. The Forest Management sub-programme proposed three projects (SR 1,460,000) all of which were given highest priority rating: · Preservation of Endemic Tree Species · Fire Prevention Measures · Preparation and Implementation of National Forest Management Plan The present Seychelles Forest Management Plan/Sector Study is the first step towards the implementation of the third project, and it also attempts to translate the overall policy framework of EMPS in the context of forestry sector. Other sub-programmes of EMPS particularly relevant for forestry include: · Land Management · Water Management · National Parks and Wildlife Conservation · Environmental Law and Enforcement · Environmental Information, Education and Training As it approaches the new millennium, the republic of Seychelles is preparing a major new initiative to manage its environment in a sustainable manner: the Environment Management Plan of Seychelles (EMPS) 2000-2001. The country has taken the step to prepare its second environment management plan, with the assistance from the World Bank so that the protection of the environment is undertaken in a planned and coherent manner involving all stakeholders. It is one of the first countries in Africa to prepare the so-called second generation of environment management plan. The plan was to be more comprehensive than the previous EMPS. Ten thematic areas were chosen to cover all major social and economic sectors as well as certain key subjects of relevance to environmental management such as environmental economics. Other crosssectoral themes that would cut across the main thematic areas were also identified. National Land Use Plan: The National Land Use Plan (NLUP) covering the three main islands of Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, has been under preparation since 1988. The plan focuses mainly on the development areas, but it also proposes a rough zonation of the non-development areas into classes: Natural Special Reserves (strict protection) · National Parks (protection) · Marine National Parks (protection against pollution or degradation) · Potable Water Resources (strict protection) · Main Catchment Areas (occasional carefully planned development) · Forest Areas (sustainable utilisation) · Agricultural Areas (sustainable utilisation) · Mangroves and Swamps (protection).
Beaches (occasional carefully planned development).
The NLUP is considered, by MCD, to have only indicative role in land use decisions. Due to the sever shortage of suitable land for housing and other development purposes, there are often conflicts between development and conservation interests. The Plan's basic classification criterion relevant for forestry is to limit Development Areas below the altitude of 50-200 m above sea level, according to location. Consequently, all the areas above this altitude are basically designated for forestry and/or for conservation purposes. The underlying rationale is the crucial importance of water and soil conservation in the sensitive uphill areas. Conservation Policy: The White Paper on Conservation Policy in the Seychelles (1971) focused on the creation of a number of conservation areas. Several of these have since been created. Regarding implementation, the 1971 Policy proposed that a Department of Nature Conservation and Forestry be established, with the help of a Conservation Officer, whose duties would include training of Seychellois staff in conservation. That was the origin of what is now the Conservation and National Parks Section (CNPS) of DOE. The 1971 Policy gave little indication of how the various conservation areas were to be managed. No regulations have been gazetted for the terrestrial national parks, except for Curieuse (in 1991). Management practices of FS, who is, in principle, in charge of the land national parks, have emphasised plantation establishment for production or catchment protection. The FS is concerned about the decline of indigenous trees and invasion by exotics, but this has not been reflected in management practices. Forest Policy: There is no explicit Forest Policy in the country. However, DOE and FS have been following an implied policy of cautious forest utilization and afforestation of all barren areas whenever the resources allow. The policy can be said to have led to sustainable, yet not financially profitable, forestry in public forests. The Forestry Section has also certain controlling powers, in case of 23 commercial species, over the private forest and tree owners. There is an intention to expand the list, or to prepare another list, of controlled species to cover all the indigenous trees. Forest and Conservation Legislation: All environmental and forestry legislation has been reviewed by de Romilly in 1990. He recommends a comprehensive revision of legislation on forestry, which is fragmented and has a number of gaps, and on conservation areas. He drafted a Conservation and National Parks Act, but this was not considered appropriate and a consultant from FAO is now preparing a further draft.
Institutional Framework.
Division of Environment: The Division of Environment (DOE) under Ministry of Environment and Transport (MET) is the governmental authority responsible for environmental issues, including forestry. DOE is.
headed by a Director General of Environment, and is divided into five sections: Forestry Section (FS), Conservation Section (CNPS), Botanical Gardens, Environmental Assessment and Pollution control (EA&PC) and the Education and Information section. Forestry Section: The Forestry Section (FS) of DOE is the responsible forest authority in Seychelles. FS is headed by a Director of Forestry, and is divided in five geographical units. Timber Control Unit provides and controls timber-felling permissions. The three field offices are in charge of the state forests in their respective areas. Fond B'Offay covers the whole Praslin and La Digue, Grand Anse the southern and western parts of Mahé, and Sans Soucis the northern and eastern parts of Mahé, including the Morne Seychellois National Park. Their responsibilities include reforestation activities from rising of seedlings to planting and tending, local supervision of harvesting operations, some harvesting, particularly thinning, and forest protection with particular reference to forest fire prevention and control. The National Park business falls under the National Park Unit.
2.5.1 FOREST RESOURCES AND MANAGEMENT Forest Resources.
Soils and Climate: The soils of the granitic islands are generally very poor and slightly acidic. This is due to the geologically very old granitic base rock, which is inherently poor in nutrients. The shallow, leached soils are typically short of organic matter. The soils of coralline islands suffer often of high salt content, and lack several nutrients and trace elements. The climate is equatorial with an average annual rainfall of 2,200 mm. The highest parts of Mahé receive the highest rainfall, around 3,000 mm. The lower elevations, and particularly the southern parts of Mahé receive considerably less, less than 2,000 mm. Praslin (1,600 mm), La Digue (2,060 mm) and all the outer islands receive still less of rain. Humidity is uniformly high at an average 80%. Mean temperature ranges from 24 to 30°C. The prevailing winds are the Northwest (December to March) and Southeast (May to October) monsoons. Most islands are outside the cyclone region. Vegetation: The inner islands of Seychelles, which are of continental origin, are some of the oldest oceanic islands in the world. Their flora and fauna have evolved, through tens of millions of years of isolation, to have a very high level of endemism. More than half the indigenous plants are endemic, including many famous rarities like coco-de-mer (Lodoicea maldivica) and jellyfish tree (Medusagyne oppositifolia). In the inner islands, particularly in Mahé, the forest ecosystems can be divided in three categories: · Lowland forests 0 - 300 m above sea level · Intermediate forests 300 - 550 m above sea level · Mountain moss 550 - 910 m above sea level Mountain moss forests are characterised by Randia-Nepenthes society. The intermediate forests were supposedly characterised by Excoecaria-Imbricaria and Deckenia-Memecylon.
societies. However, presently the intermediate forests are, to great extent, invaded by various exotic species. In the lowland forests species like bois de natte (Imbricaria sechellarum), takamaka (Calophyllum inophyllum) and badamier (Terminalia catappa) are supposed to dominate. The original lowland forests have practically vanished due to their conversion in agriculture and tree crop plantations, and due to the concentration of houses, roads, etc. in the narrow coastal belt, which was their habitat. Their species now occur mainly in the intermediate zone. Detailed description of the vegetation types of Seychelles is presented e.g. in "République des Seychelles, Ministère du Développement National, Etude des potentialités des principales îles granitiques" (1986). Yet another important ecosystem is the mangrove forests. They have been mostly destroyed from the inner islands, but are still abundant in many of the outer islands, e.g. in Aldabra. The mangroves include species like Avicennia marina, Rhizophora mucronata and Bruguiera gymnorhiza. Forest Area: No systematic forest inventories have been carried out on Seychelles and the available data are limited to a study by P.T. Henry (1976), which can be considered outdated. Based on aerial photo interpretation and field checking during this study, it is estimated that the forest area of Mahé, Praslin Curieuse, La Digue and Silhouette islands is 17,600 ha, which is 78% of their land area. 20% of the forests are within National Parks or other protected areas. The other islands of Seychelles are estimated to have additional 23,000 ha of forests of which nearly 15,000 ha are within National Parks or other protected areas. The bulk (4,400 ha) of the estimated plantation area (4,880 ha) is in "other islands". This information has been presented in several earlier studies. The amount of plantations on "other islands" may be a large over-estimate, but the situation could not have been checked, as field visits to the outer islands were not possible to be done. The above-mentioned plantation area of the "other islands" is assumed to contain largely non-planted casuarina forests. Some of them have been planted as a belt around the coconut plantations to protect the coconut palm from the wind. Their existence has not been possible to verify during the course of this study. Consequently, they may turn out to be less than previously estimated. Most of Seychelles' forests are mixed which cover more than half of the total forest area. Bush vegetation is extensive in the inner islands accounting for a quarter of their total area. These lands are marginally used even if soil protection is provided. Three quarters of deforested areas are found in Praslin mainly due to fires. Their rehabilitation is a key issue to be addressed by the Government and private landowners. 2.6 2.6.1 FOREST MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION ISSUES Natural Forest Conservation and Management.
Virtually all indigenous forest in Seychelles is mixed with introduced plant species. There are 600-700 species of introduced plants in Seychelles, but not all are capable of spreading naturally through the forest habitat and out-competing the indigenous plants. The two most serious threats appear to be cinnamon and albizia.
Another tree quick to colonize forest gaps and common in high altitude forest in Morne Seychellois National Park is guava (Psidium guajava). On Silhouette Island, an aggressive invader is agati (Adenanthera pavonina). These fast-invading, smaller species are more problematic than the albizia, because they are more widespread, more abundant and smother any possible regeneration of indigenous seedlings in forest gaps. Bois jaune (Alstonia macrophylla) is another conspicuously tall forest invader. Prune de France (Chrysobalanus icaco) also called coco plum and bracken fern (Gleichenia dichotoma) are dominant on severely degraded land, which were presumably rare before the arrival of man, so it is perhaps not surprising that they tend to be colonized by exotics. Prune de France does not seem to be able to invade either high forest or dense secondary forest. The most cost-effective approach to improve the biodiversity zones is probably to focus effort on sustained management of forest gaps, whether natural or made by clearing exotics. By tending indigenous seedlings (planted or spontaneous) and removing exotics in the gaps, a gradual reversion back towards indigenous forest may be achieved. The demand for land for settlement and associated road construction are the main forces causing encroachment into forestland. The system for handling planning applications may involve, at the discretion of the Planning Department, consultation with DOE, but gives DOE no power whatsoever to prevent, temporarily or permanently, unsuitable developments. The final decision rests with an individual civil servant, who may have no environmental training. In such a situation, the hapless civil servant is liable to be ill informed and is certain to be subjected to pressure from powerful people. 2.6.2 Soil and Water Conservation.
Fire, house building and road construction are the main causes of erosion in Seychelles. The resulting losses are substantial. Obvious losses are of land productivity and of water quality or quantity, but perhaps the biggest economic loss will result from silt reaching the sea. Silt not only discolours beaches and swimming areas, it also kills the corals, upon which the beaches and the fish depend. Due to the poor soils the process of restoring badly degraded areas will inevitably be difficult, slow and expensive. The erosion can become self-perpetuating. The bare earth surface is baked hard in the sun, preventing any infiltration of water. In such cases no vegetation will grow. In some places on Curieuse FS have dug "lock-and-spill" drains. These are said have allowed some vegetation to grow but the drains need maintenance and may be too far apart. Forestry Section has done much tree planting on eroded areas, especially in Praslin and Curieuse. Exotics have been used almost exclusively. Casuarina is the most widely used species, but an Australian acacia, eucalyptus and prune de France have also been tried. Not surprisingly, growth has usually been poor but at least some cover is established. Water availability is a crucial issue in Seychelles where the water catchments are relatively small and thus the water retention capacity limited. A study conducted in Seychelles (Murray 1992) clearly demonstrated that water infiltration rates are fastest, and soil erosion least, under conditions of dense vegetation where the soil has a high organic content and a high capacity for soaking up moisture. Conservation of the main water catchments and rivers with water intake are of utmost importance. The State Land and River Reserves Ordinance (Cap 150) stipulates that all the riverbanks be maintained untouched under permanent tree and brush.
cover. The ordinance is justified in the special situation of the country. However, it has not been properly enforced. 2.6.3 Plantation Development.
The existing plantations in the inner islands were reported to cover about 900 ha. However, in the course of the present Study, only 480 ha were found in the field. It is possible that some of the small plantations scattered in natural forests were not found. On the other hand, the 900 ha is based on the statistics on plantation establishment, in many cases calculated from the number of seedlings planted, and the figure does not take into account losses due to dying of seedlings, etc. About 25% of the plantations have been established for protection purposes leaving about 75% for production. The Forestry Section has not fully met its annual reforestation target of 100 ha established in the National Development Plan. Records are kept on reforestation and other forestry activities. However, the records are not centrally stored nor do they include any maps. The main criterion for plantation establishment has been insufficient, or lack of, forest cover, either due to forest fire or forest exploitation. Forest exploitation is usually based on selective cutting removing only trees, which have breast height diameters above a defined minimum, which vary according to three site quality classes. Therefore, tree planting after exploitation has typically been enrichment type of plantings where valuable, relatively fast-growing species are planted in openings resulting from removing of harvested trees or for