SOIL RESOURCE DEPRECIATION AND DEFORESTATION: Philippine case study in resource accounting1.
By Hermina A Francisco and Marian S de Los Angeles2.
Planning and Statistics Branch Policy and Planning Division Forestry Department.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
Soil depreciation is a measure of the change in the productivity of the soil resource over time. There are two alternative measures of coming up with this estimate. One is through the estimation of a damage function that relates yield to soil loss. The second measure is through the change in the asset value of the soil over the relevant time frame of analysis. The first measure relies largely on the physical measure of loss, which is then monetized using financial or economic prices. The second approach captures both the physical and monetary changes in the value of the asset; the latter brought about by changes in the input and output prices over time. Both of these approaches require certain data that is often difficult to find. As a result, much research continues to rely on the use of the replacement cost method, although there are a number of limitations with this approach. The change in asset value approach is a superior measure of soil depreciation, since it captures both physical and economic changes taking place over the lifetime of the resource. One can picture a scenario wherein the physical loss in production may be compensated by higher prices of the remaining quantity of the good produced. If the gain from the change in prices more than offsets the loss from the change in quantity, then an appreciation (or negative depreciation) of the resource may result. In the case of the damage function approach, conceptually one would expect that depreciation will always correspond to a loss in production or some positive number. Both of the two approaches discussed above require time series data that are often not available. At best, one has a number of years of observations for an experimental site but this is hardly large enough to say something about a whole province, more so for the whole country. This paper presents the results of an attempt to derive a damage function for soil loss using 20-year data projected through the application of the Erosion Productivity Index Calculator or EPIC in one soil conservation project site in the Philippines. For the asset value method, the study assumes a constant rent over the life span of the soil resource, assumed to be 30 years, which is the period in which all the topsoil is expected to be lost through erosion under condition of erosive farming practices. With a constant rent assumption, however, the economic measure of soil depreciation simply measures the change in the value of the asset due to the declining value of money over time. The paper also presents an estimate of 50% the value of the nutrients lost through soil erosion. The study assumes that only 50% of the nutrients available in the soils are taken up by the crops. The rest are lost through various natural processes. Soil depreciation estimates for upland agricultural land ranged from PHP 1.47 billion to PHP 6.39 billion in 1989 using a 10% discount rate. The lower value represents the economic depreciation estimate using the asset valuation approach (i.e. a change largely attributed to changes in the value of money over time). The higher value considers both the economic depreciation and the physical deterioration of the resource base, measured in terms of the value of soil nutrients lost through soil erosion. Using 1988 data, the undiscounted value of soil nutrients lost from the uplands through erosion (PHP 5.94 billion) represents 4.27 percent of the Gross Value Added in agriculture and one percent of the Net National Product. The magnitude of the soil depreciation estimate is, therefore, substantial when viewed in total. This value represents what can reasonably be spent by the government for soil conservation programs in upland agricultural areas of the country.
Soil resource depreciation and deforestation: Philippine case study in resource accounting.
ii This study has established that the value of soil nutrients lost through erosion is substantial for the country as a whole, but may not be that big when expressed on a per hectare basis. To the upland users of the soil resource, it is the per hectare analysis which is the more relevant measure. This means that farmers' decision making is affected largely by damages that are felt by them and not by the value of damages that society as a whole may incur. If, indeed, the environmental cost of land use activities in the uplands is greater to society than to the upland farmers, then there is a sub-optimal incentive for farmers to adopt soil conservation practices. Alternatively, one may state that if the benefits from soil conservation activities will accrue more to society than they do to upland farmers, then there is a greater incentive for society to invest in such activities. Therefore, it makes sense for society to assist upland farmers in undertaking soil conservation activities, since these yield greater benefits to the country as a whole than to the individual farmers. The findings of the study, therefore, suggest that where upland farmers are already considered part of the ecosystem, they must be provided with some incentives in the form of technical assistance, counterpart costs for soil conservation and other measures to attain the desired reduction of soil erosion in the uplands. Where entrants of more migrants to the uplands can still be prevented, however, then efforts to prevent further encroachment into the uplands must be strengthened.
INTRODUCTION.
The stages of deforestation and focus of the case study.
Philippine old growth forests were dominated by dipterocarp forests, which contain a mixture of varied dipterocarp trees along with timber species of other plant families (e.g., Mimosaceae, Moraceae, Fagaceae, Sapotaceae, Myrtaceae, Euphorbiaceae) and numerous members of lesserused species. Dipterocarp forests have been major sources of raw material for lumber, veneer and plywood, furniture wood and other hardwood-based products. They are located in higher elevations of Luzon, Palawan, Visayas and Mindanao, particularly in regions where precipitation is highest. Today, much of the remaining old-growth and second-growth dipterocarp forest are located in Regions II, IV, X and XI. Old-growth dipterocarp trees of large diameter sizes (at least 55 centimetres at breast height) now compose only 16 percent of all trees. Figure 1 Dynamics of Philippine deforestation.
Urban poverty Rural poverty Landlessness Population growth Improper pricing of and uncertain short-term rights for private use of forest lands by loggers.
Past social bias for converting forest lands into other uses to promote growth and development.
· Development projects · Increased road networks · Inadequate protection of forest lands.
Migration of poor farmers into uplands.
· Uncertain use rights for uplanders · No long-term investments in land.
· Large logging industry with high capital intensity & low employment generation · Low investments in forest regeneration & protection · Highly erosive road building techniques.
DEFORESTATION SHIFTING CULTIVATION EXPANDING UPLAND AGRICULTURE.
The process of deforestation follows a series of stages beginning with high extraction rates in terms of high volume removal, extensive area cut, and logging damage, ineffective protection of cut-over forest, intrusion by secondary loggers, and conversion into non-forest uses (Figure 1). During the period 1970-1989, the exploitation of old-growth forest occurred at a rate of 210,000 hectares annually; on the other hand the gain in secondary area was only 11,000 hectares per year, implying further conversion into non-forest uses. Since depreciation of resources in forest land occurs in terms of declining stocks of various forests species as well as removal of top layers of soils in forest lands as a result of erosion, this report integrates the results of both the forest and upland soils depreciation studies. The studies were generated by several phases of the Philippine Environmental and Natural Resources Accounting Project (ENRAP), an undertaking of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) funded by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).
2 1.2 Organization of the report.
Section 2 presents a detailed treatment of soil resources accounting in upland areas of at least eight percent slope. Three approaches are explored, including the change in asset value as affected by reduction of lifetime, productivity changes and replacement cost approaches. Comparisons are made and relevant policy implications are discussed. Section 3 summarizes the results for dipterocarp forest resources and Section 4 presents an integration of the two accounting results with emphasis on forest-land-based resources. Recommendations for further methodology development and data refinement are discussed briefly.
ACCOUNTING FOR THE DEPRECIATION OF SOIL RESOURCES IN THE UPLANDS.
The soil erosion problem in the Philippines is quite pronounced with more than half of the country's land area having a slope exceeding eight percent (hereby defined as the Philippine uplands). The problem is aggravated by heavy rainfall, improper land use and management, excessive and improper logging, shifting cultivation and road construction (PCARRD, 1992). Eroded areas are estimated to cover more than half of the land area in the following 13 provinces: Batangas; Cebu; Ilocos Sur; La Unión; Batanes; Bohol; Masbate; Abra; Ilo-ilo; Cavite; Rizal; Capiz; and Marinduque (PCARRD, 1984). Agricultural activities occur largely at the expense of natural vegetation and are responsible for much of soil loss taking place everywhere, particularly in areas that are vulnerable to soil erosion. Under natural conditions, the topsoil that is lost is largely replenished from the subsoil (Anderson and Thampapillai, 1990). The topsoil is defined as a renewable resource with a threshold level below which resource use renders it non-renewable. Yield losses from soil erosion can come not only from soil nutrient losses but also from the reduction in the soil's water holding capacity, infiltration rates and loss of other beneficial topsoil characteristics. The loss in crop productivity caused by reduced water holding capacity or rooting depth may be permanent while losses from nutrient loss can be offset by increased use of fertilizers. Because of the above considerations, the valuing soil depreciation in terms of the fertilizer equivalent of the nutrients contained in the eroded materials has been largely criticized as an inadequate measure. Due to the absence of basic data, however, this approach has been used extensively in the country as an indicator of the on-site costs of soil erosion. The study by Cruz et al (1988) reported that in the Magat watershed, where sheet erosion was in the order of 88 tonnes/ha/yr, the fertilizer equivalent of nutrients loss through soil erosion was PHP 15/ton or PHP 1, 320 /ha/yr. For the Pantabangan watershed, the on site cost of soil erosion (using 1977 prices) was about PHP 7/ton from the topsoil layers to about PHP 4/ton for the lower soil layers. The study also estimated the off site cost of soil erosion. For Magat, the loss was estimated at PHP 18/ton of sediment while it was PHP 30/ton for Pantabangan watershed. Alternatively, the use of a damage function relating yield to soil loss as the basis of a depreciation estimate is more popular. Colacicco, et al (1989) cited the study made by Pierce Crosson (1983) that found out through a yield soil loss regression analysis that yield of corn and soybeans can be reduced by 1.5 percent and 2.0 percent respectively over a 30 year period of 1950 to 1980. These values may not be substantial but the author cautioned that they could not be ignored for the following reasons: yield losses are substantial in some regions, and therefore, there could be large variability in production that then translates to wide fluctuations in farm income, export supplies and domestic food supplies. In addition, there is the risk posed by the irreversibility and cumulative nature of soil productivity losses. Crosson estimated the 1983 cost of erosion in the United States at USD 420 million for crop production losses, USD 105 to168 million for fertilizer losses and USD 1.2 billion for erosion control. Studies on soil yield loss relationships are more advanced in the United States with the development of the Erosion Productivity Impact Calculator (EPIC) model. This model has been used in one study area in the country and the results of that study will be discussed in a later section. Obtaining the estimates for more sites is largely constrained by limited data availability.
4 2.1 Conceptual framework: the change in asset value approach.
A given piece of land devoted to any agricultural use (commonly referred to as a farm) is assumed to possess inherent characteristics (i.e. natural inputs) necessary for crop production. These inputs normally consist of: soil nutrients (accessed largely from the top layer or A horizon); favourable soil texture; favourable Ph values; and other characteristics conducive to plant growth. When mixed with man-made inputs consisting of materials (e.g. chemicals, high yielding varieties of seeds, machinery and irrigation) and labour, natural resource commodities (e.g. crops, fruits, etc.) are produced. When the value of all man-made inputs are deducted from the value of total output, including a reasonable amount of returns for investment and management, the resulting figure comprises what is now considered as payment for the use of the natural input. This value is called the "economic rent" or, more literally in the case of soil resources, land rent. Variation in the amount of land rent over space is perceived to be the result of the inherent differences in soil fertility status (which is the Ricardian concept of rent). Rent is high for the more fertile soil, which could be found in less steep areas, and is expected to be lower for the less fertile soil. The economic rent is expected to vary every year with changes in the level of outputs and/or inputs used, their prices and the discount rate. Since the resource unit is expected to contribute to the production of one or more resource commodities over a period of time, the value of the natural resource asset (termed as asset value) for any one land use, say agriculture, will be equal to the present value of the stream of land rent over the economic life of the resource or over the relevant planning period. Land rent is obtained by estimating the annual net returns from the use of the resource over time, less a reasonable allowance for profit. In equation form, the net present value (NPV) of the asset (herein referred to as the asset value) is represented by:.
NPV is the present value of the asset at year n; T is the length of the planning horizon/or economic life of the resource; i is the discount rate; and LRn is the land rent in year n.
Three sets of assumptions are critical in this estimation procedure. One relates to prices, costs and yield data as a function of time. If one assumes constant prices, then the observed changes in the value of the land rent can only be attributed to changes in the yield or productivity of the resource and in the time-value of money. The second assumption has something to do with the expected value of the resource at the end of the planning horizon. This corresponds to a salvage value (in the case of equipment). With land, however, the term pertains to how much one could probably sell the land for at year T for nonagricultural purposes. This cannot be zero, but it is generally difficult to estimate. Hence, it will be assumed that this value is a constant amount, Kt, which is perceived not to influence the yearly changes in the value of the asset while it is still being used for agricultural purposes. For this reason, one may conveniently remove Kt from the general formulation presented above. The third assumption refers to the choice of the discount rate to be used in weighing present consumption value versus that of future consumption. In general, a lower discount rate favours future consumption, while a high discount rate gives more preference to present consumption. Two rates are used in this study: a low rate of 10 percent and a high rate of 15 percent. The cost of production in the model is defined to include the value of all material and labour inputs, including a reasonable (normal) allowance for return or profit on one's investment and management.
5 The variable, n, which may be defined as the economic life of the resource for agriculture or the planning horizon faced by the analyst, is another key variable in the asset estimation procedure. If n is defined as the economic life of the soil resources, then this measures the number of years it will take for the productive depth of the soil to be depleted at a given rate of soil erosion. When that time is reached, it is assumed that the soil resource can no longer support plant life; or even if it does permit biological growth, the variable costs incurred to make it happen over and above family labour can no longer be recovered. The asset value of the resource for agriculture then becomes zero. Alternatively, it can refer to the length of the planning horizon, which usually ranges from 25 to 30 years for resource based projects. At the end of the planning period, the asset value of the resource for agriculture may still be positive if the productive soil depth is not yet completely depleted at this stage. Note that the asset value of the land at the end of the planning period when used for alternative land uses (i.e., residential, industrial use, etc.,) may still be positive. If these alternative uses exist, then, the land use may be shifted to what may be considered as the next best alternative use of the land. If no such option exists, then the asset value at the end of the period T may indeed be zero. Note further that this phenomenon can only be a temporary situation. Given ample time for the soil resource to renew its inherent fertility, i.e., by leaving the land fallow, then the soil's asset value may increase subsequently. The ability of the soil to regenerate may allow agricultural land to be used again after the fallow period and, thus, contributes to increasing the asset value of the land under consideration. Once this happens, the whole process of accounting for soil depreciation for upland agriculture practices can start again. Also, while the asset value formula only reflects the changes arising from the variations in the present value of the land rent over time, the paper does not imply that the soil resource will be worthless at the end of the accounting period. Due to increasing demand for land resources from the growing population and probably from increasing development or even commercialization in a given area, there could be an appreciation of the land. With no data on the appreciation of land value, however, the paper assumes that the present value of the asset at time T is a constant amount K. Since this, by assumption, does not vary over time, then the observed yearly changes in the asset value of the land resource can only be caused by changes in the land rent of the resource. Depreciation is subsequently estimated as the change in asset value during the accounting period. On a year to year basis, soil resource depreciation is simply measured as the difference between the asset value at the beginning of the year and the asset value at the end of the year. 2.2 Soil yield loss damage function.
One measure of the cost of human induced erosion is through the use of a soil yield loss damage function. This function could be derived from empirical studies which relate productivity level of soils for a given land use/crop to varying rates of erosion. As earlier noted, however, these studies are hardly available in the Philippines in wider spatial and temporal coverage. Moreover, given the large number of crops that are grown in various parts of the country, it is hardly possible to come up with damage functions for all of these various crops. Still, having such a damage function is advantageous in the sense that it will enable one to project the changes in the productivity of the crop corresponding to a given change in soil loss, assuming that the level of use of all other inputs remain constant. It is of course conceivable to think of a scenario wherein the farmers would try to offset the loss in productive soil with the increased application of organic and/or inorganic fertilizers. 2.3 Fertilizer equivalent of soil nutrients not available for crop uptake.
In the process of producing the natural resource commodities, an undesirable by-product is generated (e.g. a soil loss beyond the tolerable rate). The tolerable level of soil loss may be defined as the volume of soil eroded through the natural process under a virtually undisturbed.
6 ecosystem. Under this undisturbed state, soils have the chance to regenerate so that whatever is lost (i.e., the tolerable level) is also brought back into the system, in which case, no physical depreciation is taking place. However, when the natural rate is exceeded (i.e., when soils are lost faster than they are regenerated), a physical depreciation of soil resources takes place. The physical depreciation of soil resources is a product of both the bio-physical characteristics of the soils' environment (i.e. slope, rainfall and vegetation) and the activities introduced in the production process. Given that the physical environment of soils limits the extent and the kind of land use practices that man can reasonably perform on a soil resource unit, any rate of soil loss in excess of the tolerable level may be considered as human induced. It is the cost of human induced soil erosion that natural resource accountants are interested in monitoring and valuing. As a second best approach (but one that is recognizably an inferior measure), one can use the value of the nutrients in the soil that are no longer available for crop uptake (because they are lost through erosion) as an indicator of the loss in soil productivity. This approach usually entails the estimation of the fertilizer-equivalent value of the nutrients carried in the eroded soils and some assumptions of the percentage of nutrients uptake by the crop. The most commonly measured nutrients consist of available nitrogen translated into urea equivalent (45 0 0), phosphorus in terms of solophos equivalent (0 20 0) and potassium converted into the value of muriate of potash (0 0 60). Assuming a constant annual rate of soil loss and some estimate of the percentage of nutrient uptake of the crop, the value of the inorganic fertilizer equivalent that could have been used by the crop (had this not been lost through soil erosion) can be estimated and presented as a measure of the physical deterioration/depreciation of the soil resource base. 2.4 2.4.1 Discussion of the data analysis The soil erosion problem in The Philippines.
Soil erosion is one of the most serious forms of land degradation, which greatly affects the population and the environment. This problem was recognized as early as the 1930s when it served as a precursor to the reforestation program of the then Bureau of Forest Development (PCARRD 1991). Sometime in the 1950s, the Bureau of Soil Conservation was created to promote better management of the country's soil resources. Efforts to combat soil erosion continued in the 1970s with the creation of the National Environment Protection Council (NEPC) and in the 1980s when Soil Erosion Prevention was considered as a national thrust. The seriousness of the soil erosion problem today attests to the lack of success of these programs. An analysis made by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) on the state of the Philippine environment showed that, overall, 75 percent of total croplands is vulnerable to erosion of various degrees. Thirteen provinces have 50 to 90 percent of their areas eroded. In terms of size of eroded land area, the top ranking provinces are Cebu (386,717 ha) and Bohol (271,739 ha) of Region VII; Masbate (269,147 ha) of Region V; Batangas (262,762 ha) of Region IV; and Abra (258,410 ha) of Region I (PCARRD, 1991). The Bureau of Soils and Water Management (BSWM) further classified the country's agricultural and non-agricultural lands in terms of slight, moderate or severe soil erosion (Table 1). The basis for this classification is the number of rills and/or gullies found per 100 meter length across a given slope. In a way, the assessment may be considered crude but it was the best that could be done given the high cost requirement of undertaking more quantitative measurement of the extent of soil loss all over the country. Analysis revealed that of the 42.4 percent land area in Luzon devoted to agriculture, 14.3 percent (1.44 million ha) suffers from moderate to severe erosion. The remaining 28.1 percent (4.55 million ha) has none to slight erosion. Erosion also takes place under non-agricultural land uses. Of the 57.6 percent non-agricultural land in Luzon, 27.1 percent (4.56 million ha) suffered from moderate to severe erosion. The remaining 30.5 percent (3.58 million ha) has zero to slight erosion.
7 Table 1 Areas used for agricultural and non-agricultural uses in The Philippines: extent of degradation by major island and by slope.
Land used for agriculture (in '000ha) Moderate to Severe 814 626 1,440 501 501 2,053 1,815 3,868 2,867 2,942 5,809 None to Slight 3,277 1,277 4,554 610 183 793 1,412 200 1,612 5,299 1,660 6,959 Total 4,091 1,903 5,994 610 684 1,294 3,465 2,015 5,480 8,166 4,602 12,767 Land used for other uses (in '000ha) Moderate to Severe 276 4,288 4,564 200 1,120 1,320 771 3,358 4,129 1,248 8,765 10,013 None to Slight 948 2,634 3,582 200 653 854 511 79 590 1,660 3,367 5,027 Total 1,224 6,921 8,146 401 1,773 2,174 1,282 3,438 4,720 2,907 12,132 15,039.
Island/ slope Luzon 0-8% > 8% Total Visayas 0-8% > 8% Total Mindanao 0- 8% > 8% Total Philippines 0- 8% > 8% Total.
Source: "Crop Development and Soil conservation Framework for Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao Islands", Management and Evaluation Division (ALMED), Bureau of Soils and Water Management (BSWM), 1990.
Total land use in the Visayas accounted only for those areas covered by the major watersheds. It amounts to only 57.7 percent of the total land area of the region. Of this, 22.8 percent is devoted to agriculture, 8.0 percent of which falls under moderate to severe erosion category. Agricultural lands are largely found in areas with greater than 8 percent slope. Of the 34.8 percent land area devoted to non-agricultural use, about half (1.12 million ha) has moderate to severe erosion, all having a slope of greater than 8 percent. Soil erosion is greater in areas with more than 8 percent slope, as seen also in the Mindanao data. In particular, almost all of the agricultural land areas with slope exceeding 8 percent suffer from moderate to severe soil erosion (1.81 million ha). The same is true for non-agricultural lands. Of the total 3.44 million ha, 3.36 million ha suffer from the same state of soil erosion. For the country as a whole, some 2.87 million ha have moderate to severe erosion, out of the 8.17 million ha of agricultural land having less than 8 percent slope. The rest have no erosion problem. Of the 4.60 million ha of agricultural land with slope exceeding 8 percent, more than half (2.94 million ha) have moderate to severe erosion problem. Of the 15.04 million ha of non-agricultural land, 12.13 million ha are in areas with greater than 8 percent slope. Moderate to severe erosion exists in about 8.76 million ha of this land use category. Table 2 Land use Grassland/Pastureland Upland Agriculture Open Grassland Fruit Trees Trees, shrubs, grasses Secondary Forest Paddy rice, irrigated Gmelina, ipil-ipil, coffee, grass Average erosion rates for various land uses Average soil loss (tons/ha/yr) 267.8 112.8 79.6 22.1 12.5 3.0 2.3 1.0.
Source: IRG, Edgevale Associates and MADECOR (1991).
8 2.4.2 Rate and volume of soil erosion.
The Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD, 1991) cited results of several local studies on soil erosion. Among these are the study of Paningbatan (1990) which indicated that annual soil loss was very much higher than the accepted tolerable soil loss of 3 to 10 tonnes/ha/yr and Sajise's (1984) which estimated that bare plots with 27 to 29 percent slope will have a soil erosion of 23 to 62 tonnes/ha/yr. In cultivated mountain slopes, the average erosion rate was 218.2 tonnes/ha/yr. The PCARRD (1991) publication also quoted the findings of David and Collado (1986), which applied the modified Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) to Philippine conditions using the Magat watershed as the test case. In particular, this study arrived at widely varying rates of soil loss by land use. Kaingin lands had the highest soil loss of 508 tonnes/ha/yr, followed by the open grasslands with 211 tonnes/ha/yr, and then by savannah with 195 tonnes/ha/yr. Diversified crop lands also have a very high erosion rate of 177 tonnes/ha/yr. The NRAP I (1991) have put together results of several studies which quantified erosion rates for various land uses in tonnes/ha/yr. These are presented in Table.
As indicated, erosion rates vary in different vegetative covers and across different slopes. The highest rate was measured in grassland/pastureland, which averaged 267.8 tonnes/ha/yr, and lowest in lands planted to forest tree crops (1.0 tonne/ha/yr), in paddy areas (2.3 tonnes/ha/yr) and in secondary forests (3 tonnes/ha/yr). For the purpose of this study, the erosion rate for agricultural land use was estimated by getting the weighted average between upland agricultural land and land used for fruit trees. This is because of the observed predominance of agro-forestry (i.e., combined crop farming and tree farming) in many upland areas of the Philippines. The weight used was the proportion of agricultural land area devoted to cash crops and to fruit tree species as given in Evangelista (1993). The weighted average computed for agricultural land use was 61.8 tonnes/ha/yr. In the case of grasslands (open grassland and grassland/ pastureland), the average was 173.7 tonnes/ha/yr. For woodlands, the rate measured for secondary forest was 3.0 tonnes/ha/yr. These erosion rates were used in this study to calculate gross erosion and for the cost of erosion per hectare and per region.
9 Table 3 Gross and average erosion rates by region and by land use in The Philippines in 1993 Gross erosion rate (million metric Total, Averages tonnes/year) tonnes/year (tonnes/ha/yr) Agriculture Grassland Woodland 5.99 131.73 2.54 140.26 82.42 4.53 104.02 0.53 109.08 128.49 18.17 99.54 3.85 121.57 56.51 6.73 98.84 1.24 106.82 97.82 68.60 190.39 5.50 264.49 65.50 50.99 73.61 0.69 125.29 84.74 39.01 136.18 0.74 175.94 105.80 36.45 118.21 0.27 154.92 114.04 50.07 95.24 1.70 147.00 76.35 42.13 110.76 1.03 153.92 92.58 46.69 125.10 3.50 175.29 66.31 57.92 127.18 3.65 188.76 65.39 29.72 151.00 1.72 182.45 94.79 457.02 1,561.80 26.98 2,045.79 80.62.
Region CAR I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII Philippines total.
Table 3 presents the gross and average erosion rate per region in the areas classified as uplands and highlands based on the classification given by Evangelista (1993). These land uses account for a total land area of 25.37 million ha, or 84 percent of the country's land resources. The national average erosion 