Estimating Timber Depreciation in the Brazilian Amazon.
Ronaldo Seroa da Motta Claudio A. Ferraz do Amaral.
Co-ordination of Environmental Studies Research Institute of Applied Economics (IPEA) email: seroa@ipea.gov.br.
Planning and Statistics Branch Policy and Planning Division Forestry Department.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
This case study has been prepared within an international project undertaken by the Forestry Department at the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) with the financial support of the Danish Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development with ESSD at the World Bank. The authors wish to acknowledge the valuable participation of José Ricardo Brum Fausto in the calculation procedures and equally important comments and suggestions along the text. Carlos Eduardo F. Young has also benefited us with comments on Section.
We are very thankful to Ives Dubé, from the FAO Forestry Department, for his persuasive and successful efforts of motivating us to undertake this study. We also thank Salah El Serafy and Michael Linddal for comments on the preliminary version of this study. At last, but surely not al least, our gratitude to Antonio Carlos Prado (Brazilian Ministry of the Environment, MMA), José de Arimatéia Silva (Brazilian Institute of The Environment and Renewable Resources, IBAMA), Steven Stone (Inter-American Development Bank), Delson L. M. de Queiroz (TECNOSOLO-DHV), Luis Alberto Veríssimo (Instituto do Homen e Meio Ambiente da Amazônia, IMAZON) and Fernando José A. Abranches (Barzilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, IBGE) for the kind help in the provision of their studies, database and useful comments.
This study applies distinct methodological forest accounting approaches, following Vincent and Hartwick (1997) lines, to estimate economic depreciation of timber exploitation in the Amazonian region. Although our results may be not definitive ones due to data availability problems, this exercise has proved to bring about issues which, though are theoretical and methodologically fully recognised, are not always revealed in other regional studies. High timber stocks, lack of property rights and informal economic relations are issues related to the Amazonian case that require great deal of caution when one is applying economic depreciation methodologies, as will be addressed on the basis of our results.
INTRODUCTION.
This study is part of an international project undertaken by the Forestry Department at the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations and The World Bank. It aims at the application of forestry accounting in distinct regional scenarios. Apart from Brazil, studies were also performed in Australia, Chile, Philippines and Zimbabwe. To do so, methodological lines were set up in a background paper by Vincent and Hartwick (1997), carefully briefed and commented by distinguish experts and here denominated as V&H (1997). The Brazilian case was selected to be applied in the Amazonian context. That choice was justified on the basis of the wide recognised importance of the region in ecological terms as well as its increasing economic relevance since it currently generates more than 70% of the total round wood produced in Brazil. That choice was not taken however without considering the data availability problems since it will be requiring information which is usually difficult to find even in forestry activities taking place in modern economic scenarios. The open access features of the Amazonian context is by nature one of lack of institutional enforcement, proper managerial practices and, consequently, fragile information systems. We have made the most of data availability, even though, some generalizations have been necessary. Bearing that in mind, our results will need to be seen under this perspective. On the other hand, the application of depreciation estimation methodologies in that Amazonian context has proved to bring about issues which, though are theoretical and methodologically fully recognized, are not always revealed in other regional exercises. High timber stocks, lack of property rights and informal economic relations, are issues that require great deal of caution when one is applying economic depreciation methodologies. We hope that in addressing them, we have attached a greater value added to this methodological exercise. Previous estimates for natural capital depreciation in Brazil faced the same data barriers, particularly in forest accounts for which estimate values with 1985 as the closing year1 were used. Apart from being more comprehensive in methodological procedures, our study was able to rely on recent survey data and cover the 1990/95 period which can capture the dramatic deforestation process and the radical increase in timber production started in the late eighties. Whatever the context, environmental accounting faces theoretical and methodological controversies. Even though sustainability principles can explain methodological differences,2 some theoretical issues, such as appropriate discounting and dynamic optimal behaviour, play an important role. This study will attempt to address these issues on the lines of V&H (1997) to the Brazilian Amazon. Section 2 presents an overview of the forest conversion pattern in the Brazilian Amazon and its relationship to the local timber exploitation activity. Following H&V (1997), methodological.
See Seroa da Motta (1995) for a general view of these studies and Seroa da Motta and May (1995) for the particular case of forests. It should be noted that the user cost approach was employed with sustainable output rather than net profit measures. 2 See, for example, Atkinson et alii (1997) and Seroa da Motta (1993).
2 approaches are presented in the following section. Due to the Amazonian context, property right enforcement issues are analysed in Section.
The following section describes our estimation procedures and analyses the results. The last section offers additional comments in the appropriateness of forest accounting in the Brazilian Amazon and raises some questions related to its usefulness for environmental planning in the region.
FOREST CONVERSION PATTERN IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON.
Socio-Economic Factors.
Preservation in Brazil is legally set in the Forest Code and water legislation basically by restricting land-uses. The Forest Code, published in 1934 and revised in 1965, regulates the use of wood from forests, defines conservation units, restricts farming and logging activities, set criteria for burning and chainsaw uses and states sanctions and fines. At the same time, water legislation, due to the need to protect watershed mainly for domestic supply, introduced very strict rules and norms for land uses to preserve forest areas at river basins. Despite the severity of these regulations, forest clearing at large scale has not been avoided in Brazil. No more than 8% of the Atlantic Forest, previously located over the most developed areas of the country, is left standing. The area of the Savannahs of Cerrados, in the central region, has been already cleared in half of its original size for farming purposes. Although less than 10% of the Amazon Forests has been cleared, the annual deforestation rate is still very high.3 Sustainable management practices for logging are already incorporated in the Brazilian environmental regulation. However, they do not succeed since abundant wood supply is available from agricultural expansion and lack of monitoring in such large areas. Nevertheless, even with the introduction of sustainable criteria to agricultural practices, forest clearing will continue to be a major source of wood supply while governmental agencies fail to deter illegal clearing. Forest land conversion is the main driving economic force on forest use. Therefore, the process of privatization of forest and its land, accomplished by assigning private individual rights based on clearing for further titling, has been very harmful for sustainable purposes in the region. Although a retreat on this driving force could be expected with the recent land taxation law, which offers exemptions for forestry and forest conservation, its enforcement may take several years to be fully implemented. Summing up, deforestation in Brazil is driven mainly by agricultural and logging activities. The expansion of these activities into open access areas has been very active despite legal restrictions. Apart from institutional fragility to enforce norms and rules, deforestation of important ecosystems is also a result of several economic factors, namely: a) A highly concentrated land tenure system where small farms (less than 10 ha) cover less than 3% of the total farming area while the share of large farms (more than 10,000 ha) represents above 40%. Additionally, agriculture in Brazil still presents very low average productivity levels per unit of area which acts as a push factor for continuous forest clearance. b) Personal income is also highly concentrated with 66.1% of the total income accruing to the 20% richest families while just 2.3% accrues to the 20% of the poorest ones [Bonelli and Ramos (1993)]. Such inequality creates an immense surplus of lowincome workers ready to seek occupations in frontier areas. c) Favourable credit and fiscal system to agricultural activities with no regard to soil agroecological features and managerial practices which resulted in a mere.
See Seroa da Motta (1997) for detailed indicators on deforestation in Brazil and their respective analysis.
4 replication of agricultural technologies already in place in areas with distinct ecological conditions. d) And finally, regional development programmes in frontier areas, though are nowadays mostly phased out, have immensely contributed to stimulate economic activities and promote migration flows. Some of these factors cannot be easily reverted since it would require long-term structural adjustments to alleviate social inequalities, accomplish a satisfactory land reform and even create the proper incentives and enhance human resource's capacity in governmental agencies. 2.2 Open Access Features.
As it was mentioned previously, one of the most important characteristics of the Brazilian Amazon is its open access feature. It is very important to understand the peculiar characteristics that allow agricultural peasants and timber loggers to penetrate the forest clearing it without any concern about resource scarcity and its economic consequences. Some of these peculiarities are presented below: · Land titling of a property is based on land productive use, such as area allocated to farming. Only very recently has legislation on land taxes been changed4 to consider standing forest legally recognized as productive use. Therefore, land titling and taxation have not only legalized clearing, but encouraged it. Forest land conversion to agriculture in the Amazonian region used to be allowed for up to 50% of the farm area. This percentage has been reduced to 20% in 1996 but with no effective enforcement so far. This legal clearing percentage has been used to issue conversion (clearing) permits and has become the main source of timber exploitation. Forestry activities, in fact, are financing forest clearing since extraction for this purpose is legal. Property rights for standing forests can only be viable with high enforcement costs. Illegal logging has, nevertheless, always been possible since no man-based regulation can be effective in such an enormous area as the Brazilian Amazon (western Europe size), particularly considering the existing social pressure and institutional fragility. It is known that sawmills are exploring areas where agricultural activities have not arrived due to the lack of infrastructure, consequently, the partnership between agriculture and sawmills will soon lead to other fronts of clearing. The Amazonian timber extraction process is characterized by a formal sector that works "by the books" with high costs and an informal sector working "freely" with low costs. This dual market structure is not economically feasible in such enormous area where outputs are not differentiated to receive compensatory higher prices. Amazonian forest is more heterogeneous and grows at lower rates than any other forest. Consequently, standing trees in this forest create low private values. Not only extraction costs increases as well as wood market shrinks to accommodate various species. Creaming is unavoidable without proper economic incentives. Heterogeneity in this case is on tree species as well as on tree incidence in different areas.
The new land taxation rules will be effective only in 1997.
Apart from that, states in Brazil are allowed to have their own state forestry policy and they usually have enough power to use parliamentary forces to curb centralised governmental protection measures in the region. Loggers and farmers are very politically "persuasive" in these states.
Based on these points, it has been claimed that forestry in the region is not undertaken with fully enforceable property rights. In other words, logging is carried out without proper account for scarcity parameters in a quasi-open access case,5 as will be further developed. 2.3 Logging Activity Outline.
As can be observed in Table 1, Amazonian wood output share in the national production increased from 40.5% in 1980 to 75% in 1991. Although more up-to-date figures are not available, this impressive expansion in the analysed period clearly reveals the growing importance of Amazonian wood species in logging activities. Moreover, it is estimated that in the last ten years no more than 10% of the logging output is exported and its composition concentrated in few species, particularly mahogany which accounts alone for 50% of the total export value. Table 1.
Region 1000m³ North Northeast Central Southeast South Brazil - Total Source: Prado (1995) 11.476 6.700 2.625 1.437 6.109 28.347.
Round Wood Production in Brazil.
The importance of logging expansion in the deforestation process can be observed in Table.
Estimates of effective and potential wood commercial production from agricultural cleared areas6 in the Amazonian region are presented for the period 1975/91 also based on Prado (1995). Effective production is the wood output currently generated and potential production is an estimate of the wood output which could be generated from cleared areas. The ratio of these two output values offers a good indicator of how much wood extraction is taking place as a consequence of the clearing for agricultural purposes. From Table 2 one may note that ratio values increased from 13% in 1975 to 95% in 1991. That is, wood extraction is currently strongly associated to clearing for agricultural purposes. Thus we have a circular relationship where wood extraction revenues finance clearing and legal licenses granted for agricultural clearing legalize wood extraction. This synergy generates private economic values to deforested lands much higher than those which could be derived from either preservation activities or sustainable agroforestry.
See, for example, Young (1997) for a discussion on this matter and Seroa da Motta (1997) for more details on property right's assignment in the region. 6 Cleared areas are those observed in the period and include legal and illegal clearing.
Field surveys in traditional logging Amazonian areas presented in Almeida and Uhl (1995), estimated financial rates of return higher than 300% for wood extraction and processing activities with logging undertaken in rented lands (i.e., land for agricultural clearing). If supply of wood comes from sustainable logging undertaken in lands only devoted for logging activities, rates of return would drop to almost 20%. That is, saw-milling activities can count on low-cost legal and illegal supply of wood which allows for very profitable financial returns to which sustainable logging cannot compete.
Effective and Potential Wood Production from Clearing Areas in the Brazilian Amazon.
Converted Forest Area (ha/year) 1.619.300 2.323.550 5.940.987 2.064.600 Potential Wood Effective Wood Extraction (PWE) Extraction EW E/PW E from Converted Area (EW E) (1000m³) (1000 m³) 32.386 46.471 118.820 41.292 4.064 11.476 19.539 39087 0.13 0.25 0.16 0.95.
Time Period 1975/78 1978/80 1980/88 1989/91.
Source: Prado (1995).
This association was also observed for the past in the Atlantic Forest. In fact, logging activities in Brazil are still mostly relying on native forests from which more than 75% of round wood is produced. Summing up, attempts to estimate timber depreciation in the Amazon have to take three regional features into account: a) the remaining size of the forest is still almost 90% of the original area despite the continuous deforestation process in the region; b) property rights are assigned by clearing which generates a continuous flow of timber output with the frontier advancement; and c) the association of agriculture expansion and logging exploitation seems to perpetuate the low capital and informal profile of forestry in the region. That is, large areas open for exploitation, fragile property rights and informal market structure are key factors preventing economic agent's perception of scarcity in the region.
ACCOUNTING METHODOLOGIES FOR CALCULATING THE DEPRECIATION OF NATURAL CAPITAL.
Adjustment in National Accounts.
Literature on depreciation accounting procedures of natural resource exhaustion is still open to debate about the most appropriate method.7 Economic progress has been measured in almost every nation world-wide by the system of national accounts using the Gross National Product (GNP). It uses market prices to measure the aggregate value of an economy's output in a given year. Despite being the most used indicator of economic progress, it is widely known that GNP is a very poor approximation of economic well being. Another indicator, Net National Product (NNP), is a much better measure of well being because it accounts for the depreciation of the wealth of a country. Man-made capital for example, depreciates through time and this loss in value is captured in the NNP measure. Nonetheless NNP, in its traditional measure, only takes into account the losses of man made capital, leaving aside the depreciation of natural capital.8 This depreciation happens when the stock of a natural resource is decreased. The idea of adjusting the system of national accounts to incorporate the losses due to the use of natural resources, is closely related to the concept of sustainability as an indicator of sustainable development.9 Although there are many definitions of sustainable development, economic definitions have focused on sustainable development as non-declining per capita welfare over time [Pearce and Atkinson, (1995)]. The idea behind it is that every future generation must have the option of being at least as well off as its predecessor. Hence a sustainable path has the characteristic that along it, the overall productive capacity of an economy is not reduced.10 The productive capacity of an economy depends on the total stock of capital available, as well as on its productivity. If some capital is used up and not replaced, the possibilities of future production is decreased. This is not so much of an issue with physical capital, since it can be produced and replaced. Nevertheless, it is an issue with natural capital which cannot be created by mankind. Therefore, when natural resources are used up or destroyed, there is implicitly a question of substitution. The question to ask is, at each point in time, how much of the natural capital productive base can be used up? The answer given by economic theory is based on two different approaches developed in a parallel way and yielding theoretically equivalent results. Both aim at measuring the impacts of resource depletion on long run human welfare, but while they are equivalent in theory, they will not yield necessarily the same result in practice.11.
Despite the continuous efforts of the UN Statistical Office to harmonize procedures, exhaustion accounting method is still without proper guidance. See for example Bartelmus (1996). 8 It also leaves aside the depreciation of human capital. UN Statistical Office efforts on environmental accounting are aimed at correcting this omission. 9 These adjustments should be broader than just calculating the depreciation of timber caused by deforestation, as we are doing in the present paper. They should include other factors that can affect the value of a forest and its land. Nevertheless these adjustments were out of the scope of the present study, although very important. 10 Although sustainability and sustainable development are related concepts, they are not synonyms. Sustainable development is a much more vague concept that is commonly used in many contexts without a proper definition. 11 For the importance of sustainability principles in environmental accounting, see, for example, Seroa da Motta (1994).
8 The first approach was derived in Hartwick (1977). He showed that so long as the capital stock of an economy did not decline over time, non-declining consumption was possible. We can illustrate Hartwick's idea with a simple economy consisting of two types of capital: physical and natural capital denoted by Kt and Rt, respectively. The net investment in this economy is given by the gross investment minus the depreciation in each of the form of capital: I tN = dK t dt + dRt dt . If the net investment is greater than or equal to zero, the country can at least sustain its actual consumption level. If this country produces a nonrenewable resource, non-declining consumption is possible by reinvesting all Hotelling rents from the exhaustible resource in physical capital. These rents are those resulting from an intertemporal efficient extraction programme. This is what is known in the literature as the Hartwick rule. It tell us the amount that we have to invest in other forms of capital when we extract a natural resource and earn rents on it. It was shown by Solow (1986) that it also represents a requirement to "keep capital intact". There are two important assumptions implicit in Hartwick's result. First, physical capital and natural capital are assumed to be close substitutes.12 Second, the model assumes that an individual only derives utility from the consumption of goods and not directly from the environment. The second approach was developed from the work of Weitzman (1976) on Net Domestic Product (NDP). We can define NDP for an economy with balanced trade13 as, NDPt = Ct + I tN . Weitzman (1976) demonstrated that under optimal growth, NDP should be though of as income in the Hicksian sense14 interpreted as a long run measure of economic well-being, that is, the stationary equivalent of future consumption. In this sense, national wealth for a country would be given by the present value of the best consumption path into the future that society can afford.15 Weitzman proved that Net National Product (NNP) in any year t is equal to the discount rate (social rate of time preference)16 multiplied by wealth: NNP(t)= W(t). Based on this result, he argued that a true measure of NDP should include the value of changes in resource stocks. Consequently, the net investment should be defined taking into account the depreciation in all types of capital, not only physical. Weitzman (1976) result depends on two crucial assumptions: first that a country growth path is optimal and second that social welfare equals consumption.
The elasticity of substitution is equal to one. Exports equal imports. 14 Income defined as the dollar flow which could be consumed from wealth or capital while leaving wealth undiminished.
This can be defined formally as W (t ) =.
C * ( s)e -  ( s- t ) ds , where  is the discount rate.
In this model,  equals the marginal product of capital (interest rate) only under steady state growth and zero population growth.
9 In both of the approaches presented above, we need an estimate of the depreciation of natural capital in order to subtract it from the value of the capital stock. In this manner we would adjust the gross investment to net investment. For an exhaustible resource, Hartwick and Hageman (1993) define depreciation as the change in value of an exhaustible resource under optimal use. If optimality conditions do not hold and substitution possibilities between physical capital and natural capital are restricted, then, the above approaches face criticisms on the basis of sustainability views. These approaches are regarded as based on the weak sustainability principle which sustains that natural capital can be permanently substituted by physical capital. Consequently, when natural resources are extracted, we can set aside part of its revenue to invest in physical capital and maintain intact the economy's productive capacity. This idea is not widely accepted. For some natural resources serving as production factors, there could be thresholds, carrying or assimilative capacity, causing some types of natural capital to be hardly substitutable. Many assets are essential to human being survival in the long run and this point of view is expressed in the strong sustainability concept, based on the conservation of many types of natural capital (i.e. maintaining them intact for future generations) or recognition of their safe minimum standards. Although depreciation methods can be analysed along these sustainability principles,17 the proposed depreciation methodologies can be generalized as elaborated in V&H (1997) and summarized in the following sub-sections. 3.2 The Change in Value Method.
Depreciation of an asset over a period of time can be calculated as the value of the asset in the beginning of the period minus the value of the same asset in the end of the period. This method is known as the change in value method. Adopting the definition of income as the level of consumption that could be enjoyed without diminishing the capital stock, we can define depreciation as the consumption of the assets in excess of this amount. More formally, depreciation exists when there is degradation of a resource. If we have the value of a resource at the end of a period and the value at the beginning of the period, we can calculate the depreciation of the resource as the difference between the two values.18 Defining the value of a resource as the discounted sum of the resource rents that are generated over time19 and using some algebraic manipulation, we can express the depreciation of an asset as:20.
D(t ) = iV (t + 1) / (1 + i ) - [ pq (t ) - C (q (t ))].
See Atkinson et alii (1997) and Seroa da Motta (1994). Mathematically D(t ) = V (t + 1) - V (t ). 19 If the resource is non-renewable and using discrete time, we can express the asset value at time t by V ( t ) =.
(1 + i ) t - s [ pq ( s) - C (q ( s))] ; where p is the price of one unit of the extracted resource.
(constant over time), q(s) is the quantity extracted at period t, C(q(s)) is the total cost of extraction and T is the period when the resource is exhausted. Expression pq ( s) - C (q ( s)) represents the current resource rent.
Alternatively in continuous time V = rV (t ) - [ pq (t ) - C (q (t ))] .
The previous expression is known as the fundamental equation of asset equilibrium. Although in theory it is a good representation for the depreciation of an asset, carrying out the previous calculation in practice has many complications. We would need projection of the future flow of rents, in which case we need prices, quantities extracted and cost schedules into a future finite stream. 3.3 Total Hotelling Rent as Depreciation.
Hotelling rent (HR) is defined as the rent that exists on the marginal quantity of an exhaustible resource (price minus marginal cost) and it is considered a measure of the intertemporal scarcity of that resource. This rent exists because the resource is exhaustible and consequently, the owners of the resource extract less than the amount that would equate marginal revenue to marginal cost. Multiplying the HR by the quantity extracted of the resource, gives the total Hotelling rent. It is interpreted as the portion of profit that accrue to extractive firms because they are mining an exhaustible resource. Hartwick (1988) proved that along dynamically efficient paths of extraction, Hotelling rent and economic depreciation (with a negative sign) are equals. Using this result, it is possible to use a short cut to calculate economic depreciation. Nevertheless, it is important to note that this equivalence is only correct under certain conditions, namely: a) resource extracted optimally, i.e., Hotelling's rule holds; b) price of extracted resource constant over time; c) marginal cost as an increasing function of the amount extracted, unrelated to the size of the reserve and constant over time; and d) constant discount rate over time. 3.4 The Net Price Method (NPM).
As it was mentioned previously, under special conditions, economic depreciation of natural resources can be approximated by the Hotelling rent. This last term was defined as price minus marginal extraction cost (the profit on the marginal ton extracted), multiplied by the amount extracted. Hence we can use the following expression to calculate the depreciation of natural capital from the NPM:.
In theory this method would be easier to apply than the change on value method. Nevertheless in practice, the data on marginal extraction cost is not generally available. Consequently previous studies that attempted to calculate depreciation of natural capital used the so called net price method. It uses data on average cost instead of marginal cost and calculates the depreciation as:.
11 It is important to note that, as it was mentioned by several authors,21 using the average net price instead of the marginal net price, one is calculating the total resource rent which overstates net accumulation (unless the MC=AC as in the case of a linear cost function). 3.5 The El Serafy Method (ESM).
Alternatively to the net price method, El Serafy (1989) developed a method to calculate depreciation based on the concept of user cost. He equates the finite stream of rents earned by a resource to an annuity X earned forever, which can be obtained by selling the mine and depositing the value of the mine (V) in a bank account. Mathematically this is given by:.
Rt + [1 / (1 + r )]Rt +1 +. . .+[1 / (1 + r ) n ]Rt + n = X + [1 / (1 + r )] X +. . .+[1 / (1 + r )  ] X (4).
where r is the discount rate, n+t is the last year of the extraction, X is the annuity received and R is the rent defined as Rt = pt q t - C ( q t ) . The expression R-X is a measure of depreciation, and El Serafy (1989) simplifies further the analysis to obtain a closed form solution. Assuming that the rent is constant over time,22 such that Rt = Rt +1 =. . . = Rt + n , the equation above is simplifies to:.
The previous expression is the user cost or economic depreciation for the ESM. It is important to note that as Hartwick and Hageman (1993) pointed out, if R(t) changes over time, the measure R-X could be a poor approximation to R(t+i)-X in period i, consequently the ESM would yield a poor approximation of the depreciation value. In the ESM, n is the remaining years of life of the resource stock. This is estimated by dividing total reserves remaining by the year's quantity extracted. This calculation implicitly assumes that this year's extraction will continue into the future at the same rate. If S(t) is the remaining stock of the resource at period t and q(t) the quantity extracted of the resource in the same period, we can express ESM formula to estimate depreciation as:.
D(t ) = -[ pq (t ) - C (q (t ))][1 / (1 + r ) S ( t ) q ( t ) -1 ].
Se