Forestry Outlook Studies in Africa (FOSA).
MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND TOURISM.
Anne Chileshe Rome, July 2001.
Please note that the views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the institutions.
This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
A Brief on the Forestry Outlook Study1.
Anne Chileshe Director of Forestry Forestry Department, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources PO Box 50042, Lusaka, Zambia Tel: 260-1-22 16 38/61 31; Fax: 260-1-22 16 38 forestry@zamnet.zm.
Zambia has an estimated population of 9.3 million people with an annual growth rate of 3.5% which is considered to be very high and has an effect on the forest resources. The overall objective of the country is to reduce poverty through economic growth, investment in human resource development and protection of the environment. The forest sector objective is to enhance the quantitative and qualitative contribution of the forest sector towards the national socioeconomic development. Mining dominates the Zambian economy, followed by the agriculture sector. Forestry contribution to GDP is less than 1%. However, the forest sector has a lot of potential to the socio- economic development of the country if managed properly. Forest resources although not assessed for the last four decades cover 60% of the total land area. Most of the forests are located in the customary areas, which are administered by the traditional leaders. Apart from the forest resources, the country is endowed with substantial water and wildlife resources, which are vital to the rural communities and the nation as a whole. The forest growing stock is estimated at 3.5 billion cubic metres as merchantable standing volume and 2.2 billion cubic metres is considered as commercial value timber. Sawmilling is considered as a well-developed forestry industry in the country. About 400,000 cubic metres of saw logs per annum is the estimated demand for the sawmilling industry. The woodbased industry is steadily growing under the private sector. Pit-sawing has a lot of potential to support the informal sector. Fuel-wood and charcoal have remained the major primary source of energy in most households. Figures available indicate that 95% of rural people depend on fuel-wood and 90% of urban households depend on charcoal. The demand for fuel-wood will continue to increase as the population continues to expand. In order to improve forestry contribution to the national development, the country's forestry policy and legislation have been revised based on the principles of participatory approaches and employing broad-based approaches of management and utilisation of the forestry resources. The Government has also developed a national framework for managing forest resources on a sustainable basis. The framework covers economic, social and ecological issues and it also addresses the institutional framework. The priority areas for interventions in the forestry sector are divided into the primary and supportive development programmes.
Full country report available at: FOSA website available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/FON/FONS/outlook/Africa/AFRhom-e.stm.
4 List of acronyms and abbreviations CBOs DoE FAO FD FETP FINWFPDP FREDP GMAs GDP GRZ Ha IFMBCP MAFF MENR NGOs NWFP PFAP SAP ZAFFICO List of tables Table 1: Table 2: Table 3: Table 2.4.1: Table 2.5.1: Table 3.1: Table 3.2: Table 3.2.1a: Table 3.2.1b: Table 3.2.2a: Table 3.2.2b: Table 3.3.1a: Table 3.3.1b: The Poverty Groups of Zambia ( % of Population ) Some Attributes of the Zambian Population Structure of the Zambian Economy based on the average GDP (US$ Million) Agro-Ecological Regions of Zambia. Contribution of different energy sources to household energy, 1990 to 1995. Land cover distribution in Zambia, 1992. Forest and the land cover, 1996 ­ 2016, Current trends in Million Hectares. Annual Demand of Wood by Periods in Million m3. Annual Demand of Wood by Periods in Million m3 (ZFAP Scenario). Cord-wood supply in Million m3/Annum (Current Trends) Cord-wood supply in Million m3 (ZFAP Scenario) Annual Cord-wood Supply and Balance in Million m3/Annum, (Current Trends). Annual Cord-wood Supply and Balance in Million m3/Annum, (ZFAP Scenario). 7 8 9 16 19 20 22 22 22 23 23 24 24 Community Based Organisations Department of Energy Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations Forestry Department Forestry Education and Training Sub-Programme Forestry Industries and Non-Wood Forest Products Development Sub- Programme Forest Research and Extension Development Sub-Programme Game Management Areas Gross Domestic Product Government of the Republic of Zambia Hectare Indigenous Forest Management and Biodiversity Conservation Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Non-Governmental Organisations Non-Wood Forest Products Provincial Forestry Action Programme Structural Adjustment Programme Zambia Forestry and Forest Industries Corporation Limited.
5 1 BRIEF NOTES ON ZAMBIA.
1.1 Location and terrain: Zambia is a landlocked country found in the southern region of Africa lying between Latitudes 8o and 18 o South of the Equator and Longitudes 22 o and 34 o East of the Greenwich Meridian. The country is surrounded by the Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana and Angola. It has a surface land area of 752,614 Km2 most, of which forms the highest parts of the plateau lying between 1,000 and 1,600 metres above sea level. The highest areas of the country are in the north-eastern part of the country, with the plateau gradually sloping to the south-west. 1.2 Climate and hydrology Zambia's altitude puts it in the broad belt of temperate highlands, which moderates what would otherwise be a harsh tropical climate. The temperatures range from 16 o to 27 o C in the cool and dry season and from 27 o C to 38 o C in the hot and wet season. These characteristics result into two major climatic extremes, namely the semi-arid western region and the swampy Lake Bangweulu area in the north-eastern part of the country. The country's main drainage systems are the Zambezi, Kafue, Luangwa and the Chambeshi-Luapula Rivers, which together with the lakes provide Zambia's most important water, fisheries and tourism resources. The annual summer rainfall ranges from 500 to 1,500 mm during the period of November-March, varying with latitude and altitude. Mean annual rainfall decreases from the Equator towards the Tropical of Capricorn and from north and north-eastern to the south and south-west. 1.3 Vegetation The ecosystem nomenclature in Zambia is based on vegetation types and Chidumayo and Marjokorpi (1997) have identified five forest types, namely the Dry evergreen, Dry deciduous, Montane, Swamp and Riparian Forests, and five woodland types ­ the Miombo, Kalahari, Mopane, Munga and Termitaria, and the Grasslands. In addition to the natural vegetation types, plantation forests of tropical pines and eucalyptus covering an area of about 61,000 hectares have been established countrywide with over 80% of these occurring on the Copperbelt Province. About 50,000 hectares of these industrial plantations are managed by a parastatal company called Zambia Forestry and Forest Industries Corporation Limited (ZAFFICO). At the Provincial level, The Forestry Department manages 7,000 hectares of the regional and local supply plantations, while the remaining balance is managed by private individuals at the semi-commercial and farm levels. 1.4 Fish and wildlife Fish and wildlife are some of the country's most valuable natural resources. Although landlocked, the rivers and lakes of Zambia are known to support about 156 fish species. The country is also renowned for the extensive area and biological richness of its wetlands. There are about 190 species of wild animals in Zambia, and a large diversity of birds, reptiles and insects. For example, Zambia is known to be the only country with the rare Black Lechwe, a herbivore that thrives in swampy habitats. 1.5 Population The estimated population for Zambia in 1990 was 7,383,097. With a growth rate of 3.1% per annum, population estimates for the years: 1995 - 9,095,000 1996 - 9,397,000 1997 - 9,712,000 and 1998 - 10,036,000.
About 39.9% of the population is concentrated in urban areas, mostly on the Copperbelt and Lusaka where about two thirds of the total urban population lives. Other high population density areas are in the agricultural zones along the central, north-south line of rail. The population is, therefore, highly clustered in these areas. However, there are vast areas which are almost unpopulated and hence, on average, Zambia has low population density. 1.6 Agriculture Agriculture in Zambia is characterised by a distinct contrast between the commercial and subsistence farming. Large-scale commercial farms are concentrated along the central line of rail, while subsistence farming is distributed through out the country. The level of mechanisation and use of animal draft power is not fully developed. Farming in Zambia is predominantly rain-fed with only about 1% of the potential agricultural land being irrigated. Maize is the main food and cash crop, followed by sorghum and cassava. Cattle production is limited by poor grazing land and high incidence of livestock diseases. Most of the cattle is under traditional herders and concentrated mainly in the upper Zambezi and middle Kafue areas, and the Eastern Province. Overstocking on grazing land has resulted in bush encroachment and severe soil erosion in some areas. 1.7 Minerals Zambia has about 6% of the worlds proven copper reserves and ranks fifth in production. The country also produces cobalt, ranking second in the world production. Other minerals include lead, zinc, gold, silver, iron and uranium, most of them being produced in marginal quantities. Coal is also mined to a limited extent. 1.8 Economy The current economy of Zambia is driven by the private sector, which has shares in major industries, supported by the economic policy that provides for a conducive environment for private sector investment in any business industry, including those that are forestry based. 1.9 Political Zambia is a multiparty democracy country with about 34 registered political parties. The political climate is such that anyone who enjoys popularity and is a Zambian can form and register a political party.
INTRODUCTION Objectives.
This paper takes a forward look at the forestry sector of Zambia starting from the present status of forestry in the country. The paper seeks to visualise the most likely situation that will develop as regards forests and forest industries during the next 20 years ­ from 2001 to 2020 ­ and to asses the likely implications of the development in the sector by identifying the important forces of change (Change Drivers) and predict on how these are likely to affect the forestry sector. The paper also indicates the assumptions made about the policy, institutional and technological changes while at the same time taking into considerations the inter-sectoral linkages. 2.2 Background.
Zambia is well endowed with forest resources that can play an important role in the national economy and in improving the living standards of people. However, deforestation in the last three decades has contributed to the depletion of this valuable resource. Forests produce a great variety of goods and services for the people of the country. Thus, forests have value to people and contribute to meeting human needs in a number of ways. The contribution occurs through the direct and indirect use of the forests and the mere existence of the forest or options for its future direct or indirect use. The main land-use types in Zambia are forests, agriculture and settlements. Forests are dominant, covering 60% of the country's total land area. The main vegetation type is Miombo woodland, which covers 47% of the country's land area. The other types are the savannah woodland and grassland. Proper and up-to date country wide data on forests is not available since the last comprehensive forest resources inventory was carried out in the 1960s. Agricultural land covers about 20% of the country's land area. This sector is the largest contributor to loss of forests in the country. For example, the 65% increase in maize production during the period of 1981 ­ 1991 in Zambia is attributable mainly to expansion of cultivated land rather than the increased yield per hectare of land. It is estimated that from 1992 to 1996, agricultural land-use increased by an average of 1.5% each year. Woodfuel demands around big towns and along main roads has contributed to deforestation in the country. It is estimated that deforestation as a result of woodfuel production claimed about 25,000 ha in 1969. In 1980 and 1990, this figure rose to 38,000 and 53,000 ha, respectively (Chidumayo, 1996). The original forest policy was formulated in the 1960s as a set of instructions to the Forestry Department. Of great concern in this policy was the lack of provision for community participation in the forestry sector development, but provided for Government control by way of policing over forest reserves. In order to be consistent with the current overall Government policy of promoting private sector and community participation in forestry sector development, a new forestry policy was formulated in.
8 1998. The major features of this policy are the emphasis on community participation in forestry development and the withdrawal of the exclusive powers of Government control, ownership, planning and management of the forest resources. This policy is also supported by the new Forests Act No. 7 of 1999 (CAP. 199 of the Laws of Zambia). In Zambia, the annual rate of deforestation ranges between 250,000 and 300,000 ha. However, this estimate may be incorrect as it is based on the large-scale forestry inventory that was carried out in the 1960s. Moreover, it has not been changed for a number of years, ignoring the population growth and consumption of wood resources. Since deforestation is related to population growth, it is likely that the rate will keep on increasing in future. The forestry sector in the country, if properly developed, has the potential to make a significant contribution towards the economic growth. The current underdeveloped state of the sector means increases can be substantial. There are two major problems affecting the Zambian forest sector. Both arise from population growth and the basic needs of people. The increasing number of people means that food has to be produced for all, with energy for cooking and lighting. These two needs can not be avoided, but can mitigate their impact on forests. At the national level, biodiversity conservation is relevant in terms of the economic benefits it brings about through the consumptive and no-consumptive use of forest based produce. Not only is it important from the stand point of the supply of forest and wood products to the wood based formal and informal industries but also of wildlife which attracts tourism. The indigenous forests with an estimated wood volume of about 4 billion cubic metres and commercial plantations with another estimated wood volume of about 6 million cubic metres are the main source of sawn timber, poles and mining timber for both formal and informal enterprises, and the 7 million cubic metres of woodfuel consumed every year. The wood panel industry alone is worth about US$ 2 Million per annum. Additionally, Zambia earned US$ 1 Million from the export of wood products between1990 and 1995. Globally, Zambia's forests are as important as they are to the country. The forests protect the river basins of the major rivers, which flow beyond the country's borders with neighbouring countries. Sustainable supplies of benefits brought about by the rivers such as the Zambezi and Luapula to the countries concerned depend on the stability of these forests in Zambia. 3 THE CHANGE DRIVERS.
The Zambian economy has had serious problems since the early 1980s. From the independence time, 1964, the economy had become increasingly centralised, with the public sector and parastatal companies forming the backbone of production and growth. National prosperity was almost entirely dependent on copper. Poor economic management and falling world prices of copper has led to the decline in the industry over the last 25 years, which has a knock-on effect on the national economy. Government, during this period, began to borrow to finance public expenditure, notably the subsidisation of maize production and consumption.
9 For the last 10 years, the Government has tried to restructure the economy through a series of adjustment programmes. Subsidies have been discontinued and state owned enterprises privatised. However, economic reforms bring certain hardships, many of which are shouldered by the poor. 3.1 Socio-economic changes.
Deforestation and its associated environmental problems are a threat to ecosystem conservation, and hinder socio-economic development. This section looks at key aspects and trends on poverty, population growth, economic growth and the environment. 3.1.1 Poverty.
Poverty in Zambia is wide spread. According to the World Bank report (1994a), about 68% of the population live in households where the income is not sufficient to meet the basic needs. Rural poverty is more wide spread than urban poverty as illustrated in the following table which is adopted from the ZFAP, Volume II, (1998).
Group Core Poor Poor Non Poor TOTAL Table 1: The Poverty Groups of Zambia (% of Population) National Rural Ur b a n 54 76 14 12 32 12 100 100.
The stringent economic programme being implemented by the Government focuses on liberalisation and reduced State interference in the economy. This has been accompanied by reduced spending on the social services and cost sharing in the health and education services. The impact of these reforms has been harsh on the income, health and education of the poor. The prevalence of poverty in rural areas has implications for rural development programmes such as agriculture and forestry. Poverty is greatest in Western and North-Western Provinces, followed by Eastern, Luapula and Northern Provinces although the potential for forestry-led rural development exists in these Provinces. In Zambia, poverty has been exacerbated by high population growth, environmental degradation and the HIV/AIDS. These issues have delayed the prospects for poverty reduction by overburdening the social services, increasing the number of dependants for each productive person, and reducing the assets of future generations. 3.1.2 Population growth.
The population of Zambia is ever on the increase with an estimated growth rate of about 3.1% per annum. Between 1980 and 1990, the population increased from 5.7 million to 7.8 million people. The table below summarises the key information.
1969 Population (millions) Population Growth Rate/ Annum Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) Life Expectancy (years) Fertility (unit) Source: ZFAP, Volume II (1998).
The 1990 population figure was more than double the 3.4 million of the year 1963. By 1995, the population was estimated at 9.3 million. Dramatic increases are expected to continue. The fertility rate at 6.7 per woman is still higher than the African average of.
The crude death rate declined from 19.7 in 1969 to 14.0 per 1,000 persons in 1990. High levels of fertility have resulted in the youthfulness of the Zambian population. In 1995, 46% of the population was under the age of 15 years. The reduction in life expectancy from 51 years in 1980 to 46 years in 1990 reflects the HIV/AIDS epidemic, and the generally impoverished environment. The population growth rate presents challenges to future developments. More than 42% of the population lived in urban areas in 1990. The over concentration of population in urban areas affects the provision of social services, and has serious repercussions on the environment, and forestry in particular. The youthfulness of the country's population means that there will be a growth in numbers of households as they reach the marrying age. This, in turn, implies increased demand for forest products and services in the country. 3.2 Economic growth and environmental degradation.
There is a two -way link between economic growth and environmental degradation. Deforestation and degradation have often been the result of mismanagement for short term and narrow gains. Policies promoting economic growth should encompass improved environmental management. Poor management of natural resources, especially forests, will constrain the development process, as short-term benefits become exhausted The most pressing environmental problems in the forest sector of Zambia are deforestation and forest degradation, soil erosion and fertility loss, watershed degradation, and loss of biodiversity. The contribution of the forestry sector to the national economy has been grossly undervalued. This is simply because there are few statistics on the forestry-based informal and formal sector activities. In addition to this, wood and wood-based products are classified under manufacturing leading to high distortion of the true contribution of the forestry sector to national economic development and gross domestic product in particular.
11 Most important of all, the traditional system of measuring economic growth by GDP fails to take into account the change of the natural capital of the country. A " Green GDP " would take into consideration the actual value of the forest exploited in a given year. According to the available information, the forest sector contribution to the national economy was lower than any other sector between 1989 and 1993, as illustrated in the table below.
The Zambian economy has been registering negative growth rates since 1992. Compared to the rest of the economy, the performance of the forest sector shows a consistent but slow progression. In terms of growth, the forest sector contribution to GDP increased from US$ 15,200 in 1991 to US$ 18,500 in 1995 3.3 Policy and legislation changes.
The first forestry policy for Zambia was put in place in 1965. This policy was very restrictive, as it did not provide for a broad-based participatory approach to forest management and production that takes account of other sectors and stakeholders. Instead, all control of forest ownership, planning and management was given to the Central Government through the Forest Department. Being exclusive, it did not spell out roles and responsibilities for Local Authorities and communities in the management and use of the forest resources. The policy was also silent on gender issues, and as a result, it perpetuated the gross imbalance that exists between men and women with regard to matters of ownership, access, control, derivation of benefits, constraints and impacts of forest resources development and depletion. In order to take care of the interest of all stakeholders, a new forestry policy has been formulated with effect from 1998. This policy has the objective of ensuring rational and sustainable protection, management, production and utilisation of the forest resources. It recognises the need for employing.
12 broad-based participatory approaches to forestry sector development. The policy also seeks that all stakeholders are given recognition, and are active participants in the management and utilisation of the forest resources. Further, the policy pays closer attention to forests outside the protected or gazetted forest estates. The new policy is based on the following principles: · Trees are important to environmental preservation, ecosystem conservation and sustainable socio-economic development ; · There is an inseparable relationship between humans, trees and land ; · There is need to create responsible partnerships, with gender equity, among stakeholders in forestry activities, to ensure the permanence and stability of forests ; · There is need to combine scientific and indigenous knowledge in the management and utilisation of the forest resources ; and · There is need for enhanced private sector participation in forestry development. The policy also addresses itself to four main areas of concern, namely: · Resource management and development ; · Resource utilisation ; · Capacity building ; · Gender equity. The Policy objectives and strategies are set out in each area being addressed. This is done against a background of limitations to ensure that constraints to success are addressed. 3.3.1 Resource management and development.
The major areas being addressed b y the Policy under this are the: - Enhancement of forest resources management To be effective, a participatory forest management approach will be used by making the NGOs and other stakeholders become partners with Government agencies in devising, implementing and monitoring local forest resource management plans. The joint management of local forests will be enriched by the integration of the indigenous and scientific knowledge. - Security of the forest estates The Policy will help ensure that sufficient forest reserves exist for the protection of forests, water and soil resources. Stakeholders will be identified and involved in the process of establishing New Forest reserves by following clearly defined criteria, purpose and objectives. - Expansion of plantations Past neglect of the sound plantation management has created a future shortage of plantation round wood. Early action to prevent this shortage from being prolonged is being supported by the new Policy. Ideally, plantations will be established and managed by the Private Sector including individual farmers. - Ecosystem conservation The Policy provides for the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems with unique species of flora and fauna, as this is essential for the maintenance of ecological and environmental balance and sustainability.
13 - Agro-forestry Clearing land for agricultural expansion is the major cause of deforestation in Zambia. The Policy supports the creation of closer links between agriculture and forestry, as most rural people are peasant farmers. Agro-forestry programmes based on both scientific and indigenous knowledge can meet wood needs as well as enhance agricultural productivity. - Forestry research and extension Success in developing the forest sector depends on effective forestry extension and research services. The new Policy will promote these services which will: · be demand driven ; · include the private sector ; · include forest products and processing ; · reflect the need for community participation. 3.3.2 Resource utilisation.
Forests are a source of raw materials for wood-based industries, of wood-fuel and of non-wood products. The new Policy ensures that the various uses are carried out rationally and sustainably. The Policy also supports the development of a pricing mechanism for forest products that incorporates issues such as cost and true economic value as well as externalities such as environmental standards. Wood industries will be promoted to help the forest sector contribute more significantly to socioeconomic development of the country through improved technology and management that will produce high quality finished and semi-finished wood and non-wood forest products for both the local and export markets. The dependence on wood-fuel by most households increases pressure on the forests while alternative energy sources are not immediately available. The new Policy has put emphasis on the sustainable management of the charcoal industry through the promotion of good woodland management, and supporting the National Policy on Wood-fuel as embodied in the National Energy Policy of 1994. 3.3.3 Capacity building.
Capacity building is essential to the development of the forest sector through the human resource development as well as institutional and structural reform. The sector needs educated and trained personnel - both foresters and stakeholders - for long-term success and in order to create a better understanding of the value of forests, the meaning of sustainability and approaches to good forest management. The new Policy has, therefore, put emphasis on the need to have strong institutional and legal framework that will be based on having right linkages, capacities and incentives to deliver, and the implementation of sustainable forest management under the prevailing socio-economic conditions. 3.3.4 Gender equity.
An understanding of different gender roles in forest management and utilisation is crucial for sustainability. The new Policy has recognised the need to integrate gender issues in order to correct.
14 the imbalance in gender participation in forestry activities through the recognition of the following issues: - Decision making Women will be deliberately involved in decision making at all levels and stages of forestry project identification, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. - Extension The number of women extension workers will be increased as they are generally better suited to dealing with female members of the community, who are the main users of forest resources at household level. - Training The number of women admitted to both the technical and professional training will be increased, as females will be encouraged to enrol. - Women's Organisations Women's Organisations at both national and grass-root levels will be encouraged to incorporate forestry management in their activities. - Funding Projects that target women in forestry, including agro-forestry, woodlots, conservation, wood and non-wood forest industries will be earmarked for funding. The forest sector has several linkages with other institutions whose activities may be based, or to a large extent rely, on goods and services provided by forest resources. In order to implement the measures that are outlined in the new policy, it has bee recognised that there will be need for effecting viable institutional reforms. The policy has, therefore, outlined the roles of the stakeholders as follows: Central government The role of the Government will be to formulate and review forest policy and co-ordinate its implementation. The Government shall also encourage the establishment of plantations and proper management of indigenous forests and provide a conducive environment for stakeholder participation. Ministry of environment and natural resources The Ministry will have the overall responsibility for forest resources development. Zambia forestry commission The Commission will be established to take over the functions of the Forestry Department. The Commission will also be responsible for co-ordination, implementation and enforcement of rules and regulations pertaining to forestry development.
15 Local government The role of the Local Government shall be to formulate bye-laws, enforce them and facilitate proper and smooth administration of forest estates, in conformity with the forestry policy and existing legal framework. It shall also be involved in setting aside land for forestry purposes and participate in the implementation of the Joint Forest Management. Traditional leaders and institutions The Traditional Leaders shall be involved in the administration and management of forest estates within the area of their jurisdiction. They shall also encourage the setting aside of land for forestry purposes and advise Government on policy formulation and implementation as well as facilitate local community participation in the management and utilisation of forest resources. Political leadership The Political Leadership shall be responsible for resource mobilisation, interpretation and implementation of Government policy and legislation. Local communities The Local Communities including the Community Based Organisations shall advice Government on policy formulation and implementation. They shall be the key actors in the planning and management of forests at local levels. They shall also be the implementers and determinants of the species and technologies to be used in community based forestry plantation establishment and management. Traditional healers The Traditional Healers shall participate in Joint Forest Management and foster sustainable utilisation, and provide indigenous knowledge on medicinal plant species for the conservation of biodiversity. The private sector Individuals and Organisations that are interested in business transactions that are related to forest estate management shall be partners in forestry development activities and will be expected to build capaci