Forestry Outlook Studies in Africa (FOSA).
Forestry Department, Ministry of Water, Lands & Environment.
Charlotte Kanabahita December 2001 Please note that the views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the institutions. This paper has been minimally edited for clarity and style.
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE REPORT.
AFWC CBFM CBO CDM DFID ESD ESMAP EU/UK FAO FD FF FOSA FRM&CP FA FSUP GDP GEF GHGs GoU ICRAF IFF IGAD IPF NARO NEMA NFA NGO NORAD NWFP MAAIF MFPED PAF PEAP PMA UFD UFSUP UK UIA UNFCCC UNIDO UNDP UWA FORI THF TOF SADC African Forestry and Wildlife Commission Collaborative Forest Management Community Based Organizations Clean Development Mechanism Department for International Development Energy for Sustainable Development Energy Sector Management and Assistance Program European Union/United Kingdom Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations Forest Department Farm Forestry Forestry outlook Study Forest Resource Management and Conservation Plan Forestry Act forestry Sector Umbrella Program Gross Domestic Product Global Environment Facility Green House Gases Government of Uganda International Council for Research in Agro forestry Intergovernmental Forest Forum Intergovernmental Agency for control of Desertification Intergovernmental Panel for Forests National Agricultural Research Organization National Environment Management Authority National Forest Authority Non-Governmental Organization Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation Non Wood Forest Products Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industries and Fisheries Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Poverty Eradication Fund Poverty Eradication Action Plan Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture Uganda Forest Department Uganda Forestry Sector Umbrella Program United Kingdom Uganda Investment Authority United Nations Forum for Convention on Climate Change United Nations Industrial Development Organization United Nations Development Program Uganda Wildlife Authority Forest Research Institute Tropical High Forests Trees outside Forests Southern African Development Community.
World Wild Fund.
Charlotte Kanabahita Forestry Department, Ministry of Water, Lands & Environment PO Box 26905, Kampala, Uganda Tel: 256-41-34 74 60; Fax: 256-41-34 56 05 kamugi@imul.com.
Overview of the most important expected changes Uganda will continue to experience rapid population growth in the next 20 years. Economic growth has been projected at 7% per annum but this will largely depend on peace and stability in all areas in the region and the success of the proposed government programs of poverty eradication modernisation for agriculture. The following important changes are expected to impact on the forestry sector in the next 20 years: · Increased demand for forest products such as fuel wood and construction materials due to a rapid population growth in Uganda coupled with increased incomes. This is expected to accelerate deforestation. The most threatened forests are those located on privately owned land and the government owned forest plantations. It is expected that in 2020 there will be a shortage of sawn timber in Uganda. · Increased agricultural expansion into forested areas and woodlands to cater for the growing population. · Improved agricultural production through intensification of agriculture and an increased knowledge in productive agricultural methods will reduce the pressure to convert forestland into agricultural land. This is in line with the proposed modernisation of agriculture. Through this process it is expected that farm forestry will make significant contributions towards the provision of fuel-wood and poles for construction among other tree products in Uganda. It will also be instrumental in afforestating marginal lands. · Collaborative forestry management will be an important form of forestry management especially where land is communally owned. · Eco-tourism in Uganda will be more developed and better marketed by the private sector and it will be an important source of revenue. Natural forests will be managed more for their environmental values than for their productive functions. · There will be better regulations for the access to the genetic resources in our forests. Uganda will be earning money from bio-prospecting ventures using our bio-diversity. The country will also be in a better position to tap the global initiatives on forestry and environment protection to finance more investments in forestry. · Commercialisation of some NWFP will increase. · The government institutions involved in the management of forestry will be more coordinated with clearer roles and responsibilities. They will be more focused on facilitation than management. · Adoption of more non-timber materials in building construction and adoption of non-wood fuels to a large extent especially by the urban communities. This is assuming Uganda can sustain an economic growth of 7% as projected. Recommendations There is no doubt that Uganda has a high potential for forestry development that has not been adequately exploited. While there is an increased awareness of the environmental importance of trees, there are insufficient incentives to pursue tree planting and sustainable forestry management. The key issue therefore is how to motivate people to take a deeper interest in investing in forestry including sustainable management of the forest resource base. There is need to explore ways of narrowing the gap between policy formulation and implementation as well as to promote activities that reduce pressure and dependency on land and tree resources. The chapter on accomplishing the vision has made detailed recommendations to this effect.
The Uganda forestry outlook study is a concise account of the general direction of development of the forestry sector in 2020. It outlines the current status and trends as well as the vision of the forestry sector in Uganda in the year 2020. It designed to critically examine the internal and external factors influencing the forestry sector, assess their implications, construct future scenarios and formulate a national vision for the forestry sector in the year 2020. The process is participatory, involving major stakeholders from government departments as well as from the private sector and non-governmental organizations. The Uganda forestry outlook study feeds into the forestry outlook study for east African sub region that will in turn contribute to the production of the final product, the Forestry outlook for the year 2020 also known as FOSA. The study is an analysis of the future potential of the forestry sector to contribute to the well being of the African citizen through it's economic, social and environmental functions. It analyses the status, trends and driving forces shaping African forestry. The primary objective of FOSA is to serve the development needs of the forestry sector in Africa. FOSA strives to identify policies, programs and investment options that will drive the forestry sector in a desirable direction. It aims at providing a framework and focus for investment in Africa. FOSA intends to provide lending institutions; investors, development partners and the private sector a basis for review of their forestry portfolios. FOSA was initiated by FAO at the request of the African countries through the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission (AFWC) at their 11th meeting held in Dakar, Senegal in April 1998. FAO is working in collaboration with African Development Bank and European Commission in the development of FOSA. FAO continues to seek the participation of other institutions such as World Bank, IGAD, SADC, non-governmental organizations and the private sector in the implementation of FOSA.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT.
I would like to thank the Commissioner for Forestry for trusting me with this important task. It has enriched my knowledge and increased my interest in forestry. I have the pleasure and gratitude to acknowledge the input of the following people who sacrificed their time to contribute to this study:.
Mr. Tom Blomley of CARE International (Uganda),.
Mr. G. Dutki of the Uganda Forestry Sector Umbrella Program,.
Dr. A. Banana of Makerere University, Forest Department and.
Mr. S. Nsita of the Uganda Forest Department. I would also like to thank Mr. Paul Isabirye of Meteorology Department, Mr. Ali Karantugye and Mr. Paul Dritchi of Forest Department for the useful information they contributed to the study. Last but not least, I greatly appreciate the very active and encouraging support provided by Dr. C.T.S Nair of FAO Rome. His pertinent and probing questions keep me on my toes searching for answers! The search will certainly not end with this paper. It is my sincere hope that this study will make a contribution towards the eradication of poverty in Uganda.
INTRODUCTION.
Uganda's Vision for the 21st Century.
Uganda is a country with high potential for effective conservation, sound sustainable natural forest management and viable timber plantations. It has great potential for sustained economic growth. Despite her small size of only 0.02% of the world's total dry land area, Uganda has over 11% and 7% of the known world's total of species of birds and mammals respectively. It is not surprising therefore, that she was referred to as the "pearl of Africa" by Sir Winston Churchill at the start of the century. The translation of this potential into reality has been curtailed by several factors. The major factor has been bad governance and politics of the last 30 years that has led to the destruction of people, infrastructure and the economy. Consequently, Ugandans have experienced poverty, low levels of human development and environmental degradation resulting in the country being one of the poorest in the world. Today, about 46% of Uganda's population live below the poverty line. The greatest challenge for the government in Uganda today is how to address the issue of poverty. It is the vision of all Ugandans to restore the `pearl of Africa' to its former glory. Through a wide consultative process, Ugandans from all walks of life agreed on a collective vision for the country. The vision for Uganda for the 21st century is that of "a prosperous people, harmonious nation and beautiful country" (MFPED, 2000; Vision, 2025). Uganda's Vision 2025 will provide a planning framework for the country for the next 25 years. 1.2 Uganda's Forestry Sector Vision.
Uganda depends heavily on subsistence agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Agriculture is sustained by about 85% of the population who are rural based. The agricultural sector is largely undeveloped characterised by family labour, rudimentary technology, poor crop husbandry, lack of improved seed, lack of pesticides, lack of fertilisers, a land use policy and with a low rate of land use. It is against such a background that the role of forestry in the development of Uganda is considered as crucial in the eradication of poverty. The Uganda Forest Policy states the country's forestry sector vision as: a sufficiently forested, ecologically stable and economically prosperous Uganda. A national forestry program is being developed to ensure the conservation, management and sustainable development of the forests to meet local, national, regional and global needs and requirements for the benefit of present and future generations. Although there has been a long period of upheaval and considerable damage to some forests, there is still a solid ecological basis from which sustainable forestry can operate. It is part of Uganda's development strategy that forest resources play a full part in development to maximise the positive impact on poverty. 1.3 1.3.1 Status of the Forestry Sector in Uganda The Natural Forests.
Uganda's forests fall into two major categories namely the natural forests and the plantations. Natural forests supply the bulk of forest products but plantations are gaining prominence. High Forests in Uganda were in the past degraded so much such that only 100,000 to 200,000 ha can be considered as `productive' forest. It is estimated that of this only 50,000 ha are exploitable. The rest is so degraded that it will have to be protected for at least another 20 years. In 1995, the Forest Department estimated that an annual allowable cut of about 200,000 cubic meters would be yielded from natural forest reserves in the next 15 years (Forest Department, 1995). In 1995, it was.
estimated that an annual allowable cut of about 100,000 cubic meters of wood would be yielded from public and private forests within the next 15 years (Forest Department, 1995). At the beginning of the century, the tropical high forests (THF) under government ownership covered about 3,090,000 ha or 12.7% of the country. Current estimates indicate that the THF estate under government ownership has now been reduced to 730,000 ha or 3.6% of Uganda's land area (Forest Department, 1999). Current predictions estimate that if allowed to continue at the present rate, wetlands and open water areas will be reduced to 4,500 km2 and 36,900 km2 respectively by the year 2006 (Forest Department, 1996). Deforestation in Uganda has mainly been due to a rapid increase of a population with no other economic options coupled with breakdown of law and order during the turbulent years of the 1980s. During that time, forest reserves were cleared indiscriminately. 1.3.2 Forest Plantations.
The existing forest plantations were established in the 1960 and 70s. They are in a poor state. Data on their productivity is scanty. In 1995, it was estimated that an annual allowable cut of about 150,000 cubic meters was expected from the forest plantations for the next 15 years (Forest Department, 1995). Despite a favourable climate and soils, Uganda has only a limited area of timber plantations, mainly pine and cypress. These are mostly mature or semi-mature but years of neglect have led to fire damage. Lack of pruning and thinning has reduced the potential value for high quality timber. Industrial forest plantations in Uganda consist of softwood or conifer and hardwood plantations. They cover about 345 km2 of which the majority is planted with softwoods. Government owned plantation forests are estimated at 240 km2 making up only 2.2% of gazetted forests. The main objective of the plantation establishment is to provide raw material to forest industries in the form of saw logs and or pulpwood (Falkenberg et al, 2000). Most of the hardwood plantations (eucalyptus) are in peri-urban areas for the purpose of supplying mainly fuel-wood and poles to urban enterprises. The Forest Department owns about 900 hectares of these plantations while about 1,000 hectares belong to the private sector but is on reserved land. The private sector, especially tea and tobacco processing companies has also established plantations. Private woodlots are also scattered all over the country. These private wood lots and plantations are estimated to cover an area of about 13,000 ha (NORAD, 1999). 1.3.3 Threats to the Forest Estate.
In the last 100 years Uganda's forests have faced severe pressures mainly from agricultural conversion as a result of population increase, urban demand for charcoal, over grazing, uncontrolled timber harvesting and policy failures. The forestry cover has shrunk from 45% in 1890 to the present 20.3 % of the total land area in Uganda. Currently, the rate of deforestation is estimated to be about 1% per annum (Kigenyi, 1995). The annual cost of deforestation in Uganda has been conservatively estimated at US$ 3.8 ­5.7 million per year (Falkenberg et al, 2000). Currently, deforestation is minimal on gazetted forest reserves, it is mostly occurring on privately owned or ungazetted public forests. Military warfare in Uganda has contributed much to deforestation. Uganda has had a turbulent history and sometimes guerrilla groups launch their attacks from forests and woodlands. This has led to poor management of forests and in the past, clearance of some forest in search of rebels. Today rebels have occupied Rwenzori Mountains in Uganda since 1997. This.
has prevented any meaningful conservation activity indeed in December 1999 UNESCO added this site to its list of world heritage sites in danger. 1.3.4 Economic Contribution of the Forest Sector to Gross Domestic Product.
In Uganda, the value of forestry in terms of its contribution to the national welfare or even gross domestic product (GDP) is very difficult to estimate. This is due to lack of adequate data on its output and services. Environmental services at the moment are difficult to estimate in monetary terms. It is therefore not surprising that different figures have been used over the years to reflect the contribution of the forestry sector in Uganda to GDP. The Ministry of Finance has been estimating it to be about 2% for the last 10 years while the Forest Department put is at about 6%. These figures exclude the environmental services, which have not been quantified. The actual percentage contribution of the forest sector and other primary sectors to GDP is expected to decrease as that of other sectors increases. This is in line with economic development in the country. 1.3.5 Environmental Services.
Probably the greatest contribution of the forest sector to the economy of Uganda is the environmental services it provides in terms of climate regulation, soil conservation, and protection of biodiversity and carbon sequestration. Unfortunately, these services are not quantified. The forests of Mt Elgon, Rwenzori, Bwindi and Mgahinga have substantial values as watershed areas and reservoirs for unique biodiversity. The exploitation of the environmental services of forestry is to be enhanced by the active promotion of farm forestry as proposed in the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). Farm forestry is to be used, as the means for improving soil productivity and for it's multiple socio-economic benefits in almost all the farming systems in the country. Agriculture, as already, mentioned is the backbone of Uganda's economy. 1.3.6 Social Functions of Forestry in Uganda.
The forestry sector plays a significant role in the lives of Ugandans in the following areas: · Employment: The forestry sector offers significant employment. Rough estimates put the current annual turnover of business in forestry at close to Ush 297 billion with the non-monetary value accounting for 30% of this. · Raw materials for Construction and Furniture Making and Energy: The forestry sector provides energy and raw materials for the construction and furniture making industries. Over 90% of the national energy demand is from firewood and charcoal. While about 400,000 cubic meters per year is used in the construction industry and for furniture making (Claus-Michael, 2000). · Food Security, Cultural and Spiritual Values: The rural population in Uganda depends on forests for food security, agricultural productivity and cultural and spiritual values that depend on trees and environmental services from trees. Forests are a major source of medicinal plants, which are mostly used by the rural population (about 90%). 1.3.7 Institutional set up of the Forestry Sector.
Management of the Forest Resource The constitution of Uganda (1995) vests the responsibility for managing Uganda's gazetted forest resources in the government but at different levels and in different agencies. The key agencies are Forest Department, Uganda Wild life Authority and local government (District Councils). All other partners support, collaborate and complement the efforts of the government in providing financial.
and technical support, human resource development or training materials and publicity. The role of each agency has been elaborated upon in Chapter.
Forestry Research The key agency for forestry research is the National Agricultural Organization (NARO) through the Forest Research Institute (FORI). Other government departments that are involved in forest research are the Forest Department (FD), Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and the Universities of Makerere and Mbarara. A number of NGOs are also involved such as ICRAF. National Economic Planning The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is responsible for the overall economic planning of the country and therefore has a direct role in ensuring that forest matters are included in the national planning and allocation of resources. It also coordinates all external financial input to any planning or implementation of forest related activities, which is meant to assist in the government.
FACTORS LIKELY TO INFLUENCE FORESTRY IN UGANDA DURING THE NEXT TWO DECADES.
Factors External to Forests and Forestry.
The most important external factors influencing the forestry sector in Uganda today are population growth and economic growth. These two factors directly or indirectly influence important trends such as the energy consumption patterns, agricultural productivity and the growth of other sectors in the economy which in turn have an impact on the demand and supply of forest products and services. Below is a description of the most important external trends likely to influence the forestry sector in Uganda today. 2.1.1 The Impact of Population Growth on the Forestry Sector.
21,466,000 people increasing at a rate of 2.9% 47% below 15 years 90 persons per km2 37 million 45 years AIDS but this has now been reduced to less than 10% Ebola epidemic ­ still a new phenomena. Land productivity, climate, landforms, vegetation and water supply 15% but increasing at a rate of 6.4% annually 85% but increasing at a rate of 2.4% Lake Victoria crescent, fragile highlands in South west and east of the country Migration of landless people from the densely populated highlands to the lake Victoria crescent forests and other forests to engage in charcoal production and pit sawing for charcoal and timber to sell in urban centres has accelerated deforestation Agricultural expansion into forest land. Deforestation by refugees of forests near their camps Rapid rate of urbanization is increasing the demand for charcoal and timber for construction and furniture. Demand for charcoal is increasing at a rate of 6% similar to the rate of urbanization. The construction industry is growing at a rapid rate of 10 to 20%. Increased protection of government owned forests. Uganda Wildlife Authority now manages 44% of the THF. Collaborative forest management is being tried out in some few cases. Agricultural intensification is being promoted in densely populated fragile highlands by NGOs. The PMA will also promote this. Ministry of Energy is advancing promotion of alternative sources of energy.
POPULATION FACTS Current Population (1) Structure Average density Projected Population in 2020 Life expectancy Threats to the population Factors influencing settlement patterns Urban population Rural population Most densely populated areas Impact on forest cover and demand for forest products.
Measure taken to curb deforestation.
The rapid population growth in Uganda has led to increased deforestation in peri-urban areas and the densely populated fragile highlands in the east and south west. The increase in urban population corresponds to the increase in the demand for charcoal of 6% per annum. This has serious implications on deforestation. Charcoal production accelerates deforestation because unlike firewood, which is mostly got from dead branches and stems in rural areas, charcoal production involves the felling of live trees. Charcoal production is also highly inefficient due to wasteful.
NEMA (1998) 10.
technologies currently in use. The rate of urbanization is faster than that of population growth and unless something is done to provide cheaper fuels to the urban population, deforestation is expected to increase at a similar rate if charcoal remains the dominant fuel for the urban dwellers. The consumption of sawn timber and poles are also increasing with urbanization. Most of the private forests are located in the less densely populated areas around Lake Victoria and the islands. These are also near to the biggest urban centers in Uganda and are a source of construction materials as well as charcoal. These forests are the most threatened in the country. Agricultural expansion into forestland has been discussed in detail under developments in agriculture. 2.1.2 The Impact of Economic Growth and its Related Effects on the Forestry Sector in Uganda.
For the past 10 years GDP growth in Uganda has exceeded population growth indicating a slight improvement of per capita income in real GDP terms. Since the late 1980s and early 1990s poverty levels have been declining largely due to increased economic growth. There is better distribution of wealth in the rural areas as opposed to the urban centres. On the whole, analysts have revealed that an annual decline of 2.5% in absolute poverty was registered in the country between 1992 and 1996 (NEMA, 1999). Uganda is in its early stages of development and as such the rapid economic growth will inevitably impact on the forestry sector for at least the next 20 years. It has accelerated urbanization and with it the demand for charcoal as already discussed. It has led to the growth of building construction and therefore increased the demand for timber and poles for furniture and construction. Economic growth however is also expected to have positive impacts in the long run. It is expected that it will lead to a shift to use of alternative sources of energy, alternative construction materials and furniture other than those from wood, agricultural intensification, increased ecotourism and the development of other sectors in the economy which should reduce the population's dependency on land. Some of these tends are already evident and are in government plans such as the Poverty eradication action plan (PEAP) and the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture (PAM). Some important trends about Uganda's economy and developments in other sectors likely to influence the forestry sector are outlined as below:.
Relevant Facts on Uganda's Economic Growth Average GDP rate for the last 10 years has been 6.5% per year. Average percentage increase of per capita GDP over the last 10 years has been about 3.3% PEAP (1) to decrease percentage of population living in relative poverty from the current 85% to less than 30% in 2020. PMA (2) targets to increase per capita income to US$ 500 per year and rate of GDP growth to 7.5% per year at farm level. Developments in the Agricultural Sector About 200,000 (3) hectares of land are cleared annually for agriculture and grazing. Agriculture employs 86.6% of the population in Uganda, contributes about 40% to GDP and generates 90% of foreign exchange earnings. PMA estimates that area under crop production will increase from 5,300 thousand hectares in 1996 to 6,925 thousand hectares by 2002 ­ an increase of 30.7%. This may lead to increased deforestation unless an appropriate land use policy is in place. PMA will promote farm forestry. Developments in other Sectors The share of the manufacturing sector in the total GDP has been increasing steadily from 8.4% in 1996/97 to 9.1% in 1997/98. The average annual percentage increase is 15.9% (NEMA, 1998). Much of the industrial growth has been in agro processing. The mining sector has grown by 48.2% from 1996 to 1997 as a result of private sector investment. The construction industry is growing rapidly at a rate of 15 to 20%. This is expected to continue for the next 20 years.
1 Poverty eradication action plan 2 Plan for Modernization of agriculture 3 Estimated by Ministry of Agriculture in 1994.
Uganda's main road network covers about 25,757km of which 49% is dry weather, 41% all weather and 9% tarmac. About 90% of the road become impassable during the rainy season. This has a negative impact on the growth of other sectors but has made it difficult to commercially exploit certain forests hence decreasing the rate of deforestation. Government road sector development program emphasizes road maintenance and rehabilitation of rural feeder roads. Telecommunications has been liberalized and several private companies have emerged to provide mobile telephone networks which now span all over the country. The print and electronic media are largely owned by the private sector and reach out to all sectors of the population in many languages. There has been a considerable increase in the number of newspapers, FM radio stations and television channels in the last few years. This is a positive trend and it is expected to help exchange of information, improve access to technologies and strengthen interaction. Dependence on Biomass Energy Use Biomass energy accounts for about 96% of the countries energy consumption. It is used mainly in form of firewood. Total woody biomass production for charcoal, commercial firewood and collected wood fuel has been conservatively estimated at about 28.6 million cubic meters solid. This almost matches the demand, however woody biomass demand (rural and urban) is increasing at a rate of over 3% per annum. (1) Wood fuel is used in households and small-scale industries such as in the production of lime, processing of fish, agro processing and brick making. Firewood consumption in rural areas is estimated at 600 to 900 tons of air-dry biomass per capita per year. In urban areas, the average per capita charcoal consumption was estimated at 150Kg per year (Forest Department, 1992) Some areas in Uganda have a surplus of biomass energy while others have a deficit. The overall picture is that Uganda has a surplus of biomass energy. Woody biomass demand is increasing by over 3% per annum. Nearly 3.5 million tones of wood is commercially sold for fuel annually. Studies show that over one third of that amount (over 1.3 million tones is consumed in the industrial sector (tea, fish, lime). (4) Charcoal consumption is increasing at a rate of 6% per annum. In 1994, about 400,000 tones of charcoal was produced and marketed in Uganda. Urban household use accounted for about 70% of that demand while commercial establishments such as hotels accounted for 25%.
The PEAP strategic objective on forests is to enhance sustainable natural resource management and biodiversity conservation, raise public awareness and ensure access to least cost energy sources. Afforestation and reforestation programs through large scale and household programs, private and public peri-urban tree planting are some of the priority actions to be undertaken by the year 2020. If this plan is adhered to, the demand for forest products will not have adverse effects on the environment. 2.1.3 Changes in relative role of different sectors.
Uganda's economy mostly relies on the primary sector, especially agriculture. Appendix 3 shows the structure of the national economy and the major sector contributions comparing 1992 and 1997. It has been the policy of government to address this imbalance by favouring development in the industrial and services sectors. The services sector has been largely stagnant for some time but growth in the manufacturing, construction, transport and hotel sectors have registered significant growth. However, agriculture is being promoted as the vehicle for poverty eradication in Uganda and will therefore continue to dominate Uganda's economy in the next 20 years. Agriculture expansion is expected to have adverse impacts of forestry if this is not combined with proper land use planning to guarantee control of deforestation, soil erosion, loss of biodiversity it will not be sustainable. 2.1.4 Impact of Modernisation of Agriculture of Forests.
Modernisation of agriculture may put more pressure on land resources as large tracks of land are opened for cropping. There is a misconceived idea that Uganda has 16.7 million hectares of arable.
1 ESD 1995 12.
land and only 32% of this is under cultivation. Most of this so-called arable land is under forests, swamps and woodlands, which are also very necessary for our well being. The expansion into new areas may spell deforestation, loss of biodiversity, increased use of agro-chemicals and possible pollution of surface and ground water. The modernization of agriculture in Uganda could lead to loss of our natural forests and the associated biodiversity, on private land while increasing the number of planted trees on farms. This can be avoided if it emphasizes agricultural intensification as opposed to expansion and the promotion of farm forestry. Trees as an agricultural commodity have offered farmers an economic alternative of using marginal land and have reliev