Forestry Department.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
FRA 2000 VOLUME/BIOMASS SPECIAL STUDY: GEOREFERENCED FOREST VOLUME DATA FOR ASIA AND TROPICAL OCEANIA.
Inventory areas.
Forest Resources Assessment Programme.
Working Paper 5 Rome 1999.
The Forest Resources Assessment Programme.
Forests are crucial for the well-being of humanity. They provide foundations for life on earth through ecological functions, by regulating the climate and water resources, and by serving as habitats for plants and animals. Forests also furnish a wide range of essential goods such as wood, food, fodder and medicines, in addition to opportunities for recreation, spiritual renewal and other services. Today, forests are under pressure from expanding human populations, which frequently leads to the conversion or degradation of forests into unsustainable forms of land use. When forests are lost or severely degraded, their capacity to function as regulators of the environment is also lost, increasing flood and erosion hazards, reducing soil fertility, and contributing to the loss of plant and animal life. As a result, the sustainable provision of goods and services from forests is jeopardized. FAO, at the request of the member nations and the world community, regularly monitors the world's forests through the Forest Resources Assessment Programme. The next report, the Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (FRA 2000), will review the forest situation by the end of the millennium. FRA 2000 will include country-level information based on existing forest inventory data, regional investigations of land-cover change processes, and a number of global studies focusing on the interaction between people and forests. The FRA 2000 report will be made public and distributed on the world wide web in the year 2000. The Forest Resources Assessment Programme is organized under the Forest Resources Division (FOR) at FAO headquarters in Rome. Contact persons are: Robert Davis FRA Programme Coordinator robert.davis@fao.org Peter Holmgren FRA Project Director mailto:peter.holmgren@fao.org or use the e-mail address: fra@fao.org DISCLAIMER The Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) Working Paper Series is designed to reflect the activities and progress of the FRA Programme of FAO. Working Papers are not authoritative information sources ­ they do not reflect the official position of FAO and should not be used for official purposes. Please refer to the FAO forestry website (www.fao.org/fo) for access to official information. The FRA Working Paper Series provides an important forum for the rapid release of preliminary FRA 2000 findings needed for validation and to facilitate the final development of an official quality-controlled FRA 2000 information set. Should users find any errors in the documents or have comments for improving their quality they should contact either Robert Davis or Peter Holmgren at fra@fao.org.
Abbreviations.
BEF BV CATIE Cirad EDC FAO FORIS FRA GIS SNU UN-ECE VOB WD WCMC Biomass Expansion Factor Biomass of inventoried volume Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza Centre de coopération internationale en recherche agronomique pour le développement Eros Data Centre Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations Forest Resources Information System Forest Resources Assessment Geographic Information System Sub National Unit(s) United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Volume Over Bark Wood Density World Conservation Monitoring Centre.
Introduction.
The assessment of environmental functions of forests is essential for FAO Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (FRA 2000). It directly relates to role of forests in the carbon cycling and maintenance of biological diversity. The present report deals with forest biomass estimate and specifically describes the progress made so far towards the establishment of a geographic information system and an electronic information system, containing integrated cartographic and tabular information for data analysis, modeling and the implementation of special studies on selected thematic elements. A global database on forest biomass is needed to support the information requirements of FRA 2000, including estimates for tree volume/biomass by broad type categories and political units. Information on forest volume and biomass is important for developing global perspectives on wood supply and for computations of carbon cycling for climate change analyses. The first step was to screen and analyze the existing information on volume and biomass and to organize the existing knowledge in the framework of the existing FRA Forest Resources Information System. Given the various sources and types of forest volume data available at FAO Headquarters in Rome, an in-depth review of existing documentation was undertaken, specifically aimed at assessing the completeness and reliability of baseline data. Following the review, the organization and classification of the baseline documentation in country boxes conforming to the general procedures adopted within FRA was undertaken. The classification of baseline documentation included the coding of forest inventory specifications, including information such as the description of the surveyed area, sampling method, author and reference year. Of the entire body of documents reviewed, those forest inventories and/or documents that were considered of some utility were entered into a general database, Biomass.dbf. Of these documents, those considered relevant to the FRA Volume/Biomass Special Studies were described in further detail in a linked database. The later documents were considered in function of their reliability. The reporting units of the documents in this database, Bio_tab.dbf, were then georeferenced into the FRA Geographic Information System. The following is a detailed report of the sequence of steps taken, from the review of existing documentation to the georefencing of the data.
The Review of the Existing Documentation.
The review of the existing documentation was organized in the following steps: · Review of the documentation present in the documentation room of the FRA project · Search at the Forestry Library and at the Main Library of FAO · Partial Search of the GFSS database.
In the documentation room, the work proceeded country by country. At the beginning a screening of all of the documents inside of the country boxes was done. In this way a first selection of the documents containing information on volume/biomass was achieved. For the same country a search through the virtual library (intranet) was done do verify if other useful material was present at the Forestry Library and at the Main Library of FAO. At the Forestry Library only documents that are 7-8 years old are stored. Considering that for the most part, forestry inventories were dated 1960-70 most of the documents reviewed were found either in the documentation room or at the Main Library. The consultation of documents in the Main Library was not immediate as the documents required some days to be acquired. For these reasons the review of documentation from the Main Library was conducted in parallel with the work in the documentation room. After a personal communication with Ms. Annalisa, a review of the country boxes at the Forestry Library was done to avoid the possibility of missing the most recent documentation not yet registered in the intranet database. Finally a fast screening was done also of the GFSS database. However, no relevant documents not already found in either the documentation room, Main or Forestry Libraries were found. The documents of the GFSS database appear to be secondary documents, i.e. government reports. In total 248 documents were reviewed. The selected documents were then analyzed in-depth with the aim of assessing their completeness, i.e. meeting the requirements necessary to satisfy the Volume\Biomass Study. The requirements can be summarized as follows: · · · · all species were considered in the inventory volume was reported for all species, minimum diameter was inferior to 40 cm (d.b.h), reliability of the data.
Regarding reliability, the sampling design, the intensity of the inventory, the use of stand and stock tables or how many trees were cut and measured were carefully examined. At the same time the consistency of the data was verified. Even if the document didn't satisfy completely the requirements but were for different reasons interesting they were entered into the general database and marked in the field Bio_util as "F" (false). Inventories reporting data for the inventoried area as a whole, without giving details per forest block or unit, were considered as one spatial unit. For those inventories reporting data for forest blocks where it was not possible to locate geographically with sufficient precision, the block location average (the weighted average) between the strata was calculated and applied to the whole area inventoried. Out of the 211 documents reviewed, 94 were considered to meet the requirements of the Volume/Biomass Study, resulting in forest inventory data entered for 2865 blocks. To achieve one of the objectives of the work, attention was paid on how to locate the area and the plots inventoried from a geographical point of view. Most of the documents were without a map. Some maps were annexed but supposedly were lost. In others there were maps but without any coordinates. In some inventories, while the maps were absent, the description of the area was so detailed that geographically locating the area was possible. However, this was possible only when the limits mentioned were natural limits, e.g. rivers, coastline, etc., or administrative boundaries at sub-national levels. For this I took advantage of the map library (A.G.L.). Normally these maps were at 1:500000/1000000 scale.
Organization of Baseline Documentation.
For all the documents entered into the general database, a fotocopy of the front page was made, the id code was written in red ink in the copy and placed in the volume/biomass folder. The actual documents found in the documentation room were grouped and placed in their respective country boxes. On the label of the country box, the name "volume" was added to indicate the location of the documents considered most important for the Volume/Biomass Study. If the document was found at the Forestry Libray or at the Main Library, only a fotocopy of the front page was added to the country box.
Compilation and Coding of Meta Information Related to the Forest Inventories.
Two databases were created in Fox Pro to store meta information directly extracted from the inventory reports: Biomass.dbf, containing the more general information (Table n.1) and Bio_tab.dbf, with more specific information (Table n.2). The two tables were linked via the id code, where of the six characters, the first 3 represent the FORIS Country Code and the last 3 are a serial number. The structures of Biomass.dbf and Bio_tab.dbf are the following:.
Structure for table Number of data records Date of last update Memo file block size Code Page Field 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Field Name Numeric ID COUNTR Y AUTHOR BIBL_RE F PUB_DAT E NAMEOFI NV INV_DAT E NATIONA L GEOLOC ATIO INVAREA MAP STRA_CR IT DESIGN INTENSIT Y COVERA GE DIAMETE R VOL_TYP Type 4 Character Character Character Character Character Character Character Logical Character Numeric Logical Character Character Character Character Numeric Character 25 4 1 254 10 1 100 200 9 25 Width 6 10 150 254 4.
c:\alessa~1\biomass\biomass.dbf 248 01/12/1999 64 0 Dec Index Collate.
19 20 Total.
E BIO_UTIL Logical NOTES Memo.
Description.
ID COUNTRY AUTHOR BIBL_REF PUB_DATE NAMEOFINV INV_DATE NATIONAL GEOLOCATIO INVAREA MAP STRA_CRIT DESIGN INTENSITY COVERAGE DIAMETER VOL_TYPE BIO_UTIL NOTES Table 1.
Country code (FORIS).
Country code (FORIS) and serial number Country Author or Organization Title of the document Date of publication Name of the inventory Date at the end of the field work The administrative level of the inventory Location of the area inventoried, name of the district, or any useful reminder Area in hectares covered by the inventory "T" when the inventory provides a map Information about the use of stratification or not Inventory design and sampling methods Intensity of the sampling Species for which the volume was reported Minimum diameter (d.b.h) of trees for which the volume is reported Volume type: under bark, over bark, with branches etc. "T" if the document at the end of the review and GIS georeferencing procedure satisfied all of the requirements and could be used in the volume/biomass study Description of particular information.
Structure for table Number of data records Date of last update Memo file block size Code Page.
c:\fao\max\biomass\bio_tab.dbf 286 22/12/98 64 0.
Field 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Total.
ID ID GIS REPO_UNIT UNI_AREA VOL_HA SAMP_ERR STAND_STOC COMMENTS GEO_COOR.
Character Character Character Numeric Numeric Numeric Logical Memo Logical.
Width 6 3 50 10 5 5 1 10 1 92.
Field name ID ID_GIS REPO_UNIT.
Description Country code (FORIS) and serial number Unique ID used to link the information with the GIS Report unit of the inventory or block.
UNI_AREA VOL_HA SAMP_ERR STAND_STOC COMMENTS GEO_COOR Table 2.
Area in hectares of the report unit Volume in cubic meters per hectare Sampling error "T" if stand stock tables were provided Information and additional information on the volume or reporting units "T" if the coordinates were available.
Georeferencing Forest Inventory into the FRA Geographic Information System.
Not all of the inventories had a map with which it was possible to geographically locate the area inventoried. The reasons for this were different. The map was annexed in a separate document but this document was not found. The map should have been annexed with the report but the envelope-page was empty. The map was just a scratch map without coordinates. There was map of the global area inventoried but not of the different units or strata. Or only the coordinates of the fours corners were available. In order to georeference the volume, depending on the information available, different procedures were applied. In the case of a missing map, the description of the area was very useful and from this it was occasionally possible to understand and locate the area inventoried in a generic country map. Infact very often inventories' limits were considered natural limits such as rivers, lakes, or administrative boundaries. Due to this, it was very important to invest time and energy to find country maps with the same information reported in the inventory description. In order to achieve this, the library (A.G.L.) was very useful. Normally the map used was at 1:500000/1000000 scale. When it was possible to locate the area inventoried in a map with coordinates, the procedure was the following: · The borders of the area inventoried (the smallest unit for which the volume was reported) were drawn on an acetate with a 0.2 mm pen. In order to save time during the next steps, if the units were more than one block or additional inventories covered in a neighboring zone, they were included on the same lucid paper. · At least four tic marks (normally six or nine) were drawn on the acetate and their id and coordinates reported in a tixxxxxx.txt file (xxxxxx represents the id code). · The polygons drawn on the acetate were scanned at 200 dpi, and saved as a compressed .tif file (imxxxxxx.tif). · The files were imported into Arc\Info GIS and vectorized. For corresponding tic marks, tic points were added. · The cover was then edited to clean all the superfluous arcs. All the needed corrections were done. · To georeference the map, a cover of just tics was created and projected. Very few inventory maps included information on the projection system characteristics. When it was not possible to figure out the projection system, the projection characteristics of the topographical maps used in the respective countries was adopted. The cover with the polygons was "Transformed" on the tics cover earlier projected. · A new Item in the coxxxxxx.pat file was added to register the Id_gis code. · The polygon labels were added and coded with the Id_gis code. When it was not possible to locate the area inventoried on a map, but the coordinates of the four corners were provided, the procedure consisted in building a cover of polygons directly from a .txt file where the coordinates of the fours corners were reported. The ID of the polygon reported in the .txt file corresponds to the Id_gis. In this way it was possible to avoid the labelling phase. When two or more inventories covered the same area or part of it, to keep the polygons separate, and consequently the volume, the Region function of Arc\Info was used.
5.1 The Case of India.
One of the problems with the Forest Inventory Data of India, coming from the "Goverment of India, Forest Survey of India, 1993. The State of Forest Report 1993" was the fact that we didn't know with sufficient precision the position of the inventoried area and its shape. So the question was: At what feature and from what geographical point of view, could we link the Forest Inventory Data? Different possibilities were evaluated; e.g., to associate the inventory data to a feature point, a circle with the size proportional to the volume data, or a rectangular feature. In the end, considering the fact that forest inventories regard generally only forested areas we decided to proceed as follows:.
The vegetation map1 and the administrative unit map2 were combined in an overlay and linked to a database. From this new map we knew where the forest was, what class of forest a certain polygon was, its size and the administrative name of the area. All the polygons of the vegetation map belonging to a single volume data were selected to develop the forest inventory map plot. As a result we had our data geographically georeferenced with a probable shape. Data inventory was georeferenced and the volume attributed to the equivalent vegetation map units (polygons delimiting the classes). As result, a forest inventory plot map was generated. A new item was added at the polygon cover and polygons have been labeled with the appropriate Id_gis code. The vegetation map used is going to be replaced by the National Forest Vegetation Map at scale 1: 3.500.000 based on visual interpretation of Landsat imagery-1991-1993.
5.2 The Case of National Forest Inventory of Indonesia.
Data was available in a .dbf file for all the 2735 plot-clusters in a 20x20 km grid (see Sampling Design description). No useful map was provided. Due to the necessity to georeference them, an Arc/Info routine was developed to locate each of them. You can see the data for The National Forest Inventory of Indonesia in the Annex 1.2 .
The following annexes contain samples of the most important fields from the two databases. As they are generated in Access, the annexes can be made available on hard copy upon request to FRA Programme.
The map was prepared by the International Institute for Vegetation Mapping (ICIV) Toulouse, France, for FAO. It was drawn on FAO base maps of 1:5,000,000 scale in a Miller Oblated Stereographic Projection. The manuscript was prepared from information current in approximately 1980. The mapping projects and reports were finalized in 1987. The map was digitized between 1988-90.The map was digitized by the Canada Lands Data System (CLDS) Division of Environment, Canada, for FAO 2 For more information see the work "Estimating Actual Forest Volume using Forest Inventory and Climatological Data" 9.
Appendix 1: Indonesia National Forest Inventory.
Inventory plot.
