Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security.
Technical Consultation Report Editors: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Dr. Penkwan Chombreeda Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand Dr. Hathairat Rimkere Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Organized in Partnership with FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Kesetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University Bangkok, Thailand and Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme United States Agency for International Development University of Georgia, USA June 9 to 12, 1998 Kesetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
The designations and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
ISBN: 974-87222-9-5 All rights are reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of purpose and extent of the reproduction should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Oganization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100, Rome, Italy.
Editorial support: Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Dr. Penkwan Chombreeda Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand Dr. Hathairat Rimkere Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
For copies write to: Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
The report captures the outcome of the Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector for Household Food Security." This consultation was a collaborative effort of the Women in Development Programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Kasetsert University, Thailand and the USAID Peanut Collaborative Research Support Programme, USA (Peanut CRSP). We encourage such collaboration with research institutes and research networks to strengthen FAO's efforts in mainstreaming gender concerns in research and technology development. The role of women in cash crop in the Asia-Pacific region takes many forms and cuts across many crops. Their participation could vary from the extensive involvement of women in rice crop cultivation in South East Asia to intensive roles of women in plantation crops in South Asia. In many countries of the region, peanut is an important cash as well as food crop and is grown either in large acreage or in the homegardens. This crop has the unique character of being a cash crop with high market value, requiring intensive labour demand and at the same time it offers direct food value with minimum processing to enter the daily diet of the household. It also proves to be a product amenable for sale in small-scale food vending markets to generate cash income for women. Women's role in the peanut sector contributes to household food security and thus making the peanut sector a good entry point to assess the role of women in the cash crop sector. The document presents the summaries of the papers and a synthesis of the discussions on gender roles in production and consumption aspects in the peanut sector. It is envisaged that it would contribute to our continued exploration of gender dimension in various crops. I congratulate the Kasetsart University faculty and staff for organizing this meeting; particularly those associated with Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute. I also thank Peanut CRSP Management Entity in University of Georgia, for their support to this activity.
Prem Nath Assistant Director General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific November 1999.
Acknowledgement.
The participants, organizers and sponsors express their profound thanks and appreciation to Kasetsart University and in particular to the Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute for the successful hosting of the Technical Consultation and for warm hospitality extended to them. The Technical Consultation also wishes to place on record its warm appreciation to Dr. Revathi Balakrishnan, Dr. Penkwan Chompreeda, Dr. Hathairat Rimkeeree, Dr. Patricia C. Jimenez, Dr. M.F.U. Mia, Mr. Chen Changbing, Dr. Shova Patrabansh and Ms. Sumalee Sunthornnarurangsee for chairing the sessions and to the secretariat which prepared the report in time for adoption. Thanks are also due to the resource persons. The Technical Consultation expresses its sincere appreciation to the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific and Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program-USAID for their support and assistance. We record our thanks to Mr. Jumpoth Ruayjaroensap, Manager Mae-Ruay Snack Food Factory Co. Ltd., for facilitating the technical study tour.
Hyperlinks to non-FAO Internet sites do not imply any official endorsement of or responsibility for the opinions, ideas, data or products presented at these locations, or guarantee the validity of the information provided. The sole purpose of links to non-FAO sites is to indicate further information available on related topics. This electronic document has been scanned using optical character recognition (OCR) software. FAO declines all responsibility for any discrepancies that may exist between the present document and its original printed version.
I. Introduction II. Conclusions and Recommendations III. Country Specific Recommendations IV. Country Reports: Summaries V. Organization of the meeting VI. Resource papers: Summaries Annexes Annex 1: List of Participants Annex 2: Programme.
Suggested Model for Linkages: A Suggested Model for Linkages: B.
Gender Roles in Peanut Sector In Selected Asian Countries.
Glossary of Acronyms FAO KAPI KU Peanut CRSP RAP USAID WID Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute Kasetsart University Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific United States Agency for International Development Women in Development.
I. INTRODUCTION.
The Technical Consultation on "Gender Roles in Peanut Sector and Household Food Security" was held from June 9 to 12, 1998, at the Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-industrial Product Improvement Institute, Kasetsart University, Bangkok. The consultation was supported by the Women in Development Programme of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (WID FAO RAP) and the USAID Peanut Collaborative Research Support Program (Peanut CRSP). The Kasetsart Agriculture and Agro-Industry Product Improvement Institute (KAPI) provided the leadership in organizing the Consultation and technical support. Hence, the Technical Consultation was an outcome of collaboration between three organizations that have a commitment to understand the gender roles in the peanut sector and to improve household food security by enhancing women's participation in production and consumption. Peanut crop has the unique characteristics of being both food crop and cash crop in small holder production systems. It is a also an important commercial crop, since peanut is the basic commodity for a wide range of commercial products such as oil, snack food and animal feed and other by products use in packing. Peanut is also a key ingredient in Asian culinary preparations. In this region, women play an important role in seed selection, cultural practices, in harvest and post harvest processing of the peanut crop. So, women share significant responsibility along side with men, in the peanut sector, which is important to ensure for foodsecurity in determining both access and availability of food at the household level. Given the wide range of use for peanut crop in food system and commercial enterprises, women's role in the crop is also important in the wider context of national food security. The Technical Consultation focus was to identify the gender differentiated responsibilities of women and men in the peanut sector from production to processing and marketing. From such a review examine the central role women play the peanut sector that have relevance for household food security. The countries represented in the Consultation were Bangladesh, Cambodia, China PR, India, Lao PDR, Nepal, The Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. The Experts at the Consultation represented diverse subject areas of expertise and institutional experiences.
II. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
2.1 Gender Roles in Peanut Sector and Household Food Security The technical papers and country papers presented in the consultation examined the aspects as relevant to: a) the importance of peanut crop in the household food security and b) gender roles in the peanut sector. From the view point of household food security, peanuts have a high protein content. Hence they can be an important item in the food chain to improve the nutritional status of children, women and the aged. In terms of access, peanuts are cheaper than animal product as a protein base. As a cash crop, peanuts provide opportunity to earn an income thus increasing the family's ability to purchase a better quality food resulting in improved nutrition. Since peanut production is labour intensive, it generated local labour demand and thus employment. These economic interactions generate income for the hired labor and thus in such agriculture labour households, the access to food could improve. From the cultivation perspective, the peanut crop as a nitrogen fixating crop improves the soil fertility and land of improved soil fertility can be put to use for cultivating other crops. A diversified cropping system adds to the income potential that could mean more food for the farm household. Peanuts are a good source of livelihood to augment family income with a potential to improve access to food. Additionally, peanuts are an acceptable nutritious food to maintain and improve the nutritional status of the family. Peanuts are a women's crop in a small farmer production system. In peanut production, women are involved at all stages of crop production, processing and food preparation. In the peanut production system, men do heavier jobs but claim fewer numbers of jobs. Women do the lighter jobs but serve in greater number of activities. Within peanut sector, in food preparation, at the industrial level, men hold the managerial jobs and women are the workers. At the household level, women do most of the work. Review of the documents and small group deliberations brought out a classification of activities for men and women in the peanut sector. Table 1 provides the information on the gender roles in peanut sector as analysed by the participants. The table indicates that men and women are equally involved in every aspect of production, though the frequency and levels of involvement varies by the task. At the production end both women and men's work in all aspects of production except those related to pest control through application of chemicals and maintaining machinery and equipment. But women play a key role in seed selection in peanut crop cultivation. Hence they have the primary responsibility for quality and quantity of crop produced. Women are more involved in hand shelling of peanuts but machine shelling is mostly male task domain. Women hare heavily involved in peanut processing phase. Women are more often responsible for selling peanut as snacks. In the consumption end, women have the primary responsibility for cooking and thus hold the key to the quality of the food consumed and the food security of the household members.
Gender Roles in Peanut Sector in Selected Asian Countries.
Segment Crop production Land Preparation Planting Seed Selection Fertilizer/manure application Weeding Mulching Irrigation Pest Control: Chemical Application Equipment Maintenance Harvesting Harvesting: Manual Harvesting: Mechanical Hauling the produce/Transportation Post Harvesting Separation Drying Grading/clearing/sorting Storage Shelling: Manual Shelling: Mechanical Processing : family operation Processing : Commercial By-product Utilization Marketing Selling by products: Family Selling by products: Commercial Selling : peanuts as food: Snacks as family enterprise/Vending Selling : commercial enterprise Household Production Fuel Collection Water Collection Cooking Tasks Women Men.
X X XX XX XX.
X X XX XX X X XX XX X X X X.
X X XX X X X.
XX X X X XX.
Note: X and XX show relative share of tasks involvement. X meaning less frequent involvement while XX more frequent involvement.
2.2 Current Understanding of Gender Concerns by Research and Extension Services.
The common research practice does not give any specific attention to gender issues. But in a case like dehulling, especially since females are involved, the simplification of the process through simple modifications may be suggested. In Thailand research linkages between Department of Agriculture Extension and Kesetsart University resulted in developing new Peanut Technologies. The technology is disseminated through Development of Agriculture Extension, to rural clientele. Among the clientele, 70% are women who implement the technology and the beneficiaries are 50% each of men and women. It should be noted that:.
Gender concerns are gaining importance nowadays. Larger number of women scientists, managers, researchers, extension agents are available these days. Extension services are now also reaching women. Control is still in the hands of men.
2.3 Methods to Develop Linkages between Researchers and Extensionists to Improve Women's Access to Peanut-sector Technology First and foremost extension agents should not make any sort of discrimination in transferring technology. However, as women are physically less strong, special attention should be given regarding transfer of appropriate technology to them. Second, the peanut sector technology should also be inclusive of by-product utilization. Third, it is important that policy makers should be educated and made aware about the production, utilization and nutrition value of peanuts. Fourth, awareness creation about the utilization of byproducts as an integrated approach in order to generate income may play an instrumental part to expand women's role in the peanut sector. Fifth, it is critical to identify the linkages among the various institutions and agencies involved in research, extension and agriculture production policies. 2.4 Proposed Models of Linkages to Enhance Support to Women in Peanut Sector The consultation proposed the following Models of Linkages among the actors involved in peanut sector development and promotion. Both the models place the women at the centre to support women's role in the peanut sector. Model A and B present somewhat similar linkages, while the first is process oriented and the second takes presents stakeholders' linkages. Additionally model A takes into consideration the segments in peanut sector to which women contribute.
Suggested Model for Linkages: A.
Suggested Model for Linkages: B.
The proposed models assume that women farmers will go to extension agents for better technology in the peanut sector. In order to assist women better, researchers will develop technologies and pass them to the extension personnel for dissemination at farmers' level. Further, policy makers will support both researchers and education for extension staff that may facilitate improved transfer of technologies. 2.5 Steps to Support Women's Role in Agriculture Including Peanut as a Cash Crop At the production level the following actions require attention to assist women as farmers:.
Provide more resources to women. The resources identified are credit, land, extension service, tool/equipment, knowledge/skills and access to market Support to improve women's participation in decision making Gender equality in the distribution of benefits Involve women in all stages of technology development and transfer Information dissemination should reach women Gender sensitization to those involved in research and extension through gender awareness sensitization programmes Technical and skills training for women Provision of adequate post harvest handling facilities Efficient marketing support mechanism that women could use Provision flexible credit/financing schemes.
At the consumption level, the following areas deserve attention to assist women as farmers and consumers:.
Information on nutrition value of peanut as food Methods to cook and process peanuts to preserve nutrition value Training for women in peanut processing Provision of resources for processing and finance for investment Follow-up activities in all areas of transfer of technology to women Promote peanut product, and assist to improve sale.
III. COUNTRY SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Consultation also identified country specific recommendations as relevant to gender roles in peanut sector for food security. This section presents these recommendations. 3.1 Bangladesh a. Develop gender-sensitive guidelines on better ways to address the technological needs and priorities of rural women on the role of local/indigenous knowledge systems in technology development and policy concerning the latter. b. Upgrade and broaden the information base on different aspects of women's role in agriculture. c. Undertake studies of female enrollment in agricultural education institutions in order to develop country strategies to increase female student enrollment and the number of female extension workers. d. Develop learning resource materials to train young rural women to improve peanut technology skills for technology transfer. e. Develop gender-sensitive training and educational materials for policy-makers and planners to improve household food and nutrition security among women-headed households. 3.2 Cambodia a. Recognition of importance of peanut as food and cash crop through agricultural and rural development policies to support production. b. Peanut cultivation should be included in the agenda of agricultural support services, with specific focus on institutions providing education, training and other services. c. Relevant government agencies must be geared toward an understanding of the role of peanut cultivation in food security. d. Research should be directed towards linking peanut cultivation needs to overall agricultural production. e. The socio-economic dynamics/gender roles in the peanut production system should be understood. f. An understanding of the role women play in peanut planting should be a precondition for the development of strategies intended to improve food security. g. Gender analysis should be part of policy formulation and programme planning in agricultural sector. Gender awareness and sensitization training should be made available to planners and policy makers. h. Gender sensitive-research findings should be incorporated into extension programmes to ensure that rural women's needs related to production are being addressed. i. Rural women's needs should be observed in decision-making on agricultural research including peanut enterprises. j. Collaboration between researchers, extensionist, and women's groups needs to be strengthened. k. It should be recognized that women managed production and controlled income from agricultural production including peanuts and its marketing which might have an impact on poverty reduction. l. Promotion of income opportunities for women that would lead to intensification of peanut cultivation and adoption of innovations such as improved stoves, that save both labour and natural resources.
m. It should be recognized that agro-processing and related micro-enterprises have an important role in increasing income from primary peanut activities. These activities, if organized as separate income-generation activities, rather than as an extension of homework, would enable women to pay full attention to technical requirements and to upgrading of their own skills. n. Efforts should be made to improve the process of listening and learning from female farmers and to facilitate the representation of women in agricultural policy making bodies. o. It is important to recognize that peanut cultivation is typically a family activity and thus it is necessary to learn about gender roles by region and in association with the activities of other family members. 3.3 China PR a. Provide women with enough input support such as finance and technology to help them develop family-based peanut production and processing. b. Organize and implement courses on peanut technology management and trade for women and at the same time provide assistance to solve problems faced in peanut production. c. Encourage women to set up peanut processing enterprises and strengthen their capabilities to become economically independent. 3.4 India a. Incorporate female farmers' perceptions into peanut technology development. b. Examine the workload associated with production practices. c. Develop policies to address issues on women's access to input and output markets in the peanut sector. d. Carry out need assessment of women in groundnut production by engaging women in on-farm research. e. Involve women and men in participatory breeding and varietal selection in the peanut sector. f. The following are suggested as potential areas of research where gender dimensions can be more specifically addressed: · In-situ conservation, seed networks, participatory seed collection and evaluation. · Labor-cost effective integrated pest and disease management practices/strategies. · Resource management practices - tillage, sowing operations, irrigation, soil nutrient management, weed management, and harvest and post-harvest processing. g. Strengthen user perspectives into adaptive research within the formal research sector and apply participatory techniques in adaptive research and technology transfer. h. Organize special field days for women farmers, providing them with a forum for feedback to researchers on women's needs, with access to specialized knowledge and information, not always available through male-oriented extension systems. i. In field research apply a balanced mix of gender-sensitive participatory methods, and other techniques of data collection. j. Beyond the specific research topic of gender analysis, continue to include women into consultative processes and information dissemination mechanisms.
k. Develop pragmatic approaches and realistic indicators and robust tools for monitoring the gender component of research programmes. 3.5 Lao PDR a. Target farm households for a main training program related to peanut sector, as a priority means for development of quality and productivity improvement in Lao PDR by the following measures: · collection, evaluation and dissemination of market information. · assistance in the planning and scheduling of production. · securing a market for producers. · advice on the best practical post-harvest practice. · coordination of inputs and credit delivery. · provision of transport, storage, and post-harvest facilities. b. As a follow-up to the gender research so far completed, initiate field programs for gender integration. 3.6 Nepal a. Women should be provided with additional productive assets and technical information along with assistance on improving quality and quantity of the product and access to research and appropriate technology. b. Provision of training, education and extension services to women entrepreneurs in various fields of intervention in order to enhance their production capacity and ensure product safety. c. Develop gender-sensitive training and educational materials to support improvement of household food and nutrition security. d. Develop self-sustainability and empowerment of women through income generating activities through the practice of equal rights in access to resources. e. Create awareness on the importance of the peanut crop for household food security and family nutrition. f. Encourage women's participation in decision-making processes in the adoption of peanut technology. g. Encourage utilization of peanut by-products as a resource for derivative products in an integrated way to generate income among women for female self-reliance. 3.7 Philippines a. Provide opportunities for training to improve women's technical capabilities for peanut cultivation and enterprise development. b. Integrate activities related to production, processing and consumption related to make peanut production profitable. c. Develop post-harvest technology and labor-saving equipment to lessen the burden of work on women peanut producers and processors. d. Link women peanut producers/processors with practicing scientists in institutions involved in research and development associated with agricultural science and technology to ensure that they will have direct access to research results. e. Women should have access to opportunities for capability building, training and participation in research.
Strengthen the entrepreneurial capacities of women through the provision of project development and management training. g. Improve support by ensuring equitable opportunity and access to credit (including the simplification of requirements). h. Farmers should use the government agencies' support services on production, processing and post-harvest handling of peanuts, investment counseling and market information and/or market matching. i. Farmers should receive information on policies, issues and developments in relation to the peanut industry. The information should be as relevant to legislation and executive orders passed to support, funding and other forms of assistance provided to production, cultivation, processing and marketing. j. Establish well-functioning cooperatives of women producers/processors of peanuts to overcome constraints stemming from marketing intermediaries. 3.8 Sri Lanka a. Conduct simple surveys to identify the respective roles of women and men in groundnut production (from seed selection to processing marketable value-added products) in randomly selected districts. b. Sensitize the relevant policy makers by using survey findings. Together with other agents develop a program to increase ground-nut production and introduce new groundnut products. c. Develop a follow-up mechanism at the initial stages of the program directed at policy makers. d. Study the groundnut market (market channels of collection and distribution and linkages, controls by various interests and the strengths and weaknesses of the marketing system). e. Observe the groundnut consumption patterns of a cross section of the society (e.g. income, ethnic groups, age). 3.9 Thailand Most rural women in peanut production do not know about advances in peanut technology, they commonly use only traditional practices. A programme should be developed to support rural women and to cover of them in areas of peanut production and processing such as by:.
training programmes. development of tools and equipment appropriate to women. support income-generating projects.
3.10 Viet Nam a. Transfer appropriate post-harvest technology, especially of peanut dryers to reduce mold and prevent generation of mycotoxin in general and aflatoxin in particular. This will help farmers to enhance product quality for domestic consumption and for export and reduce post-harvest losses. b. Introduce methods of using shellers to improve farmers' productivity. c. Encourage the consumption of peanuts in daily diet of the peanut farmers' families to improve their nutrition as a support to Vietnamese government's nutrition activity program 1996­2000.
3.11 Recommendations for Collaborating Organizations a. TCDC opportunities for research on gender roles in peanut sector should be identified. b. USAID Peanut CRSP-FAO RAP-KAPI-KU collaboration in this area should be strengthened. c. USAID CRSP should support additional activities in Asia with a focus on gender roles in the peanut sector both in research and technology transfer. d. Expand the CRSP network to include the participants of the consultation.
IV. COUNTRY REPORTS: SUMMARIES.
Participants presented a summary of each country statement. The presentations focussed on importance of peanut in household food security both as a food crop and as a crop with cash income potential. Furthermore these participants examined the respective roles of men and women in peanut production and processing in their countries and gender specific concerns to improve women's potential for income generation in the peanut sector. 4.1 Bangladesh Sustainable agriculture and effective rural development cannot be pursued without explicit recognition of the substantial contribution of rural women. Among oilcrops grown in Bangladesh peanuts rank third position both in area and production volume. Their potential is great as a cash crop contribute much to improve family income in rural areas. Women in Bangladesh can play a vital role in production, application of transferable technology, generating new technology and providing production inputs to increase the productivity of peanuts. In peanut production and processing, women share equal responsibilities with men in the case of marginal farmers, from land preparation to seed storage. Besides, at home scale women prepare many food items from peanuts for family needs and for sale for cash income. So women farmers can play a leading role in maintaining peanut production for food, fuel and health. Awareness of women's role in production, crop management, improvement and protection are vital issues for a developing country such as like Bangladesh. Women can participate more fully in decisionmaking rather than men alone when it comes to technology acceptance as well as in family guidance. Therefore, women should be trained well in technical, managerial and organizational aspects of improved peanut production and processing. 4.2 Cambodia The contribution of peanuts to the economy of Cambodia is very important. The GDP share of all crops including peanuts but apart from rice was 10% in 1990, 11.5% in 1992 and 10.1% in 1994. Peanut production is most directly contributing to household food security by providing direct access to food. A peanut crop can be harvested and prepared as food and fed to the family members, often on a daily basis. In the case of Cambodia, peanut production contributes to food security in two fundamental ways. First, through the provision of a greater diversity of food items those improve the quality and the nutrients available to farm families. Second, a large proportion of peanut producers sell surplus produce. Hence, peanut production is an important supplementary cash-generating activity for many poor households in Cambodia. Women play a very important role in peanut cultivation as they are the primary farmers due to loss of men in civil-war. Throughout the history of Cambodia, women always produced 60 ­ 80% of all food. Rural women in Cambodia still play a significant role in household food security, such as agricultural production, providing economic access to food for household and ensuring nutritional standards for household members. The participation of women in post-harvest phase such as preparing boiled, roasted, and fried peanut is also necessary. Women sell processed peanut products in local markets or near schools as a snack for children. Women have traditionally increased their income by selling the surplus generated by their work in the peanut cultivation. Men normally do not participate in peanut processing and marketing activities. 4.3 China PR.
In China, peanuts are one of the four traditional oil crops since from among a total of 31 provinces, 27 have land under peanut production. The importance of peanuts for household food security is shown by its role as a subsistence crop. More over due to the high quality, people's demand for peanut oil has risen year after year with increase of living levels among the people of Chi