RAP PUBLICATION 2001/05.
Workshop on gender-sensitive local planning.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Application for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy, or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org Technical support: Ms Revathi Balakrishnan, PhD Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO regional office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok.
Ms Mary Rhodes, PhD Oregon State University Corvallis OR USA Cover credit: Apinya Petcharat FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok For copies, contact: Ms Revathi Balakrishnan, PhD Regional Rural Sociologist and Women in Development Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok 10200 Email: Revathi.Balakrishnan@fao.org Fax: 66-2-697-4445.
ISBN No: 974-7946-15-7.
Food and Agriculture Organization aims to achieve elimination of hunger and sustainable food security for all. The technical expertise across the organization is deployed to a singular purpose of elimination of hunger and poverty reduction among the marginal groups and disadvantaged populations across the globe. As globalization proceeds in accelerated phase, bringing prosperity to the already advantaged communities of people, those who began their lives with fewer options may face persistent barriers to keep pace with changes. The rural communities would face greater risk for livelihood if the local solutions were not put in place. Asian countries recognize this challenge and support the efforts to devise local strategies in the context of globalization. Hence, the trend in these countries is to develop local governance institutions and foster stronger local leadership to assist communities to face the social threats and economic risks. Countries in Asian region have a long tradition of local governance and now they are being formalized in structures promoted by national governments. The past and new governance structures and processes have to fit together to improve governance at the local level. The current social equity concerns and complex financial transactions can pose stress on the local governance system. The planning structure could become increasingly formal and the new leaders may lack the awareness and capacity to deal with new norms of equity including gender equity and accountability for equity. Hence, FAO regional office for Asia and the Pacific organized a workshop as a capacity building effort to foster the local planning perspectives to be gender sensitive. During the FAO workshop on "Gender Sensitive Local Planning" officers responsible for local planning administrations explored the issue of integrating gender considerations in local planning. The workshop deliberations examined the current local administrative structures and planning processes to determine current status and constraints to promote gender sensitive.
approaches in local planning. The workshop activities resulted in developing a framework for gender sensitive local planning. The information shared and the recommendations generated by the participants are presented in the publication. The recommendations are addressed to both FAO as well as members countries who participated in the meeting. I sincerely hope that the publication will serve as guide to improve the local planning efforts to be increasingly sensitive to gender considerations. There is much work yet to be done to improve the planning process to be gender responsive and address the women's concerns in the local planning strategies. But, I believe we have made a good beginning in the workshop and will continue to strengthen our joint efforts to achieve gender equality through appropriate local planning approaches and participation of all stakeholders.
R.B.Singh Assistant Director General and Regional Representative FAO regional office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand November 1, 2001 FAO REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC, BANGKOK © FAO 2001.
Hyperlinks to non-FAO Internet sites do not imply any official endorsement of or responsibility for the opinions, ideas, data or products presented at these locations, or guarantee the validity of the information provided. The sole purpose of links to non-FAO sites is to indicate further information available on related topics. This electronic document has been scanned using optical character recognition (OCR) software. FAO declines all responsibility for any discrepancies that may exist between the present document and its original printed version.
GLOSSARY.
BACKGROUND.
GENDER-RESPONSIVE PLANNING.
PARTICIPATORY INFORMATION FOR LOCAL PLANNING.
PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.
VENUE AND DURATION.
COUNTRIES REPRESENTED AND PARTICIPANTS.
SELECTION OF OFFICE BEARERS.
PROGRAMME.
SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS.
OPENING REMARKS.
SHARING EXPERIENCES: ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED IN GENDER-SENSITIVE.
LOCAL PLANNING.
COUNTRY PRESENTATIONS AND RELATED DISCUSSIONS.
Bangladesh.
Cambodia.
Pakistan.
Thailand.
Sri Lanka.
Viet Nam.
SECRETARIAT PAPERS.
Women-inclusive local planning: cultivating a new planning culture.
Institution building for participatory gender-sensitive local planning.
REGIONAL REVIEW: COMMONALTIES AND SHARED CONCERNS.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
COUNTRY-SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS.
Bangladesh.
Cambodia.
Pakistan.
Sri Lanka.
Thailand.
Viet Nam.
COMMON FRAMEWORK FOR RECOMMENDATIONS.
Overall policy framework for gender-sensitive local planning.
Information generation.
Human resource development.
Workable institutional setup.
Monitoring mechanism: how to implement workshop recommendations.
ACTIONS FOR FAO.
FAO RAP SUGGESTION.
NOTE OF THANKS REFERENCES ATTACHMENT 1 LIST OF PARTICIPANTS ATTACHMENT 2 PROGRAMME.
ACFTU ACWF ADB AIT ARI BBS CAAS CASD CCAP CDWP CEDAW CUSRI DCB DCC DDC DOAE DOAE DVDC ECNEC ESCAP FAO GWDO IRDP LGPAD MLD MOF MPI MWCA NCFAW NEC All China Federation of Trade Unions All China Women's Federation Agriculture Development Bank, Nepal Asian Institute of Technology Agricultural Research Institute, Bangladesh Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences Community Action for Social Development, Cambodia Centre for Chinese Agricultural Policy Central Development Working Party, Pakistan Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women Chulalongkorn University Social Research Institute Decentralized Capital Budget, Sri Lanka District Coordinating Committee, Sri Lanka District Development Committee, Nepal Department of Agriculture Extension, Bangladesh Department of Agriculture Extension, Thailand Divisional Coordinating Committee, Sri Lanka Executive Committee of the National Economic Council, Pakistan Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Food and Agriculture Organization Great West Development Office, China Integrated Rural Development Programme, Sri Lanka Leading Group for Poor Area Development, China Ministry of Local Development, Nepal Ministry of Finance, Nepal Ministry of Planning and Investment, Viet Nam Ministry of Women and Children Affairs, Bangladesh National Committee for the Advancement of Women, Viet Nam National Economic Council, Pakistan.
NPC NWCWCSC PC PDWP PFA PRA PRDC PRI RAP RAPS RD SDA SDPC SDWW UDA UNDP UNESCO UNICEF VC VDC VDC WID.
National Planning Commission, Nepal National Working Committee on Women and Children of the State Council, China Provincial Council, Sri Lanka Provincial Development Working Party, Pakistan Platform for Action, Bangladesh Participatory Rural Appraisal Provincial Rural Development Committees, Cambodia Panchayat Raj Institution, India FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Sustainable Development Rural Development, Pakistan FAO Rural Development Division State Development Planning Commission, China FAO Women in Development Service Urban Development Authority, Sri Lanka United Nations Development Programme United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization United Nations Children's Fund Village Committee, China Village Development Committee, Cambodia Village Development Committee, Nepal Women in Development.
BACKGROUND.
The twentieth century development gains in the Asian region were marked by spectacular success in the economic sector of a few countries. But world focus on such success hid from view the inequities in the economic and social spheres existing within these successful countries as well as in other slow-growth countries. "Several countries in the region achieved high growth rates and rural poverty saw a substantial decline during the 1980s and 1990s. However the impact was not uniform across the region. Three fourths of the world's poor (1.3 billion) live in the rural areas of the Asia and Pacific region. The South Asian sub-region in particular has been the home of two fifths of the income poor of the developing countries. Most of the poor in the region are small and landless farmers living in rural areas. The poorer people are found among women, children and youth, older persons, ethnic minorities and victims of disasters and conflicts. Poverty involving the rural sector could remain the significant issue in the first decade of this century, considering the fact that about 80 percent of the world's economically active population are engaged in agriculture in Asia." (PAI 1998) Hence in the Asian region, concerns such as the following continue to dominate the development agenda: achieving economic growth with shared prosperity among rural communities; fostering gender equity in shared prosperity; fostering local responsibility for planned development and sustainable resource management; and achieving effective local governance that promotes prosperity and gender equity in rural communities. Most recently the Asian approach to development has been guided by principles of equity and participation. These two principles emerge in programming ideas such as participatory local planning, equitable participation of stakeholders that is inclusive of women and neglected clients, effective local governance and fostering the local community's responsibility for local prosperity and ecological sustainability. Though equitable participation in local planning was promoted by development agencies and civil organizations, commitment to these processes varies widely among and within the countries. It has become increasingly acceptable to weigh gender considerations and to include women in development. But gender-equity commitment is yet to be consolidated and actions are yet to be formalized as consistent programmatic approach.
Gender responsive planning.
FAO is committed to and does promote gender-responsive planning. In brief, FAO genderresponsive planning has come to mean essentially "first, learning about how gender shapes the opportunities and constraints that women and men face in securing their livelihoods within each cultural, political, economic and environmental setting. Because women and men have different tasks and responsibilities, and different livelihood strategies and constraints, they must each be consulted. There is overwhelming evidence that development has to address the needs and priorities of both women and men in order to be successful" (FAO 1999b). According to FAO, an ideal gender-responsive agricultural planning process would entail the following elements (FAO, 1999b):.
Information flow up and down, and across the planning ladder to provide valuable information to all stakeholders;.
Dialogue, negotiation, consensus building and the creation of channels of communication that allow farmers and planners at all levels to take decisions together about appropriate actions; Building linkages and partnerships among stakeholders at the same level as well as between levels; Empowering women and men to express their needs and aspirations in the institutional planning process at all levels; and Follow-up to community-based planning efforts and to the commitment of resources (both financial and human).
The elements of gender-responsive planning such as free information flows, dialogue, negotiation, participatory decision-making, building of linkages, articulation, resource allocation and action often confront gender-defined hurdles and barriers preventing women to be included as key stakeholders. But most often due to reasons of cultural conditions and resource and social constraints that are gender specific, women are not effectively integrated in the local planning process.
Participatory information for local planning.
Information generation for local planning has been the main rationale for practising and promoting methodologies such as participatory rural appraisal, participatory research and participatory learning; however, it also suffers from a few weaknesses such as: i. ii. iii. insufficient analysis, synthesis and use of qualitative information as tools for local planning; inadequate contribution of women in the participatory process to identify gender-specific concerns for local planning; and lack of approaches to use effectively sex-segregated qualitative information for participatory local planning.
It is recognized that "the generation and use of information on rural gender issues compete with many other priorities ... Important rural/urban, gender, age and other differentials at the subnational level are overlooked in research and evaluation. This makes it difficult for issues of social equity and the specific needs of male and female agricultural producers to be adequately addressed" (FAO 1999a). The gender-specific limitations stemming from applying information generated from participatory processes and gender gap issues stemming from involving women in participatory local planning should be examined by planners at the provincial and district levels, to streamline the planning process with local communities. The recommendations and outputs from an earlier FAO expert consultation on participatory research methods and gender database for local planning were integrated into the deliberations of this workshop.
PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.
The purpose of the workshop was to support an objective review of the current status and local planning situation, in order to develop strategies for gender-sensitive planning that also addresses the multidimensional needs of the local clients in agriculture and rural communities. The definition of local clients should be inclusive of all, but in this workshop a special emphasis was on women as local producers and managers of local resources as well as on gender concerns that affect women's participation in local planning. In order to address the aspects of multidimensional needs and gender in planning, it is important that the dialogue include contributions drawn from multi-sectoral and multidisciplinary professionals involved in planning at provincial and district levels. Hence the workshop invited the representation of professionals who are involved in integrated planning for local development. In the workshop the dialogue was among the representatives from the agencies involved in planning for and with rural communities and they developed gender-sensitive planning guidelines. The focus was on integrated local planning that would be gender sensitive. In order to achieve the above purpose, the specific workshop objectives were as follows: i. ii. iii. iv. v. Review the current situation on integration of gender concerns and inclusion of women in the local planning process, and programme development in local government. Examine specific models of people's participation in gender-sensitive planning for local development that achieves prosperity with equity and equitably shared responsibility. Compare country-specific experience of success in the integration of women in the local planning process and use of sex-segregated information for local planning. Compare the country-specific constraints to include rural women's concerns and women's participation to achieve gender-sensitive planning. Working within the country-specific framework for local planning processes and local development mechanisms, identify strategies for gender-sensitive strategies and women-inclusive approaches.
VENUE AND DURATION.
The workshop was held at the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok. The workshop lasted three days from 27 to 29 June 2000.
COUNTRIES REPRESENTED AND PARTICIPANTS.
Countries attending were Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam. The participants were nominated by the respective governments, and their participation was facilitated through FAO representations in these countries. The UN agencies and research institutions situated in Thailand also were invited to participate. The following agencies were represented: the Asian Institute of Technology, the Economic and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific, Chulalongkorn University, Kasetsart University, the United Nations Development Programme and UNICEF. A list of the participants is included as Attachment.
Among the 18 participants, 6 were men and 12 were women. The participants' backgrounds were such that they represented multidisciplinary expertise; they had responsibility for planning, for local governance or for agriculture planning.
Selection of office bearers.
The meeting unanimously elected the following office bearers: Chairperson: Nargis S. Nahar Deputy Chief Planning Commission Government of Bangladesh Vice Chairperson: W. H. Munasinghe Deputy Director Human Settlement Division Department of National Planning Ministry of Finance and Planning Government of Sri Lanka The FAO secretariat provided a reporter for the workshop, Leonie Venroy, SNV Netherlands.
PROGRAMME.
The programme was planned for three days, from 27 to 29 June 2000. R. B. Singh, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, delivered the opening address. Dong Qingsong, Deputy Regional Representative, also attended the opening session. The opening session programme included a video presentation entitled "Phantom statistics" which highlighted the lack of statistics on women in agriculture and rural communities. The programme also included sharing of experience by representatives from the invited agencies and self-introduction by the participants. A participatory exercise on understanding gender was done. Another media presentation in the programme, entitled "Net worth", reported on women's participation in an aquaculture programme in Bangladesh. It was produced under the aegis of the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research, by the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources. The programme included country presentations from Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam. The country papers were prepared following the outline provided by FAO. The RAPS group technical officers representing rural development and women in development areas presented two secretariat papers. By design, the format of the workshop allowed exchange of views on participation, planning at the local level, institutional mechanisms for local planning and gender-responsive planning, constraints and potential modality for gender-responsive planning at the local level. The discussions were facilitated to draw the participants' views on prevailing conditions at the country level for gender-sensitive local planning, and the need and type of information needed for gender-responsive planning. The country representatives also generated recommendations that were directed to promote and strengthen gender-sensitive local planning at national level and for an FAO follow-up to the workshop. The workshop programme is presented as Attachment 2.
SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS.
This section summarises the presentations made in the various sessions of the workshop.
Opening remarks.
R. B. Singh, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, delivered the opening remarks. Dr Singh stated that the region is marked by diversity in culture, political systems, area occupied, population size and size of economies managed. He highlighted the importance of women as crucial human resources for development. His statements included a declaration by the UN Secretary-General on the importance of including women in the development process and the commitment of FAO Director-General Jacques Diouf on the role of women in achieving food security. Dr Singh also cited the Sustainable Development of Water Resources Director's declaration on the role of policymakers to focus on integrating women in agriculture and rural communities. He also quoted Chairman Mao's slogan "Women hold half the sky" to illustrate women's roles in nation building. The Assistant Director-General applied genetic principles of exclusion and inclusion to social systems. He stressed that, based on the principles of inclusion, the participatory process promotes partnerships hitherto excluded. The local planning process helps us to learn from each other and helps us to think and act for local development. He emphasized the importance of making planners understand and acknowledge the contribution women make. He cited the example of India, where one third of the seats in Parliament are reserved for women, and thus it is up to women to use this opportunity. He commented on the timeliness of "Gender and food security - The role of information", published by the Women in Development Service, FAO Rome, and indicated that the participants should receive copies. Dr Singh concluded that in this workshop all participants should identify ways to increase the real inclusion of women in participatory local planning, and should make recommendations based on experience that would help FAO develop strategies for local planning.
Sharing experience: organizations involved in gender-sensitive local planning.
i. The Asian Institute of Technology: The Asian Institute of Technology is an academic institute which focuses on research. AIT has undertaken research on the local planning process. Its findings indicate that the local planning process in projects is done with a participatory rural appraisal (PRA) component. The belief is that in a bottom-up process PRA is essential to get community-based data from women and men groups. However PRA does not always ensure women's participation or represent women's needs as such. When the new PRA team arrives in the study area, the women prefer to express only socially accepted issues. Chulalongkorn University: Chulalongkorn University, as an academic institution, is not oriented towards field-level development interventions. About ten years ago, research with UNESCO focused on the scientific study of women at the local level concerning their choice of vocational training. The findings indicated that women always worked in the domestic sphere. When training turned to technical aspects, women would not get the training. Men wanted to receive technical training themselves and according to them.
they would transfer the knowledge to their wives. Women should have training for their roles as mothers and wives and in domestic skills. Health and maternity care were important, but women wanted training to raise their earnings. In the end, the women's workload was heavy, but they still had no control over their earnings. More time was needed to create an attitudinal change among men. Based in Chulalongkorn University, the Social Research Institute (CUSRI) has a women and youth studies programme, which currently focuses on indicators of children's rights and child labour. It also has the Social Water Project, through which a database on women is placed in the CUSRI website. CUSRI mission and activities are very much gender sensitive. A two-year project on indicators of wellbeing as understood by villagers uses focus groups to collect information and CUSRI insists that women of all ages be included in the focus groups. ESCAP: ESCAP has no field activities on gender-sensitive local planning. The focus is on micro-credit institutions as they function to improve women's access to resources, to review the effectiveness and modalities for micro-credit outreach and to identify effective tools from this review. ESCAP efforts are directed to strengthen community-based organizations through training on how to involve women in development. Kasetsart University: The Centre for Cultural Studies at Kasetsart University promotes gender-equality issues and focuses on the socioeconomic impact of the crisis. Its studies indicate that women have less time than men to participate in community work and that it is difficult to get women on decision-making seats. Baseline data still lack genderdisaggregated data. The village head has a strong influence in the community. Women don't raise their voices. People's partnership is still wanting. UNDP: Participants representing UNDP informed the meeting on projects in Thailand on poverty alleviation, and the integration of components with the projects that relate to agriculture and gender-sensitive planning at the village level. The emphasis is on building the capacity of rural farmers in a bottom-up approach with the involvement of nongovernmental organizations. UNDP officers exchange views and pay as much attention as possible to gender aspects in the field of poverty eradication. NGOs, government offices and others have undertaken exercises on gender-sensitive planning, which have resulted in work plans with more visible gender aspects. UNICEF: The UNICEF main office in Thailand is in Bangkok. Two area-based offices have recently been opened, namely in Chiang Mai and Khon Kaen provinces. UNICEF area-based staff monitors and follows up projects supported in the Upper North and Northeast, respectively, to make sure UNICEF support has real impact. In the Northeast, gender matters are relatively new issues. It was found that a large number of women participate in community activities.
Country presentations and related discussions.
The country presentations were prepared following the terms of reference provided beforehand.
6.3.1. Bangladesh.
Mrs Nargis Shamsun Nahar Deputy Chief Planning Commission Government of Bangladesh i. Summary.
Women's fundamental right to equality is guaranteed in the Constitution of Bangladesh and women are entitled to special provisions in their favour from the State. In spite of this, women in Bangladesh face much deprivation and discrimination and many disadvantages. This adverse situation can be attributed to the cultural legacy, traditional societal expectations, their disproportionate burden without equitable remuneration, lack of opportunity and social and religious taboos. The gender issue has been addressed in the national development plan with a view to integrate women in the development process. Specific projects and programmes in different sectors have been taken up with this end in view. Appropriate policy backup and institutional framework have also been provided for effecting positive socioeconomic changes among the womenfolk. In Bangladesh a tiered organizational arrangement achieves local planning. At present the local government in Bangladesh is based on four tiers, viz. village council, union council and municipality, upazilla (sub-district) council, and district council. Of the four, only the union council has been activated. So far elections have been held for the union councils, pourashavas (municipality) and one city corporation. The union council has played a vital role in village development for more than a century. It is the entry point of grassroots politicians. A union council has a chairperson, nine (male and female) members and three female members, all directly elected. Local and regional planning, district planning and rural area planning are relatively new ideas. At present, there is no distinct local planning countrywide. The successive five-year plans of the country have emphasized local-level development with a focus on the rural poor, in one way or another, but actual achievements have been rather limited due to constraints, at the top of which is the lack of participation by stakeholders, who have had hardly any role in development initiatives. In accordance with the present government's fundamental principles, the Fifth FiveYear Plan envisages that each of the local-level institutions will have well-defined and extended functions. They will participate in the preparation of development programmes and projects at the local level. Standing committees for such fields as law and order, health and family planning, agriculture, irrigation and the environment, education, social welfare, development of women and children, sports, culture, and fisheries and livestock will be established. The standing committees will assist the local government bodies at all levels to conceive, design, formulate and implement local-level development programmes and projects. Local government bodies therefore will be vested with roles and responsibilities. They will focus particularly on how these institutions can be made participatory to enable the local people to provide inputs for planning, and how, through a process of bottom-up planning, the development programmes and projects of the various tiers of local government will be integrated. The local government ministry has a direct network at grassroots level - in other words, with local people. The departments and agencies under the division carry out various programmes and projects undertaken and financed by the division. The Ministry of Agriculture and its agencies, including the Department of Agriculture Extension (DOAE) and the Agricultural Research Institutes (ARI), are responsible for providing support services for the production of food crops. DOAE is responsible for the transfer of new technology from ARI to farming communities and it provides feedback to the research system on the technological needs of the community. DOAE has an administrative structure up to the union level and its supervisors are the extension agents who contact individual farming families.
To make local planning more effective the local institutions have to be activated in proper ways, community-based working groups have to be formed from the grassroots level and rural people have to be trained so that they can participate in the process. Above all, policy commitment on devolution needs to be given effect expeditiously because devolution will provide the necessary framework of partnership in the development process between the national and local levels. Data for local planning can be collected from censuses and other survey reports published by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), such as the Household Expenditure Survey, Labour Force Survey and Agricultural Census. Besides, other studies and surveys are carried out from time to time by the Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies, NGOs, UNDP, UNICEF and other private organizations. A series of district study reports were prepared by BBS, and afterwards the Planning Commission prepared some 30 district reports. The data available are usually gender-based. Regarding data about women's development, some inventories have been prepared at various times. These data are generally used by the Central Planning Organization, various actors in the socioeconomic development scenario, viz. sponsoring ministries, executing agencies, NGOs and development partners. The government of Bangladesh has endorsed, without any reservations, the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference for Women held in Beijing in September 1995. Accordingly, the government has already formulated an action plan on the basis of recommendations of the sectoral-need assessment teams for the 12 critical areas of concern identified by the platform. The Ministry of Women 