RAP publication 2003/09.
A handbook for training of disabled on rural enterprise development.
Johanne Hanko.
In collaboration with.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, 2003.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Rural Development Officer, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
For copies write to: Wim Polman Rural Development Officer Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
There are an estimated 400 million persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific. Physically and/or mentally impaired persons constitute a major group of the most vulnerable poor in this region. A vast majority of persons with disabilities live in rural areas and many of them are small farmers who depend on the agricultural sector for food and livelihood security. A major cause of disability in rural areas is malnutrition caused by extreme poverty and food insecurity. In addition, more and more farmers are disabled by road or machine accidents due to mechanization and commercialization in the agricultural sector. Violence and armed conflict are another major cause of disability among rural people in the region. Rural people with disabilities must confront major barriers to achieve food security and sustainable livelihoods. Dominant social and cultural biases make it doubly difficult for them to overcome these hurdles. A large majority of country-level rehabilitation programmes for disabled persons do not give due attention to the specific needs of small farmers. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has taken up the challenge of increasing awareness among policy decision-makers and the general public about the plight of rural persons with disabilities. Pilot activities have been initiated to empower farmers with disabilities, including women, and make them economically self-reliant by developing their self-confidence and skills to become independent, smallscale entrepreneurs. The FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific provided regional and country-level support for the implementation of the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons that ended in 2002. As part of these efforts, the FAO regional office provided technical assistance and coordination in FAO pilot project activities aimed at small-scale enterprise development by disabled farmers, based upon mushroom production, processing and marketing. FAO's technical assistance included provision of agro-processing technologies adapted to the needs of physically and mentally-disabled small farmers to help them become rural small-scale entrepreneurs. FAO promotes enterprise development by disabled persons in the region, in collaboration with national governments, international nongovernm ental organizations and self-help groups of persons with.
disabilities. In 2002, governments from the Asia and Pacific region adopted a new Action Plan for a Second Decade for Persons with Disabilities, called the Biwako Millennium Framework for Action 2003 2012. This framework describes the commitments of the Asian and Pacific countries towards the goal of an inclusive, barrier-free and rights-based society for persons with disabilities. FAO endorsed the aims and activities of the Biwako Framework. A major task now lies ahead for all stakeholders in achieving these goals, which, among others, requires enactment and enforcement of the proposed legislation. This, in turn, requires mobilization of the necessary political will for effective implementation of all the instruments already established in the first action plan 1993-2002, covering health, education, information/communication, training, employment and social services for disabled persons. `A handbook for training of disabled on rural enterprise development' was developed to assist FAO member countries and support organizations in the training of disabled persons on small-scale enterprise development. It applies the lessons learned from the abovem entioned FAO technical cooperation project Mushroom production training for disabled people in northeast Thailand, as well as from the Poverty alleviation through market generated rural employment project that was jointly implemented with the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). Better known as Success Case Replication (SCR), the latter project tested a methodology to replicate successful experiences in village-level, micro-enterprise development by small farmers in eight Asian countries. This handbook has adapted the SCR methodology to the needs of farmers and other rural persons with disabilities. This handbook is a practical tool for pilot activities, by FAO and other interested UN agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to empower rural people with disabilities as part of the implementation of the Biwako Framework commitments. It provides an adapted SCR methodology, references and check-lists, and identifies resources for use by specialized training centres, village development workers and other trainers on self-employment of disabled persons as small-scale rural entrepreneurs.
He Changchui Assistant Director-General and FAO Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific.
Acknowledgements.
`A handbook for training of disabled on rural enterprise development' is the outcome of the on-going collaboration between Wim Polman, Rural Development Officer of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and specialized training institutions and other interested agencies within the region, aimed at improving livelihoods of small farmers and other rural persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific. We would like to thank all those people who contributed directly and indirectly in the preparation of this handbook and express special appreciation to Sunee Saisupatpon, Head of the Vocational Development and Employment Subdivision from the Office of the Committee on Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons, Thailand, who provided case studies of mentally and physically disabled successful entrepreneurs; Kannika Saruasuwan, Head of Education and Rehabilitation for the Blind at the Education and Rehabilitation Centre for the Blind in Roi-et, Thailand, who provided case studies and pictures of visually-impaired successful entrepreneurs; and Johanne Hanko who, since 1997, has been working as a technical specialist with the FAO regional office in the fields of rural development, disabled persons in agriculture and agro-industry and disadvantaged social groups. Over the same period, Ms Hanko has been associated with RAP in activities of the UN Thematic Working Group on Disability-related Concerns, which brings together UN agencies, NGOs and others. Working in Thailand for over 13 years, she is also an entrepreneur and specialist in environmental engineering and management.
This handbook is designed as a guide for setting up a smallscale business. Although meant for persons with disabilities, it offers basic knowledge for successful business management and selfemployment for all small farmers to help them in generating income and improving their quality of life. The handbook is divided into four parts. The first part outlines the structure of the handbook. It explains the need for economic self-reliance for rural people with disabilities and how self-employment as a small-scale entrepreneur offers them a good alternative to being hired by another person. It evaluates the difficulties and advantages of this form of self-employment for a disabled person when compared to working for an employer. The second part deals with the crucial aspect of the methodology used in training persons with disabilities. It outlines the importance of the attitude and orientation of the trainers as well as the steps in the process of training, from selecting, motivating and building the self-confidence of the trainees, to equipping them with the skills for starting and operating a small-scale rural enterprise. Disabilities differ in kind and degree and two persons with the same disability may have dissimilar abilities. This section stipulates ways of dealing with specific issues that can arise when training persons with disabilities and the need for follow-up action. The third part reviews basic steps in the preparation and setting up of a micro-enterprise. It looks at the various challenges encountered by new micro-entrepreneurs and those that are specific to persons with disabilities starting a small-scale enterprise. It informs potential micro-entrepreneurs about selecting the right business, reviewing market demand and competition, choosing the size of their planned enterprise and the importance of location. It gives some direction on where to seek funding, resource organizations, where and how to select raw materials, and offers a checklist to verify feasibility. Furthermore, it reviews the various components of marketing and guides potential micro-entrepreneurs through the various steps involved in running the business, including basic accounting, cash-flow and strategic timing for expanding the enterprise. Finally, it addresses.
the advantages of training and explains how the success case replication methodology can and has been used as a tool for training persons with disabilities. Overall, it reviews the major steps in decision making and the need for technical know-how, marketing strategy development, access to credit and funding, accounting and management skills, and informed selection of raw materials. This part does not claim to answer all questions related to micro-enterprise development for persons with disabilities in rural areas. However, the suggestions and ideas presented should help in avoiding problems that are commonly encountered. The fourth part on the success case replication methodology uses examples of successful micro-entrepreneurs as models and trainers for people who wish to start their own micro-enterprise. It examines the methodology, which has been tested in Asian countries, and the strengths and weaknesses of each of its nine steps. It also examines how the methodology can be used to train persons with disabilities in rural areas and explains the role of the field worker or organizer. The handbook is illustrated with case studies of farmers with disabilities who have become successful micro-entrepreneurs. The examples highlight the initial steps in their becoming entrepreneurs, some of the specific problems they encountered and how they overcame their disabilities. The case studies also show how some persons with disabilities who became successful micro-entrepreneurs decided to share their knowledge by training others.
Introduction.
Although many programmes are available for the rural poor, more needs to be done to help the poorest of the poor ­ rural people with physical or/and mental disabilities. Many rural persons with disabilities are forced to go to the city for rehabilitation or livelihood training. More rehabilitation programmes for the disabled are needed in the rural areas. Poor farmers with disabilities, with or without land, need to generate income or supplementary income to become active participants in their family and community, thus reducing the burden of their disability on both family and society. More opportunities must be provided to enable disabled persons in rural areas to generate income and become self-reliant. This guide is designed for government and non-governmental organizations working for the social integration, rehabilitation, training and empowerment of persons with disabilities in rural areas. Its main objective is to give direction on how to prepare persons with disabilities to become active members of society and generate income through micro-enterprise development. Jobs are not readily available for persons with disabilities. Even with special government incentives, many employers refuse to hire persons with disabilities because they think that the disabled person cannot do as good a job as a worker without disabilities. However, it is also not easy for a disabled person to be self-employed. Not all people, disabled or otherwise, are born entrepreneurs. While some can set up a successful micro-enterprise on their own, many, if not the majority of people, need basic training on starting a new enterprise and some advice on its overall management. Moreover, careful consideration is needed before choosing the type of micro-enterprise and its eventual expansion. The aim of this guide is to reduce the risks involved in setting up a new project through careful preparation. People in the field should be able to use this guide as a tool to establish a micro-enterprise for supplementary or main income generation. The guide takes the user through every step to be considered when a disabled person decides to start a small-scale enterprise. Although many of the items may appear logical and simple, the guide should serve as a checklist and.
be adapted to the trainer's entrepreneurial skills and those of the potential rural micro-entrepreneur with a disability. It reviews how a small-scale enterprise can and should be started with minimum capital investment, where this investment can be found and how to use and manage readily available resources. It further reviews the success case replication methodology and how it can be used with disabled persons. This methodology has proven effective for non-disabled persons and offers the same advantages for persons with disabilities. The final part illustrates how disabled farmers overcome their disabilities, become successful micro-entrepreneurs and active members within their families and communities.
Self-reliance through micro-enterprise development.
Most persons with disabilities live in rural areas and, as such, it has become necessary to identify income-generating opportunities for them so they can become self-reliant while remaining within their community. Disabled persons have long been treated as social outcasts and were offered little support in becoming self-sufficient and capable of taking care of themselves and their families. However, things are changing and persons with disabilities are now being recognized as individuals capable of doing. Initially, all help and support programmes could only be found in the cities, forcing rural persons with disabilities to travel to urban training centres. New approaches are now being implemented with the inclusion of disabled children and adults in schools and the workplace respectively. Nevertheless, employment remains difficult for a person with disabilities although several government programmes offer incentives for companies and industries to hire them. The incentives include subsidies for making workplaces accessible to persons with disabilities, special on-the-job training, payment by the government of part of the disabled employee's salary and tax rebates for companies hiring disabled persons. However, many business owners are reluctant to hire persons with disabilities. Most often because of ignorance, employers tend to see only the disability and cannot recognize the capabilities of a disabled.
person. Consequently, self-employment offers an interesting alternative. However, not all persons with disabilities are capable of becoming entrepreneurs, being no different from non-disabled persons in this respect. Several factors have to be considered before starting a microenterprise. The various aspects of a business must be taken into account. Management and administrative skills must be developed. Many people in rural and remote areas, whether with or without disabilities, have already devised strategies and projects that generate sufficient income to sustain their families. These micro-enterprises vary according to country and culture, and can be found in various sectors such as agriculture, aquaculture, sericulture, animal husbandry, fishing, tool repair, and much more. Cooperatives have been organized in some sectors and areas. Case study: With determination, a low-income paddy farmer with amputated leg becomes a millionaire entrepreneur in aquaculture His right leg had to be amputated below the knee after a farm accident in 1992. Yet, 54-year-old Samang Rooplaikha, a former low-income paddy farmer in Thailand's Nakhom Pathom province about 100 km from Bangkok, is now recognized as an active and successful member of his community. A prosperous and well-known entrepreneur, he is an inspiration both within the community and beyond. With only a primary education, Mr. Samang was growing rice and breeding chickens to support his family with six children. Seeking to boost his meagre income and observing other successful farmers, he decided to cultivate black tiger prawns. He learnt about the aquaculture business by himself from books, a successful neighbour and visiting other tiger prawn farms. He started his own black tiger prawn farm with an interest-free credit of 20 000 baht given by the Disability Fund of the Department of Public Welfare. He was able to expand his business after only one year. Determination, hard work and a sound business investment have enabled him to increase his annual income from 40 000 to one million baht in just five years. He is now a prominent aquaculture entrepreneur whose success has been publicised by newspapers and other mass media. Many aspiring aquaculture entrepreneurs from various provinces of Thailand visit his farm regularly to study and learn from.
his example. Mr Samang owns land, a car and a mobile phone. He attributes his success to hard work and willingness to learn constantly. "The key to success is to be diligent and to regularly improve one's knowledge," says Mr Samang. These small-scale entrepreneurs have often encountered several problems, which they managed to solve using existing facilities, resources and understanding. They often know what works and what is needed for their enterprise to be successful. Persons with disabilities need to develop new ways and approaches to accomplish certain tasks and to surmount problems that they would face because of their disability. Small-scale entrepreneurs and especially those with a disability are in a perfect position not only to share their experience but also to teach others like them what to do and what not do, and how it can and should be done. Training rural persons with disabilities in their own community has the advantage of allowing the trainees to remain with their families and to learn a trade that is accepted by the community. Training within their village or a nearby habitation also allows the trainees to exchange experiences with neighbours and make new friends. Since all people come from the same background, have the same culture and traditions, they are better able to understand the needs of each other. Persons with disabilities have tremendous capabilities and courage, and must be given a chance to prove themselves. Capacitating persons with disabilities to become micro-entrepreneurs improves their livelihoods and has beneficial effects on the quality of their life and health. It helps reduce rural poverty and food insecurity and leads to the better integration of disabled persons into their community. Disabled farmers can become self-reliant, capable of generating regular income and thus be proud and active members of their families and communities.
Training persons with disabilities.
Before entering into a new venture, even if it is to be a small-scale enterprise, a person needs to have sufficient knowledge of the work involved in order to make the business successful. In several cases, training is needed in order to learn more about the technical aspects and procedures that will ensure success. This training is often not readily available to persons with disabilities. Several vocational training centres will not accept a person with a disability because they assume that such a person will "slow down" the learning process of other participants. Financing the necessary training is therefore another issue that cannot be ignored. How much does it cost? Who will finance it? Governments and non-governmental organizations around the world are developing special programmes for persons with disabilities. Because such persons did not always have the opportunity to go to school, or could study for only a few years, many disabled persons can barely read or write, or are totally illiterate. Training programmes must be especially developed to take this into account and use hands-on training techniques to teach new skills to persons with disabilities.
Creating the opportunity for disabled persons to become self-reliant.
Trainers must realize their responsibility towards trainees with disabilities because they will play a major role in the future of the trainees; their work will offer disabled persons a chance for a better life with self-reliance, food security and an improved quality of life. The main objective is to enable rural persons with disabilities to become economically self-reliant through income generation as smallscale entrepreneurs. The trainer must keep this in mind at all times during the training. All trainees participate in the training by choice and because they believe that the training course will give them the tools necessary for improving their livelihood. It is the responsibility of the trainer to convince trainees that they can do anything and everything they set their minds to.
Considerations for training of rural disabled persons.
Training must take into consideration the activities of trainees within their community. In Asia, rice sowing and harvesting are the busiest times of the year for farmers and, therefore, it is very difficult to organize training during these periods. Trainees may also have received different levels of education and, therefore, they must be encouraged to work as a team, helping one another. Both trainees and trainers must learn to work together towards a common goal, which is to succeed in starting a small-scale enterprise. If the trainees help each other, they can all learn from one another and will feel happier during the training. Trainees must be well prepared for training in farming and rural activities. They must understand that it is not possible to close the enterprise during the weekend. Rural poor people often work seven days a week since some activities cannot be stopped. For example, animals need to be fed and crops need to be watered every day of the week. Trainers must arrange their schedule according to rural daily realities. The use of a small-scale entrepreneur's experience can be very helpful and highly encouraging for trainees with disabilities. Trainers should include specialists in enterprise development, disability matters, and agriculture and rural affairs. The training can be provided either by one person with all these specializations or by a strategically selected training team. Trainers may work on a rotating schedule. Communication between trainers, trainees, consultants and all parties involved is necessary for an effective outcome.
Motivation and capacity-building.
Trainers will have to prepare trainees for basic learning and for unexpected events that will certainly occur during and following the training.
Four main learning steps.
The objectives and priorities in training rural people with disabilities for enterprise development are:.
4. To improve daily living skills To impart technical capabilities and capacities To develop entrepreneurial skills To establish a network and strategic partnerships.
To improve daily living skills Trainers should focus on the daily realities of the trainees' community life by direct discussion with the trainees and offering appropriate advice: ! Accept who you are and learn to love yourself as you are ! Think positively, and be convinced that you CAN DO ! Be an active member of your family and community ! Be responsible for your life by ensuring food security and quality, and practice good eating habits for yourself and your family ! Be aware of your needs ! Participate in your family and community activities as an equal member.
! Confront and surmount problems through open-minded.
interactions among themselves and in addition, through personal prayers, meditation, reflection and physical exercises.
Trainees must be made aware of their personal limitations and potentials; they must never allow other people to determine what they can and cannot do. Training sessions should create the atmosphere of a large family reunion in order to encourage exchange, sharing, discussion, compassion and emotional.
strengthening. Trainees must learn to listen to the experiences of others in order to learn how to overcome some of the problems and be successful in improving their quality of life. Finally, enterprise development will offer trainees the chance to become self-reliant once they are convinced that they are capable of doing, even if they do it differently. Surmounting new challenges is never easy but always brings a feeling of achievement and success. Case study: Teenager with Down's syndrome earns income and confidence from chicken, duck breeding Fifteen-year-old Darum Bunkum, a resident of Lao Khwan district in Thailand's Kanchanaburi province, suffers from Down's syndrome. The right side of his body was severely weakened and he could study only till grade four. Eight years after he began rehabilitation training, he has recovered much of his strength and became economically self-reliant and confident about the future. When he was seven, he joined the rehabilitation project run by the Foundation for the Welfare of the Mentally Retarded of Thailand under the Royal Patronage of Her Majesty the Queen. The community-based rehabilitation project (CBR) arranged physiotherapy for physically disabled rural children by giving them small cows. Taking the cows out to graze enables the disabled children to exercise their limbs. It helped make Darum's arms and legs stronger. Noting that Darum really enjoyed taking care of the animals, the Foundation gave him funds to buy and raise chickens and Bavary ducks. Workers from the Foundation first trained his parents how to raise the chickens and ducks and manage the income. The Foundation actively followed up on his progress every three months. He also learnt how to inject the birds with vaccine and to prepare their feed according to prescribed formula. Darum could earn enough by selling chicken and duck eggs, ducklings and young chickens to expand his small farm. He now has 50 chickens, 10 pairs of Bavary ducks and five meat cows and earns between 70 to 100 baht per day. He now earns his own income from his enterprise for the first time in his life. A portion.
of the income is used for expanding his enterprise, another part helps meet necessary family expenses and the remainder is put in Darum's bank account. Darum learnt about money management from his parents and is now proud to manage his bank account by himself He is confident he can become physically stronger and also develop his intellectual capabilities to be successful in life. He wants to make chicken and duck breeding his permanent livelihood.
To impart technical capabilities and capacities Trainers must concentrate on the skills required for the successful accomplishment of all tasks associated with the chosen small-scale enterprise that is to be established in a rural area. These skills and tasks will vary from one business to another. For persons with physical disabilities, certain techniques may be needed to replace the "conventional way" of doing things. For example, using the feet or mouth instead of hands has proven very efficient. Certain tools and devices can also be adapted to a person's physical disability. Because training has to be conducted over a limited period of time, the quality of trainers becomes extremely important. Several programmes developed by government and non-governmental organizations use specialized trainers. Nevertheless, trainees prefer trainers who are successful entrepreneurs themselves and can explain from experience the "do's" and "don'ts" of establishing and running a small-scale enterprise.
To develop entrepreneurial skills All aspects of a sustainable rural enterprise must be reviewed and well understood. For details see Part III.
To establish a network and strategic partnerships Regular communication with trainers and all parties involved will provide trainees with timely information about existing training programmes. Trainees should fully exploit opportunities for collaboration with various agencies and organizations. This will also facilitate their acceptance as full members of their community.
The following are examples of organizations and institutions that can be contacted for future collaboration or partnership.
Agriculture extension offices Local disability training centres Technical colleges Universities Private companies Local community small enterprises Organizations for persons with disabilities (local, national and international levels).
Non-government organizations (local, national and international levels).
Central government agencies (e.g. Ministry of Invalids, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Health) 10. Local government agencies 11. UN agencies such as FAO, ILO, UNDP, UNICEF, UNIDO, WHO. 12. Others Finally, because of the importance of marketing in any business venture, strategic partners and associations may support trainees in advising on market opportunities and become potential partners and clients.
Selecting trainees.
The selection of trainees should be based on well-defined criteria. Although many persons with disabilities can perform all required tasks, their motivation is crucial for success. Careful selection of the trainees is, therefore, vital for the successful replication of the enterprise and its future sustainability. Persons with disabilities are capable of accomplishing most of the tasks involved in enterprise development. Nevertheless, certain activities may need to be adapted and strategies developed to compensate for the disability. Moreover, two persons with the same disability do not necessarily have the same capabilities and, consequently, it becomes necessary to understand their abilities while developing the strategy. Every person is different and therefore should.
be allowed to test his or her capabilities and limitations. Trainees must be allowed to develop their own personal way of accomplishing the tasks required in the enterprise. Trainers must be able to give advice, support and direction.
Trainee selection procedure.
Identification of the candidates: In most countries, the names and addresses of persons with disabilities are registered with a government office responsible for their welfare, such as the Ministry of Invalids, the Ministry of Social Welfare or the Ministry of Health. Provincial or municipal governments may also have information on persons with disabilities. Radio or television announcements can be used to invite candidates for training on enterprise development. Information on training should be provided to disabled persons located in the remotest rural areas.
Pre-selection: The disabled person's age and type of disability should be verified. Ideally, the age should be between 20 and 35 years. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated in some cases that the selection of younger or older candidates was fully justified and highly rewarding for both trainees and trainers with the success of the trainee's new enterprise. Persons with multiple disabilities may have difficulties following a 