The forest revenue system and government expenditure on forestry in Democratic Republic of Congo.
A paper prepared for the FAO work-programme component on financing sustainable forest management.
Working paper: FSFM/WP/07.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DG VIII DEVELOPMENT.
THE FOREST REVENUE SYSTEM AND GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON FORESTRY IN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO.
Elie Kabongo Tshikala.
Chef de Division, Industries forestières Secrétariat Général à l'Environnement et Conservation de la Nature Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo.
Forestry Policy and Planning Division, Rome Regional Office for Africa, Accra September 2004.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
FAO working paper on financing sustainable forest management: FSFM/WP/07.
INFORMATION NOTE ON THE FAO PROGRAMME ON FOREST FINANCE.
It is generally accepted that financial considerations represent one of the most important factors that can have an impact on the implementation of sustainable forest management. With this in mind, the FAO Forestry Department has implemented a programme of work on forest finance, to examine how government policies (in forestry and other sectors) affect financing in the forestry sector and the consequences of such policies for sustainable forest management. One of the most important ways in which governments can have an impact on financing in the forestry sector is through the fiscal policies that they implement within the sector. Where forests are owned or managed by the state, the way in which charges for the use of forest resources are determined and implemented can have a major impact on the scale and types of investment in the sector. A vast literature has developed over the last 30 years examining this topic. Other fiscal policies, such as taxes and subsidies both within and outside the sector, can also have a significant impact on the forestry sector. The purpose of this work will be to review the impact of current fiscal policies on sustainable forest management, along with other related policies, such as land tenure, which have an impact on forest financing. However, the work will attempt to go beyond simple financial analyses of current policies (which have largely been done before) to examine the broader social, institutional and political aspects of policy reform. It is hoped that this work will assist forestry administrations to identify practical ways in which they can revise their fiscal policies, so that they can more easily pursue the goal of sustainable forest management. This work has been funded through the FAO Regular Programme and the EC Tropical Forestry Budget Line (FAO-EC Partnership Project on Sustainable Forest Management in African ACP Countries). A large part of the work has been produced by national consultants and institutions, with the supervision and assistance of FAO. Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted, but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information that they feel would be useful for this work. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below, from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information about this programme of work, can be obtained: Mr Adrian Whiteman Forestry Officer (Sector Studies) Planning and Statistics Branch Policy and Planning Division Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale delle Terme di Caracalla Rome, 00100, ITALY Tel: (39-06) 5705 5055 Fax: (39-06) 5705 5137 Email: adrian.whiteman@fao.org Mr Peter Lowe Forestry Officer FAO Regional Office for Africa Gamel Abdul Nasser Road PO Box 1628 Accra, GHANA Tel: (233-21) 675000 ext. 3404 Fax: (233-21) 668427 Email: peter.lowe@fao.org.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED.
BEF CBC CBF CEO CMO DAB FAO Fc FMS FOB FPM FRFC Gécamines GOALR GOT IBRD MFMO NTO NZ OFMH OMPD RFC account SFM TOT UNDP USAID Belgian Franc Central Bank of the Congo Congolese Business Federation Customs and Excise Office Congolese Monitoring Office Decentralised Administrative Bodies Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Congolese Franc Forestry Management Support Free on Board (at port of exit) Forestry Products Menu Funds for the Reconstitution of Forestry Capital Congolese State mining company General Office for Administrative and Land Revenue General Office for Tax International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Maritime Freight Management Office National Transport Office New Zaire (former Zaire's currency) Office for Forestry Management and Hunting Office for Management of Public Debt Resident Account in Foreign Currency Sustainable Forest Management Tax on Turnover United Nations Development Programme American Agency for International Development.
This report describes the forest charges collected in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It shows that the forest revenue system is complicated, due to the large number of charges and the many different institutions collecting charges. Total forest charge collection is also generally very low. The report discusses the strengths and weaknesses of different types of charges and makes a number of recommendations for improvements to the forest revenue system.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
This report has collected what little information is available about forest revenue collection in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It describes the general structure of taxation in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which includes a large number of different taxes and fees collected by many different agencies. There are also a large number of different forest charges, including charges on: area; volume harvested; turnover; export sales; equipment and workers; and turnover. In general, forest charges are quite low and the value of these charges has been eroded by inflation and changes in the currency used in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Currently, the total amount of forest revenue collected is probably around USD 1.5 million per year. The process for collecting charges is quite simple, but there is little follow-up and supervision and it is suspected that tax evasion is high. Charge collection is decentralised and many of the charges are collected by provincial authorities. In terms of expenditure, there is a Fund for the Reconstitution of Forestry Capital, but the operation of the fund has been paralysed by the war. In addition to this, the Ministry for Land Affairs, Environment, Fishing and Forestry has an investment budget and operating budget from the central government. In 2000, the investment budget allocated to the ministry was around USD 10.9 million and the operational budget was USD 156,000. These two budgets account for five percent and 0.4 percent (respectively) of the total public expenditure on investment and operating costs. The report highlights the strengths and weaknesses of each of the different forest charges currently used in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The main recommendations of the report are that the forest revenue system should be simplified; greater efforts should be made to follow-up and control tax evasion; greater attention should be paid to taxation of the informal forestry sector; and charges on the export of unprocessed products (logs) should be increased. However, improvements in financing the forestry sector will require an improvement in the general economic and security situation in the country.
INTRODUCTION.
This national report follows on from the project for sustainable forest management in the ACP African countries (GCP/RAF/354/EC) set up by FAO in the framework of its partnership programme with the European Community. Its aim is to aid national forestry administrations in ACP countries to direct their policies and institutions, as they should, so as to meet the goals of sustainable forest management in tropical African forests. The realisation of the above-mentioned aim comes through the knowledge and utilisation of flows of money from tax revenue on the one hand, and the public spending of the countries concerned on the other. This study proposes presenting the tax system for forestry as it currently operates in the Democratic Republic of Congo before proceeding to calculate the flows of money from the forestry sector to and from the government. In order to present the study in this way, we have subdivided the work into six parts. The first part deals with general points concerning Congolese taxation and ends with a presentation of forestry resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo and their importance compared to other forestry countries in the Congo Basin. In the second part, the report describes the tax system for forestry in operation in the country and analyses all the forestry taxes levied by the different bodies involved in tax collection. The third part of the report sets out the forestry tax administration of the country, the system for collecting taxes, the institutions that collect these taxes as well as the amounts of revenue collected. In the fourth part, the report presents public revenue granted by the State. The fifth part outlines State spending on forestry. Finally, the sixth part contains our comments and suggestions which the subject calls for before presenting our conclusions.
Difficulties encountered.
The drafting of such a national report in the absence of financial support and or logistical aid is all the more complicated when it is carried out in an economic environment where informality reigns and where collaboration takes place with a completely demotivated public administration in total decay. Here, where all studies of a sector which do not translate into money, people, as resources of information, become mistrustful and retain information. To overcome this difficulty in part, at least with regard to public revenue from forestry sectors and other sectors in the economy, we decided to research this information a step down from the tax network, that is, with the ministries responsible for forestry and public finance. With regard to taxes for which the rates are well known, we ourselves have collected taxable elements from different sources concerned by this study before going to calculate each tax and to compile all taxes. These calculations thus take out the total amount of revenue due to each service or business which could generate revenue. In relation to information on the State budget (revenue and expenditure), we benefited from the aid of heads of the ministry responsible for forestry in order to obtain statistics on revenue generated in 2000 which we will outline below.
Specialised work on forestry tax literature being lacking, we referred ourselves to publications of the time of the Forestry Management Support Project (FMSP), notably to the work entitled "Proposals for forestry taxation" (Ouellet, 1989) supplemented with the results of our studies of sectors carried out by the Forestry Development Bureau on the changes in proportional tax collected by the Fund for the Reconstitution of Forestry Capital (FRFC), as well as different texts, orders and decrees published by the ministry responsible for forestry to make up the contents of this report. Financial difficulties have prevented us from having photocopies of documents consulted as FAO requested, however we outline, at the end of this report, a bibliography of publications consulted. Finally, we would like to express our thanks to the FAO delegation in Kinshasa, the people responsible for the Congolese Monitoring Office and the General Office for Administrative, Judicial and Land Revenue and Contributions (GOALR) and all selfless persons for their contribution to the drafting of this report. We hope that it may contribute as much as possible to achieving the goals sought by FAO through its project for sustainable forestry management in our country.
GENERAL POINTS ON TAXATION IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO.
The origins of tax collection.
Tax collection goes back to age-old times in history. In the Roman times, there were people responsible for collecting taxes who went around with wicker baskets which they used to transport gifts that the people offered to the Emperor Caesar, through taxes. These baskets were called "Fiscus Cesares" which means "Caesar's treasures", hence the term "fisc" which currently denotes the administration responsible for calculating taxes due and to collect them on behalf of the State.
Historical background on the tax system in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Regarding the tax system in the Democratic Republic of Congo, our ancestors also knew about taxation but in the form of deductions in kind (Dimandja, undated). Indeed, in precolonial times, village chiefs had the right to a part of hunting or harvest produce. When a distinguished visitor was being welcomed, they called on their subjects to contribute hens, eggs and goats so as to cover the costs of this particular visit. In their turn, they were supposed to provide banquets, to feed judges and soldiers and to offer goods to the needy among their citizens. All in all, the chiefs were responsible for finding remedies for problems likely to affect the public health of villagers, their personal safety and the safety of their goods. In order to achieve this, the support of each and every person was required. When colonial authority arrived, the Congolese of days gone by knew another type of tax called the "capitation tax" (caput means head) which means "tax per head", which consisted of a tax on each individual, without taking into account their resources or their assessments for tax. The aim of this tax was to obtain revenue for the State and particularly to combat inactivity by obliging those people liable for tax to get the necessary money to pay tax, thus forcing natives to abandon an economy of subsistence and to develop a market economy. Following on from this, a number of citizens developed trading and craft activity. Thanks to their determination and their business sense, they succeeded in creating quite significant and prosperous business. Others, luckily, occupied functions which had up until then been carried out by Europeans.
Aspects of the Congolese tax system.
Characteristics of the system.
Like all tax systems, the Congolese tax system is characterised by the multiplicity of taxes notably: · · · direct taxes on revenue; indirect taxes on spending; and taxes on capital.
Due to the regulatory effect of taxes in relation to the present state of the economy, taxation can be either spontaneous or organised by the authorities. For example, progressive taxes on revenue for immediate payment. Such a tax, at a time when revenue is increasing, always levies a bigger part of revenue, thus limiting the possibilities for saving and investment. Structural tax policies can work in encouraging or discouraging certain types of businesses. To encourage certain business people to transfer their activity to new areas for development, the State generally grants aid in two forms. · · Positive form: through subsidies and very low interest loans. Negative form: through exemptions or reductions in tax payments.
The Congolese State can also protect national industry by raising the tariffs on the rights of entry on foreign products in competition with similarly made products made in the country, thus practising interventionism. 2.3.2 The importance and role of Congolese taxation.
The importance of Congolese taxation is recognised at two levels of influence. The economic level. Positive influence - the State can promote national and foreign investment in sectors deemed to be priority areas for tax exemption and other tax advantages. Depending on the effect of costs, taxation can play an anti-inflationary role. Negative influence - taxation can also paralyse economic activity if tax rates are too high. The social level. The State uses tax to ensure the redistribution of revenue. The same applies to those citizens who benefit from reductions because they have several children in their homes.
General state of public finances.
Tax revenue and its redistribution in the country is an integral part of an accounting tool called the national budget. For this reason, we have deemed it appropriate to present here as follows, in few words, the national budget of the Democratic Republic of Congo before dealing with its forestry taxation.
Congolese State budget.
All institutions that aspire to rational management must have a vision and a more or less overall understanding of the process of evaluating and implementing the budget. Thus the budget can be defined as all the forward-planning annual accounts of resources and responsibilities of the State, of communities and public establishments. 2.4.2 Drafting of the Congolese State budget.
In conformity with Order-law number 774/002 of 2 January 1974 amending and supplementing Order-law number 69/0014 of 5 December 1969 pertaining to financial law, the Ministry for Finance is responsible for the preparation of the budget from tax revenue. This role gives it the title of the Ministry of Revenue. The instructions relative to the drafting of the budget of current spending are provided by the Ministry of the Budget. The budget is drafted in the form of a summary table with three columns where item by item the following elements are mentioned: · · · finances used in year X-1; finances allocated for the same items in year X; and finances in year X+1 suggested by financial officers to the budget controllers.
To these elements, there is a table of the number of staff including the personnel under statute and temporary staff, all in six copies and distributed as follows:.
2.4.3 a copy to the service concerned; a copy to the controller of spending; a copy to the head of the division or office for the provinces; a copy to the ministry for central services and to the governors of provinces; and two copies to the Ministry for Finance. Structure of the Congolese State budget.
The Congolese State budget is made up of two large parts divided into the headings of revenue and expenditure as follows:.
2. revenue in the budgetary framework; and revenue for social security.
In the revenue contained in the budgetary framework, there is tax revenue and non-tax revenue (Central Bank, 1995).
Tax revenue is made up of:.
taxes on foreign trade; taxes on the revenue of persons, companies, firms and fines; taxes on goods and services; exceptional taxes on payment of wages, paid by employers; special funds for boosting the economy, agriculture and other; other; and Gécamines.
Non-tax revenue is made up of:.
administrative, judicial and land revenue; portfolio revenue; royalties; Office for Management of Public Debt; and other.
With regard to the spending budget, it is made up of the institutions as follows:.
4. 2.4.4 political institutions (Presidency of the Republic, government, Prime Minister's Office etc.); ministries (more than 25); other services; and spending on order. Implementation of the budget.
Once the budget is approved and promulgated by the parliament, the budget should be implemented and applied. The implementation of the budget is not an automatic exercise. There are the requirements of management to be allied to the demands for rigorous methodology. 2.4.5 Budget commitment.
It is the act which legally obliges the State to take on the task of spending and this act thus renders the State a spender. Nevertheless, the State only becomes a spender definitively when the act that causes the spending is completed. The authority in power approves expenditure and manages the approved spending. Each ministry is by right, the main manager of its own ministry's budget. 2.4.6 Liquidation.
This is the observation and checking of its authenticity and legality allowing for a determining of its exact amount and to charge it to the appropriate budgetary loan. A provisional liquidation is carried out by persons authorising expenditure from each ministry or province. Exception being made for fixed spending or State subsidies, those authorised proceed to.
examine the letter of debt and establish their concordance with the service rendered and with the clauses of the initial commitment. Definitive liquidation is operated by the public revenue offices who monitor the admissibility of what is to be taken on by the treasury by ensuring the quality of documents attached to the declaration of debt, who checks that there is no duplicating with expenses already liquidated and if legal and regulatory provisions have been well observed and which, finally, monitors the regularity of charging the expenditure to the article of the budget to which it is linked. Liquidation, once completed, incurs the recognition of the debt by the State. 2.4.7 Order to pay.
This is the second last stage before payment. It is an order issued by the Ministry for Finance or by a delegated representative to the State cashier or accountant of the public revenue department to pay the debt in accordance with the liquidation. Certain expenses outlined by law can be paid without previous authorisation and others are regularised after payment. 2.4.8 Payment.
This is the accounting stage of implementing the spending budget, which brings about extinguishment and is carried out by a payment in cash or more often by cheque or bank transfer. The bank monitors and carries out payment orders and transfer orders or orders for funds to be forwarded, and it issues letters of credit or credit advice in the name of designated beneficiaries. 2.4.9 Nuances between fees and taxes.
Following this overview of taxation and the Congolese budget, we can say a word here about taxes which sustain the budget (Dimandja, undated). Tax and its characteristics. It is an obligatory pecuniary payment which is definitive and without immediate compensation on the resources of physical and moral persons. It is used to cover expenditure in the general interest of a community. It is characterised by the following eight features:.
8. tax is a means of transferring taxpayers' buying power; tax is a benefit in money, in cash; this benefit is not followed by apparent immediate compensation by the public authorities; coercion is a fundamental characteristic of tax; tax is the means at the State's disposal for policy implementation; tax is determined and collected according to fixed rules and not arbitrarily depending on the good will of the tax administration; tax is owed by individuals and societies due to the fact that they form an organised political community (the State) or because they benefit from revenue or some kind of advantage; and tax is brought to the budget.
Fees. Fees are a pecuniary payment that go to a specific and defined service and which are only paid by individuals who receive a specific State benefit.
Forestry resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
All forestry analysts are unanimous in recognising that the Democratic Republic of Congo, an immense country with a very large surface area at the heart of Africa (2,345,000 km²), has equally immense forestry resources estimated to be 128 million hectares. This last figure represents 58% of all tropical forests in the Congo basin and more than 52% of African tropical forests (IBRD, 1971). Table 1 below shows the distribution of forestry zones in Africa. Table 1.
Country Democratic Republic of Congo Angola Nigeria Cameroon Gabon Congo Ghana Ivory Coast Central African Republic Other Total.
IBRD (1971).
Distribution of forestry zones in Africa.
Total forest area `000 km² % 129 72 31 24 20 20 14 12 2 17 341 38 21 Dense forest area `000 km² % 90 2 52 1.
DESCRIPTION OF THE TAX SYSTEM FOR FORESTRY IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO.
As a system, the tax system for forestry in the Democratic Republic of Congo is founded on the orders, laws and ministerial and inter-ministerial decrees of administrative regulations, which organise the collection of forestry taxes. The orders are signed by the President of the Republic and the decrees by the minister responsible for forestry. We will present here the name of each tax followed by the legal texts (order or decree) regulating it.
Surface area taxes.
This tax is levied by the Office for Forestry Management and Hunting under the Ministry responsible for forestry, in conformity with order number 86-114 of 10 April 1986. It is levied annually at no given period in the year and is currently USD 0.147 per 100 ha in concessions granted in a Supply Guarantee (decree number 042 of 7 February 1994).
Tax on felling permit.
Levied in accordance with decree number 009 of 7 September 1985 by the FRFC, this tax is paid annually when a felling permit is issued. Its value is currently USD 2.00 per hectare.1.
Tax on felled wood.
This tax falls into the domain of decentralised entities, that is, provincial coordinating bodies who levy and use it according to decree number 011 of 27 December 1985. Its calculation is based on information provided by wood harvesters themselves.
Tax on non-wood products (Forestry Products Menus).
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, non-wood products are linked to forestry products menus (FPM). This tax is applied to the purchase of firewood and charcoal, as well as to the harvesting and export of medicinal plants (for example: rauwolfia vomitoria, decorative roots, copal, wood bark etc. in accordance with decree number 42 of 7 February 1994). It is applied as follows: A. Construction wood (logs and poles) Category 1 from 0 to 0,010 m at : 0.28$US/m3 Category 2 from 0,11 to 0,30 m at : 0.28$US/m3 Category 3 from 0,31 to 0,050 m at : 0.084$US/m3.
According to decree number 042 of 7 February 1994, taxation is set based on the rate of exchange of USD 1.00 = NZ 35.00.
Tax on Forestry Products Menus · At harvesting · Rauwolfia · Voacanga and digitalia · Decorative roots · Gums, lacs, copal and other For export · Rauwolfia · Voacanga and digitalia · Decorative roots · Gums, lacs, copal and other.
Tax on transformed wood.
The consumer/buyer of sawnwood and plywood on the local market pays this tax in the form of Tax on Turnover, at 6.75% and which is then forwarded by the seller to the tax services in his area.
Tax on export of logs and transformed products.
The Fund for the Reconstitution of Forestry Capital (FRFC) levies this tax ad valorem to export in conformity with decree number 91 of 29 August 1988 which sets out the means of application as follows: 4% on logs 2% on sawnwood 1.5% on other products.
Tax on export revenues.
This tax is levied by the Customs and Excise Office (CEO) in conformity with order number 86-044 of 8 July 1986. It is 6% of currency brought back into the country. Tax on Turnover (TOT) - also levied by the Customs and Excise Office, this tax is instituted by order number 86-044 of 8 July 1986. Its rate was set in order number 69-058 of 5 December 1969. Another tax of the same name is levied at 18% by tax service agencies in the country. The basis for calculation is based on TOT Model "E" and the product sales contract.
Export taxes.
Tax on exit duties only apply to untreated roundwoods, even logs roughly hewn with an axe or adze, and following species named below:.
Codification of species for export (tax on exit duties) Scientific name Khaya sp Gosweilerodendron balzaniferum Entandrofragme utile Chlorophora exal Terminalia superba Entendrophragma cylndricum Entendrophragma angolense Milletia laurentii Khaya sp Gosweilerodendron balzaniferum Entandrofragme utile Chlorophora exal Terminalia superba Entendrophragma cylndricum Entendrophragma angolense Milletia laurentii.
Code Commercial name HS Code 4403 Wood in the rough 41 African mahogany 42 Tola (Agba) 43 Sipo 44 Iroko 45 Limba 46 Sapelli 47 Tiama 48 Wenge HS Code 4404 Wood simply worked 21 African mahogany 22 Tola (Agba) 23 Sipo 24 Iroko 25 Limba 26 Sapelli 27 Tiama 28 Wenge 29 Unnamed species.
Remunerative tax.
This tax is levied by five State companies: the National Transport Office (NTO), the Maritime Freight Management Office (MFMO), the Customs and Excise Office (CEO), the Congolese Monitoring Office (CMO) and the Central Bank. It is fixed by order number 80-256 of 12 November 1980 and is applied in conformity with decree number 003/83 of 17 January 1983 which determines the amounts of commission to collect by MFMO for its intervention in loading and unloading freight operations. Table 3 summarises this information for each State company levying this tax as well as the services granted by them to economic operators who export wood. Table 3 Company NTO MFMO CEO CMO CB Companies benefiting from remunerative tax Services provided Opening of file. Weighing and tax on document. Intervention in loading and unloading operations. Form for declaring definitive exit. Quality and quantity control. Collection of proportional taxes and commission on exchange.
Tax on equipment and workers.
It is a tax based on harvesting and wood transformation equipment and the number of expatriate workers and the workforce. Paid annually, this tax is 30% of the equipment value.
Tax on revenue.
As for all other companies running in the country, forestry businesses pay tax on revenue to the State. This tax is 50% of gross revenue.
Historical information on these taxes.
Surface area tax. In spite of the flexibility of Zaire's currency throughout 1992, this tax remained fixed at Z 100/ha (that is USD 0.47/ha) (Decree number 10 of 6 April 1993) until the changeover of Zaire's currency to NZ in 1994. It was at this time that it was brought up to date and fixed at NZ 5 per 100 ha (decree number 42 of 7 February 1994). Tax on felling permit. It is one of the rare taxes which underwent change even though it stayed for a long time at NZ 100/ha before rising to NZ 350/ha in 1988 (that is USD 1.64/ha). It finally rose to USD 2.00/ha since 1996 (decree number 013 of 28 February 1996). Tax on wood for export (proportional taxes). These taxes also underwent change compared to their level before the setting up of the FRFC in 1985: Before 1985 Logs: Sawnwood: Veneer: Z 400/m3 Z 75/m3 Z 200/m3 After 1985 4.0% FOB value 1.5% FOB value 2.0% FOB value.
CEO tax on exit duties. This tax dropped from 7% to 6%. TOT and MFMO tax. They remained successively fixed at 6.75% and 0.5%.
Other taxes.
There is another form of tax undefined by the State, but which is paid in cash or in kind to decentralised bodies, more precisely to the traditional chiefs called " land chiefs", resident in forests designated for harvesting by the State. This "tax" called "Royaliste" in the Democratic Republic of Congo can vary from a motorised pirogue to a hunting rifle even to the setting up of a socio-economic infrastructure such as a bridge on a river, a village dispensary or a school shelter. It is the expression of a contradiction latent for a long time between land ownership law and the traditional vision of the notion of land ownership. This conflict will soon be resolved with the new forestry bill from the last forum organised in May 2000 with the aid of FAO and the UNDP in the Democratic Republic of Congo. There are also purchasing licences and the sale of firewood and charcoal whose costs are collected by the urban councils, which are offshoots of the forestry administration. It should also be mentioned that felling permits are issued to small-scale harvesters, called pit sawyers, whose surface areas do not exceed 50ha per permit per year.
Even though harvesters of firewood and charcoal and pit sawyers regularly receive their licences and felling permits for industrial roundwood for processing, their harvesting activities totally escape the forestry administration out of a lack of monitoring and follow-up. It is the category of harvesters which makes up what is called the "informal forestry sector" because it goes untaxed. Nevert