BRINGING BACK THE FORESTS.
Policies and Practices for Degraded Lands and Forests.
Proceedings of an International Conference 7­10 October 2002, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Bangkok, Thailand 2003.
RAP PUBLICATION 2003/14.
Editors: H.C. Sim, S. Appanah and P.B. Durst.
Organised by:.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying o r otherwise, without the permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Senior Forestry Officer, Food and Agridulture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok, Thailand. @ FAO 2003.
ISBN No: 974-7946-43-2.
For copies of the report, write to: Patrick B. Durst Senior Forestry Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 39 Phra Atit Road Bangkok 10200 Thailand Tel: (66-2) 697 4000 Fax: (66-2) 697 4445 Email: Patrick.Durst@fao.org.
Forests are important natural resources that fuel the continuous economic and social d e v e l o p m e n t of many countries. This is especially true for many of the developing c o u n t r i e s in the Asia Pacific region. However, the rather rapid economic and social development experienced by many of these countries was partly fuelled through exploiting these natural resources in an unsustainable manner. Additionally, inappropriate logging practices, shifting cultivation, repeated burning and other human disturbances are also rampant in many of these countries. All these unsustainable practices and rapid expansion for agriculture production have resulted in vast tracts of degraded forests and lands. A critical consequence has been the reduction in productive forest area, lowering of genetic diversity, changes in global climate, greater frequency and severity of floods and storms, and increasing poverty. Concerned with the severity of the problems, a number of countries in the region have initiated national policies and implemented numerous forest rehabilitation projects to Bring Back the Forests. While much knowledge and experience have been gained from these initiatives, they have not been widely publicized or adopted. There is an urgent need to bring this understanding to the natural resource managers and policy-makers so that appropriate action is taken and supporting policies are adopted. This International Conference on Bringing Back the Forests: Policies and Practices for Degraded Lands and Forests was therefore designed to bring together all the stakeholders, including the project planners and implementers, as well as beneficiaries, to exchange experiences and knowledge and to promote successful approaches. Besides new technological advances, much care was given to the critical issues of policy and implementation. Furthermore, the Conference also provided opportunities to establish closer collaboration and networking among all the concerned parties for future undertakings. This volume, the proceedings of the conference, is a collection of some of the most valuable papers that have been recently produced on the subject. Professionals and practitioners in forest rehabilitation should find this volume valuable, and avoid repeating mistakes and errors and wasting already scarce resources in this region.
Dr. He Changchui Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
Dato' Dr. Abdul Razak Mohd. Ali Chairperson, Asia Pacific Association of Forestry Research Institutions Director-General, Forest Research Institute Malaysia.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
The International Conference on "Bringing Back the Forests: Policies and Practices for Degraded Lands and Forests" was jointly organized by the Asia Pacific Association o f Forestry Research Institutions (APAFRI), the Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and the Pacific (FORSPA) and the International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO) from 7 to 10 October 2002, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The conference was attended by delegates from Australia, Bangladesh, China, Cambodia, Denmark, Germany, India, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Nepal, Netherlands, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, United States of America a n d Viet Nam. FRIM and Cambodia's Department of Forestry and Wildlife greatly facilitated the field trips in Malaysia and Cambodia. A major portion of the funds for organizing this Conference was provided by FAOFORSPA. A number of other organizations and private enterprises have also contributed financially and in kind. We wish to thank the delegates and authors for their contributions to the Conference and the proceedings. Special thanks are due to the sub-committee headed by Dr. Raja Barizan of FRIM for the initial compilation of this publication.
FOREWORD ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS iii iv.
1 2 Welcoming address on behalf of FAO Patrick B. Durst Introduction: restoration of degraded forests as opportunities for development S. Appanah 3 7.
3 Is it possible to reforest degraded tropical lands to achieve economic and also biodiversity benefits? David Lamb Bringing back the forests: by whom and for whom? Stephanie Mansourian, Geoffrey Davison and Jeff Sayer 17 27.
5 The use of forest succession for establishment of production forest in northeastern Viet Nam Ulrich Apel and Knut Sturm Variable success of native trees planted on degraded pasture in Costa Rica F. Lynn Carpenter and J. Doland Nichols Growth of subtropical rain forest trees planted on degraded farmland in eastern Australia Kevin Glencross and J. Doland Nichols Local knowledge on indigenous trees: towards expanding options for smallholder timber tree planting and improved farm forestry in the Philippine uplands Fernando Santos, Manuel Bertomeu, Belita Vega, Eduardo Mangaoang, Marco Stark and Rumila Bullecer Forest rehabilitation on post-mining landscapes--a German case study Reinhard F. Hüttl and Werner Gerwin 39 51.
SESSION III.
10 Rehabilitation of Malaysian forests: perspectives and delimitation of planting bamboo as a commercial species 99 Azmy Hj. Mohamed and Abd. Razak Othman Incentives for tree growing: setting the right instruments for sustained local participation Paulo N. Pasicolan Forest degradation and rehabilitation in China Shen Guofang Integrating rural livelihoods with forest rehabilitation: need for community forest management P.K. Biswas 107 119.
Forest recovery with villagers--based on a case study in Khong Chiam, northeast Thailand Anders P. Pedersen and Chana Piewluang.
15 16 Measuring forest capital of India--its usefulness for forest regeneration Swarna S. Vepa 157.
How can silviculturists support the natural process of recovery in tropical rain forests degraded by logging and wild fire? 171 Charles Garcia and Jan Falck Using native tree species to restore degraded hillsides in Hong Kong, China Billy C.H. Hau and Ken K.Y. So Forest rehabilitation case study: rehabilitation after bauxite mining in the jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) forest of southwestern Australia John Gardner and Carl Grant Economic value of skid-track rehabilitation: a case study in Sabah, Malaysia Ulrik Ilstedt, Edmund Gan and Paul Liau 179.
20 Institutional financing of forestry programmes including afforestation of wastelands in India: some issues and options Kulbhushan Balooni and Katar Singh Forest rehabilitation and forest genetic diversity--management implications and research needs Jarkko Koskela, Percy Sajise and L.T. Hong The rehabilitation of the poorly-stocked hill forests in Peninsular Malaysia: crucial for timber production Abdul Rahman Abdul Rahim, Shashiah Abdul Karim and Mohd. Jinis Abdullah Financing community-based watershed reforestation in the Philippines Danilo C. Mero Initiatives for improving reforestation strategies: an enabling framework of criteria and indicators for forest land evaluation V.P. Mohan and Vu Tan Phuong Operational use of remote sensing and GIS for forest rehabilitation planning Safiah Yusmah Muhammad Yusoff, Khali Aziz Hamzah, Raja Barizan Raja Sulaiman and Abd. Azhan Shah Idris 213.
Policies and practices for the rehabilitation of degraded lands and forests in leasehold forestry, Nepal 285 Shree Prasad Baral The effects of forest restoration activities on the species diversity of naturally establishing trees and ground flora Oranut Khopai and Stephen Elliott Company­community partnership outgrower schemes in forestry plantations in Indonesia: an alternative to conventional rehabilitation programmes Ani Adiwinata Nawir and Tini Gumartini List of participants 295.
Welcoming address on behalf of FAO.
Patrick B. Durst*.
Honorable Minister of Primary Industries, Datuk Seri Dr. Lim Keng Yaik, Dato' Dr. M.A.A. Razak, Director-General of FRIM, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It's a great pleasure for me to be here this morning and to offer a few remarks on behalf of the Food and Agriculture Organizationof the United Nations (FAO). At the outset, allow me to convey the greetings of FAO's Assistant Director-General for Forestry, Dr. Hosny El-Lakany, who asked me to extend his warm regards and best wishes for the success of this conference. And likewise, I'd like to extend the greetings of my colleague, D r. S. Appanah, Senior Adviser for the FAO-supported Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and the Pacific (or FORSPA, as many of you know it), as FORSPA is also one of the organizers of this conference. The origins of the Bringing Back the Forests Conference can be traced to a meeting of the Executive Board of the Asia Pacific Association of Forestry Research Institutions (APAFRI), held early last year in Chiang Mai, Thailand. Members of the Executive Board agreed that there was a need for APAFRI to raise its institutional profile by regularly organizing major technical and policy-oriented conferences on key forestry topics, in partnership with other leading organizations in the region. FAO and FORSPA were happy to support this idea and we went on to discuss potential topics. Collectively, we agreed that an area with enormous potential synergies--and one desperately in need of critical attention in this region--is that of forest rehabilitation. Following the discussions in Chiang Mai, a group of energetic individuals from APAFRI, FORSPA, Forest Research Institute Malaysia, International Union of Forest Research Organizations and FAO have worked tirelessly to bring the vision of this conference to reality. Many of you are probably aware that the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) has given special attention to forest rehabilitation in its deliberations during the past two years. Coincidentally, and somewhat unfortunately (for those of us who can't be.
*Senior Forestry Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.
in two places at the same time), some of our colleagues are also meeting in Seoul, South Korea, this week, under the umbrella of IUFRO and the Korean Ecological Society, also to discuss forest restoration and rehabilitation. Several other national and international meetings and workshops have been held, or are being planned, to address these topics. So why forest rehabilitation--and why now? One important reason is that, until recently, rehabilitation has been one of the more neglected of the major strands of forest management. For decades, there has been intense efforts to conserve the remaining natural forests and protect their associated biodiversity. Enormous attention has also been given to plantation establishment, but primarily for timber production purposes. In comparison, the focus on rehabilitating degraded forests and degraded lands has been much less intense, especially here in the Asia Pacific region. This is somewhat s u r p r i s i n g when we consider that FAO's Global Forest Resource Assessment 2000 estimates that there are more than 140 million hectares of "other wooded land" in Asia. Most of these areas were once forest, but are now largely covered with shrubs or bushes, or too few trees to still be considered "forest." Of course, there are also many tens of millions of hectares that still meet the formal definition of "forest," but which have been degraded or damaged--sometimes severely-- as a result of inappropriate logging techniques, shifting cultivation, fire, insect attacks, and other factors. Another area of concern and opportunity is the region's vast Imperata grasslands-- which now extend across more than 50 million hectares in South and Southeast Asia alone. As I'm sure most of you know, Imperata is a highly aggressive grass that quickly dominates areas that are subjected to regular burning or grazing. And although perhaps not all of the 50 million hectares were historically forested, evidence suggests that most were indeed covered by trees at some point in the past. FAO has recently increased efforts to promote "assisted natural regeneration"--an approach developed in the Philippines to restore Imperata grasslands to more productive forest. Just from this brief review of the areas involved, we can see that there is enormous s c o p e for rehabilitation activities. There are also many good reasons for doing so. Obviously, when forests are cleared or heavily degraded, their economic, social and ecological contributions are removed or impaired. We may easily see, as a result: · · · · · reduced capacity to supply wood, fiber, energy and biomass; increased release of greenhouse gases; deterioration of water quality; accelerated loss of biodiversity; and increased impoverishment of forest-dependent people.
To a large extent, broader recognition of these detrimental impacts--both locally and internationally--is helping to stimulate interest in forest rehabilitation. For starters, recent concerns about climate change, and subsequent interest in carbon offsets and the C l e a n Development Mechanism have brought renewed focus on improved forest management for enhancing carbon sequestration. Similarly, significant reductions in timber harvesting in many countries of the region highlight the need for new sources of wood. One alternative is to gear up production on degraded sites where current productivity is very low. T h e r e 's also growing appreciation of the potential for forest rehabilitation to advance objectives related to biodiversity conservation and protection of water quality. 4.
We l co min g address on behalf of FAO.
Finally, the past decade has seen major advances in policies related to rural poverty and social stability. There's increased recognition of the contributions that forests make, both in providing subsistence "safety nets" for the poorest segments of society and in generating broad levels of employment and income. There's also greater understanding of the ramifications of failing to address rural poverty adequately. Despite the heightened interest in forest rehabilitation, actual progress on the ground r e m a i n s rather limited. While there are plans for ambitious forest rehabilitation programmes in a few countries, such as Vietnam and China, most initiatives are still small scale in nature. There's a tremendous need to "scale up" successful pilot activities, based on sound research and realistic financial incentives. In this respect, I would like to mention the role that FORSPA has played in supporting five large-scale rehabilitation research and demonstration sites--one each in Cambodia, Laos, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. But, still, these efforts are minimal compared to the scale of the problem and the challenges. It's important to recognize that the constraints are rarely technical in nature. The main constraints lie in the realm of policy, finance, land-ownership and related problems. G o v e r n m e n t s are gradually recognizing that their forest departments alone can't rehabilitate all the degraded areas needing attention. And yet, private companies and individual farmers are all too often viewed more as adversaries rather than as partners in rehabilitation efforts. If the laws or regulations of a country prevent a farmer from cutting, or transporting, or selling the teak tree that he's planted in his garden plot (as is the case in several countries), we will continue to find it difficult to bring back the forests. If neither corporations nor individual farmers can be assured of secure tenure over land and resources, how can we expect them to invest in forest restoration? If bribes have to be paid to corrupt officials in order to obtain cutting and transport permits, and at multiple checkpoints along the highway, what motivation exists for planting trees? If taxes on the sale of plantation-grown wood exceed 50 percent of gross revenue, who will be interested in bringing back the forests? There are many such policy issues constraining forest rehabilitation. You will note, therefore, that we are giving strong emphasis to policy measures and financial instruments at this conference. It's only when these fundamental constraints are removed that we will likely see significant gains in forest rehabilitation. Ladies and Gentlemen, FAO is delighted to be a partner in organizing this Conference. I'd like to take this opportunity to thank our partner organizations­APAFRI, FORSPA, FRIM and IUFRO--for the fabulous job they've done in planning and preparing for this Conference, and particularly for ensuring such an impressive programme and comprehensive participation. Speaking from a personal perspective, I'm very much looking forward to this Conference. Forest rehabilitation and regeneration are virtually etched into the soul of every forester. Probably nothing can be more rewarding for a forester than to return an area of scrub, or wasteland, or degraded pasture, back into thriving forest. And, while we're not going to rehabilitate any forests directly in the next four days, our programme should give us ample opportunity to discuss the key issues and learn about some potential solutions. It's the sincere hope of FAO that this Conference will sow the seeds for expanded forest rehabilitation throughout the region, and indeed throughout the world. I wish all of you a productive, rewarding, and enjoyable conference. Thank you. 5.
P a t r i c k B. Durst.
Introduction: restoration of degraded forests as opportunities for development.
S. Appanah*.
Despite earnest efforts by the international community, forest and land degradation has advanced to such a degree that many countries in the Asia Pacific region have practically lost a major income-earning sector. Besides, loss and degradation of forests are bringing a backlash of problems, environmental, social, and others which were never unexpected. Under the circumstances, there is now pressure to rehabilitate those degraded forests a n d lands. In the past, such activities were limited to monoculture plantings. Now, rehabilitation procedures seek to go beyond that of commercial timber production--trials are underway to increase biodiversity and ecological services as additional products. Fortunately, such efforts can also be linked to social development. The vast majority of forest restoration schemes can also provide additional income to rural communities, besides increasing their resources. Attempts are also underway to find more innovative ways to support such developments.
INTRODUCTION.
Nature inherently has a duality about it--it can be benevolent or otherwise depending on how you treat it. When Unasylva, FAO's forestry journal was launched in 1947, Sir John Boyd Orr, the first Director-General, was enthusiastic when he wrote in the foreword that "The tie between forests and the good things of the earth runs back through history" (Orr 1947). Just half a century later, following much maltreatment, the forests may perhaps be revealing their other side too. Not too long back, some states in Malaysia were reverberating from the shock of a viral epidemic. The effect on human life and the economy was devastating. An unknown virus, subsequently named the Nipah virus, spread from swine to humans and.
* N a t i o n a l Forest Programme Advisor, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.
killed over a hundred of the latter. The epidemic could only be contained after about a million animals were culled. What is the connection between these sudden viral epidemics and forests? If new research is confirmed, there is a very strong link, at least with the Nipah virus (Helpin et al. 2000). The story goes that the huge forest fires in Borneo and Sumatra in 1997­1998 led to mass migration of flying foxes to Peninsular Malaysia. Here the bats were feeding on fruits in orchards, and their droppings with the Nipah virus were picked up by pigs that foraged on the floor. The virus was eventually transmitted to humans. This is perhaps a small indication that if we continue with the unabated destruction and degradation of the world's forests, the link between forests and bad things of the earth may become our future inheritance.
FOREST DEGRADATION AND DESTRUCTION--ASIA AND THE PACIFIC.
In the same Unasylva issue (ibid.), Aubreville (1947) expresses strong concern about the disappearance of tropical forests (in Africa) and warns of the consequences which ensue such a folly, such as loss of timber wealth, climate change, impoverishment of soil, poverty and so on. Yet he did believe the process can be halted and even reversed. I n his view, the salvation will be a gigantic task, and has to be undertaken on an international scale. F i v e decades later, despite enormous efforts from national and international agencies, progress remains quite limited, however. A quick glance at the change in the forested land area in the last decade in the Asia Pacific region would convey the view quite trenchantly (Table 1).
Change in forested land in the Asia Pacific region (1990­2000) (million ha) (FAO 2001) Total Total Total % of land Change % Countries land forest forest forested 1990­ change area 1990 2000 in 2000 2000 per year Australia and New Zealand 795.0 164.9 162.5 20.4 ­2.4 ­0.1 Central Asia 391.6 16.6 19.3 4.9 2.7 1.6 NW Pacific and East Asia 1 147.8 195.2 212.7 18.5 17.4 0.9 South Asia 640.3 86.3 85.3 13.3 ­1.0 ­0.1 Southeast Asia 434.5 234.7 211.4 48.7 ­23.3 ­1.0 South Pacific 53.9 36.4 35.1 65.2 ­1.2 ­0.4 Asia and the Pacific 3 463.2 734.0 726.3 21.0 ­7.7 ­0.1.
The Asia and the Pacific, with more than half the world's population, has only about 20% of the world's forests. The average per capita availability of forest area in the region is only around 0.2 ha, which is very low compared to the world average of 0 . 6 5 ha per person (FAO 2001). Within the region, Southeast Asia had the highest deforestation, with a loss of about 2.3 million ha per year. The causes for deforestation and degradation have been well researched: they include population pressure, heavy dependence on fuelwood, timber and other products, along with conversion of forests to agricultural, urban and industrial land. Overgrazing, shifting cultivation and armed conflict have added to the toll. With continued degradation, fires have increasingly become 8.
Intro duc t io n : restoration of degraded forests as opportunities for development.
major agents for forest loss in recent times. The Indonesian fires of 1996­97 are stark reminders of what disasters can be wrought with poor management. These are critical i s s u e s , as they accelerate loss of biodiversity, threaten ecosystem stability and the continuous flow of forest products, and the depletion of the natural resources underpinning many national economies (UNESCAP & ADB 2000).
N AT I O N A L AND INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES TO FOREST LOSS.
T h e loss and degradation of forests is well recognized, and most governments have implemented a variety of instruments and programmes to counter the problems and bring about sustainable management. Some countries like Bhutan have mandated that 60% of the country should remain under forest cover. Others have introduced controls on clearance of land outside the conservation and production areas. Yet others have introduced logging bans--some 10 million ha in the region have been thus protected, albeit with mixed results. In many countries, implementation is still inadequate, while in a few cases like Sri Lanka and New Zealand it has been effective with harvesting shifting to alternative sources. Overall, the bans have also resulted in accelerated cuttings in neighboring countries. Countries like Malaysia and Thailand have adopted zero burning policies. Economic i n s t r u m e n t s have also been employed to conserve forests--China has introduced afforestation fees and licenses to strengthen cultivation, management and protection of forests. Plantations, although a poor substitute for natural forests in terms of biodiversity maintenance, have been stepped up as an alternative source of wood. Now the region has 60% of the world's plantation forests, although it will take a decade or more before they begin producing wood.
REHABILITATION OF FORESTS.
Of all the measures, one that can reverse somewhat the process of deforestation and degradation is attempt to rehabilitate them. Research work on forest rehabilitation can be traced back to the very beginning (see Appanah & Weinland 1993). For example, those familiar with Malayan forestry research still recall the work of J.H.M. Robson in 1899 (in Wyatt-Smith 1963). When concern with over-exploitation of Palaquium gutta (gutta percha) grew, planting trials of the plants were conducted in forests depauperate of the species (Hill 1900). The work in Burma and India would date further back. The early work was mainly confined to rehabilitating degraded forests, and afforestation of denuded lands and mined areas. The importance of such work was seen to benefit landless communities, either as cash for labour or opportunities for cropping the land in the earlier planting years, e.g. the taungya system, developed in the 1830s in Burma by Brandis (in Champion & Seth 1968). Rehabilitation as a tool for development began thus. In fact, the bulk of the work FAO and other institutions initiated had social objectives primarily. It created employment, additional resources, use of land that otherwise had no agricultural value, and environmental benefits (FAO 1985).
S . Appanah.
Briefly, the following rehabilitation methods have been employed:.
i. Secondary/degraded forests management.
Logging using crawler-tractor systems have without exception caused much damage to the young regeneration and pole growth. The regeneration may be extremely depauperate or patchy. Enrichment planting, usually through line planting (Dawkins 1958) of desired species is the usual method to rehabilitate such areas. The success of these plantings has been rather variable (Adjers et al. 1995). The main problem is light--usually the canopies close back rapidly, and the small seedlings may be shaded out rapidly, pioneers m a y outgrow them, and creepers may entwine them. The problem has clearly been overcome--older seedlings, over 1 m in height have been tested, and plantings done in areas that have much more canopy openings. Height growth of 1 m per year has been a c h i e v e d in Malaysia and Cambodia (unpublished, pers. obsns.). The advantages of rehabilitating secondary forests are the low costs, ensuring the many ecological services and retaining socially important products.
ii. Monocultures.
The vast majority of afforestation and reafforestation work used single species, plantation concepts. This included rehabilitating extremely degraded forest sites, lands occupied by hardy weeds, mined lands, and sites that were prone to heavy erosion such as water catchment areas. Besides bringing about environmental benefits, commercial profits were also a consideration. As a result, many fast-growing exotics were used in such plantings.
iii. Multi-species plantations.
Monocultures are not always the best options--they lack biodiversity, and the multiple other non-timber forest products which local communities seek. Planting mixtures of species, either upper-storey timber species or mix of species in various canopy levels, and meeting a variety of products, from timber, food, medicines, spices, etc. have been tried out. They are, however, complicated to establish. But properly constructed mixtures can have significant advantages in certain situations (Keenan et al. 1995). Mixtures can be less susceptible to disease, and enhance production arising from light and nutritional r e s o u r c e s . A number of rehabilitation approaches are being tested out to achieve a semblance of the natural ecosystem. One is to accelerate restoration without consideration for commercial return. Degraded sites are rehabilitated by planting groups of relatively fast-growing species that are considered as ecosystem building blocks (Goosem & Tucker 1995). It only requires one planting, and thereafter depends on the local gene pool to increase species and structural diversity. This would work provided a neighbouring forest site is near enough to act as a seed source. When such a source is absent, a large number of mature phase canopy species can be planted. This would be more costly, however. Another related method includes establishing high-value mixed-species timber plantations in farmland. Overall, there are several technical approaches available for rehabilitating tropical landscapes. All the approaches offer additional improvements in the ecological integrity of the new forest cover, while meeting the benefits of the communities that depend on them.
FAO'S RECENT INITIATIVES ON FOREST REHABILITATION.
In recent years several international institutions have initiated new programmes on forest and land rehabilitation in the Asia Pacific region. They include ITTO's Criteria and Indicators, CIFOR's research on secondary forest, JIRCAS BIOREFOR initiative, Korea E c o l o g i c a l Society's Reforestation Programme, and FAO/FORSPA's own initiatives. Following is a brief outline of the work of FAO/FORSPA initiated in the region over the last few years: i. Assisted Natural Regeneration Workshop in collaboration with the Department of E n v i r o n m e n t and Natural Resources, Philippines (2001)--Improved planting techniques, nursery practices, mixed-species plantings, biodiversity conservation, community participation, and economic issues were discussed. 100-ha Demonstration Plots--FORSPA developed a network of 100-ha demonstration plots in Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Papua New Guinea and Sri Lanka. The objective of the plots is to test out the best rehabilitation practices in a permanent site, and carry out the work long enough to demonstrate the success of the various planting designs, and estimate the costs. Establishment and management protocols have been developed, and preparation and treatment methods refined. The national scientists conduct most of the work, and hence technology transfer and future implementation in the countries are guaranteed. I n t e r n a t i o n a l Conference "Bringing Back the Forests: Policies and Practices for Degraded Lands and Forests" in collaboration with APAFRI (2002)--This current conference has brought together policy makers, researchers, managers and NGOs to review the status of forest rehabilitation in the region, and explore additional a p p r o a c h e s , particularly the economic and policy issues needed to support rehabilitation work. Asia Pacific Forest Rehabilitation Network (APFReN)--FAO/FORSPA initiated this network, and is now managed by a group of researchers of the Forest Research Institute M a l a y s i a . The purpose of the network is to bring about the critical mass of the researchers, and exchange information, ideas, and promote the development of their scientific work. Documentation of the best practices in "Assisted Natural Regeneration Techniques for Southeast Asian Countries"--A team of experts will soon meet in Kuala L