RAP publication 2004/14.
The Report of the.
REGIONAL HIGH-LEVEL ROUNDTABLE.
23-24 February 2004 Bangkok, Thailand.
SUBREGIONAL COOPERATION FOR ERADICATION OF POVERTY AND FOOD INSECURITY IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC.
The Report of the REGIONAL HIGH-LEVEL ROUNDTABLE.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 2004 i.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory or any area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors alone and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
NOTICE OF COPYRIGHT The copyright in this publication is vested in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. This publication may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, by any method or process, without written permission from the copyright holder. Applications for such permission with a statement of the purpose and the extent of reproduction desired should be made through and addressed to the Chief, Policy Assistance Branch, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.  FAO 2004.
Asia and the Pacific region is characterized by high economic growth, increasing per capita income, and high agricultural production and productivity. Notwithstanding the success many countries in Asia and the Pacific have achieved in reducing poverty and improving food security and the overall welfare of the people, the region remains home to the majority of the world's poor and hungry. Out of approximately 1.2 billion people in the world who are estimated to be living under a dollar a day consumption level, roughly two-thirds of them live in Asia and the Pacific, particularly in South Asia. To address poverty and food insecurity, Asia-Pacific countries have been implementing several national initiatives with their own resources as well as in collaboration with the United Nations System, including the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), international financing institutions (IFIs) and multi- and bilateral donors. The region still faces several challenges and constraints to sustainable agricultural development. These are mainly related to sustainable management of natural resources, the spreading of plant pests and a n i m a l diseases, consumer concerns about food safety and inadequate food marketing systems. Furthermore, globalization and the international and regional trade and economic environments impose additional challenges, which call for collaboration at regional and subregional levels to attain sustainable poverty reduction and food security. With a view to addressing these issues, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, UNESCAP and ADB jointly organized a Regional High-level Roundtable Meeting to discuss how Asia and the Pacific can meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and World Food Summit Declaration through opportunities offered by subregional and regional collaboration, derive lessons learned and formulate a future course of action. The discussions and the deliberations in the Roundtable rightly concluded that for certain aspects of food security, poverty eradication and the promotion of agricultural and rural development, regional collaboration can provide a critical and indispensable contribution and that Regional Economic Organizations (REOs) have a significant role to play in this regard. Such a development is helped by strong political commitment to policy harmonization among the REO's, which is critical to fostering economic growth, employment and the income earning capacities of the poor and thereby increasing their access to food. Continued reduction of trade barriers to intraregional trade, the establishment of common phytosanitary regulations and common standards, the harmonization of tariff nomenclature, customs valuations and customs procedures and so forth are still necessary if we are to achieve the MDGs. The Roundtable provided a high-level forum to discuss the political commitment and building of fruitful partnerships within and amongst the subregional bodies in Asia and the Pacific and co-ordination of their respective initiatives and programmes related to agriculture and rural development with a focus on eradication of poverty and food insecurity. It urged leaders and decision-makers of countries in the Asia-Pacific region to put the fight against hunger and poverty at the forefront of national priorities and to urgently strengthen their political commitment towards this objective. This Report is thus useful and timely, as there is a need to design a separate package of policy targets, strategies and programmes that are directly designed to address poverty issues and problems for specific poverty groups in the various subsectors of the economy. This Report is based on the cooperative work done by the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, UNESCAP and ADB. The contributions of UNESCAP and ADB are greatly acknowledged and appreciated. HE CHANGCHUI Assistant Director-General and FAO Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific iii.
Page Foreword ............................................................................................................................................. I. II. III. IV. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... INAUGURAL SESSION ......................................................................................................... EXCHANGE OF GENERAL VIEWS .................................................................................. TECHNICAL DISCUSSIONS ............................................................................................... iii 1 3 4 7 7 7 7 8 9 9 9 9 10 12 13 13 16 18.
Overview on the incidence, nature and causes of poverty and food insecurity in the region, with analysis of progress in achieving the MDGs ...................................................................................... UNESCAP Paper: The incidence of poverty and food insecurity and the progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals in the region .................................................. ADB Paper: Rural development policies in Asia and the Pacific: Lessons learned and future course of action ............................................................................................................... FAO Paper: Opportunities and scope for subregional and regional collaboration to address poverty, food security and sustainable agriculture and rural development .............. Current and/or planned initiatives and programmes of the SREOs .................................................. Current and/or planned activities of ASEAN ........................................................................... Current and/or planned activities of SAARC ........................................................................... Current and/or planned activities of PIF ................................................................................. V. VI. DECLARATION ...................................................................................................................... CLOSING REMARKS ...........................................................................................................
Contents (continued).
Page Statement by Honourable Prakash Chandra Lohani, Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives, Nepal .................................................................................................................................................... Statement by Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteology of Samoa ..................................................................................................................... Statement by H.E. Mr Zhang Baowen, Vice Minister of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China .................................................................................................................................................... Statement by Mr R.C.A. Jain, Secretary, Agriculture, Government of India ................................... Statement by Mr Rahul Raturi, Sector Manager, the World Bank .................................................... Statement by Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General of ASEAN .................................................... Statement by Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General of SAARC .................................................. Statement by Mr Aleki F. Sisifa, Representative of PIF .................................................................... Annex II List of Participants ...........................................................................................................
Heads of country delegations at the Regional High-level Roundtable on Spearheading Subregional Programmes and Cooperation for Eradication of Poverty and Food Insecurity in Asia and the Pacific.
Top row, left to right: Mr Ramesh Chandra A. Jain, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, India; Mr Mohammed Umar, Director, Institute for Research, Extension and Training in Agriculture, University of the South Pacific; H.E. Hima Takelesi, High Commissioner of Niue to New Zealand; Dr Virachai Virameteekul, Vice Minister, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Thailand; Mr Keng Yong Ong, Secretary General, ASEAN Secretariat; Middle row, left to right: Dr Hari Krishna Upadhyaya, Member (Agriculture) of the National Planning Commission, Nepal; Mr Q.A.M.A. Rahim, Secretary-General, SAARC; The Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Meteorology, Samoa; H.E. Major General Nyunt Tin, Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation of Myanmar; The Honourable M.K. Anwar, Minister for Agriculture of Bangladesh; H.E. Y.B. Tan Sri Dato Haji Muhyiddin bin Haji Mohd Yassin, MinisterforAgriculture of Malaysia; H.E. Mr Zhang Baowen,Vice Minister of Agriculture, China, Bottom row, left to right: Mr He Changchui, Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific, FAO; Mr Jacques Diouf, Director-General, FAO; H.E. Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand; Mr Kim Hak-Su, Executive Secretary UNESCAP; Mr G.H.P.B. van der Linden, Vice-President, ADB; Honourable Young M. Vivian, MP, Premier of Niue.
INTRODUCTION.
Asia and the Pacific region is characterized by high economic growth, increasing per capita income, and high agricultural production and productivity. Notwithstanding the success many countries in Asia and the Pacific have achieved in reducing poverty, improving food security and the overall welfare of the people, the region remains home to the majority of the world's poor and hungry. Out of approximately 1.2 billion people in the world who are estimated to be living under a dollar a day consumption level, roughly two-thirds of them live in Asia and the Pacific, particularly in South Asia. At the international level, the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action adopted at the World Food Summit (WFS) of 1996 and the World Food Summit: five years later (WFS: fyl) in June 2002 brought to fore the global commitment to eliminate hunger and malnutrition, and to achieve sustainable food security for all people. This global commitment was further reaffirmed in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) following the Millennium Summit in 2000. MDGs are now widely accepted as the framework for development action and for measuring development progress. Within these, MDG-1, calling for eradication of extreme poverty and hunger, is on the top of the development agenda. To address poverty, food insecurity and sustainable economic growth and rural development, Asia-Pacific countries have been implementing several national initiatives with their own resources, as well as in collaboration with the UN System, including ESCAP and FAO, the Asian Development Bank, international financing institutions (IFIs) and the multi- and bilateral donors. However, it is emerging that due to increasing reliance on regional and international trade, investment and technology transfer for economic growth, national economies of most countries have become interdependent. In the context of the current global trading system, including World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements and the continued negotiations for trade facilitation (i.e. Doha, Cancun), generation of collective bargaining power with countries of common interest vis-à-vis other dominant trading partners have become critically important for sustaining agricultural and overall economic growth. Poverty, food security and development issues are increasingly becoming part of trade negotiations. Also, though poverty, hunger and food security are essentially issues of national concern, for many countries in the region production, trade and distribution of food and agricultural commodities, as well as opportunities for alternative livelihoods, transcends national boundaries. The implications of interdependence and the linkages of trade with development issues and concerns are amply recognized in Asia and the Pacific as indicated by the existence and activities of several Subregional Economic Organizations/Communities (SREOs/SRECs), trading blocks, growth triangles and subregional initiatives for economic integration. Some SREOs/SRECs, with the support of their member governments, are engaging themselves in efforts to eradicate poverty, hunger and food insecurity through achievement of overall sustainable socio-economic development, including agricultural and rural development. SAARC had decided to establish Regional Food Security and Seed Security Reserves and mandated the preparation of a Regional Poverty Profile. Above all, the 2nd Meeting of SAARC Ministers of Agriculture, held in Kathmandu, Nepal in May 2002, adopted a resolution on eradicating hunger and poverty. At its Ministerial meeting in Islamabad, SAARC adopted a Plan of Action to abate the menace of poverty. ASEAN strives to provide adequate levels of food supply and food accessibility to its members and, at the same time, enhance the competitiveness of its food sector. It is also engaged in implementing the Strategic Plan of Action on ASEAN Cooperation in Food, Agriculture and Forestry (1999-2004) and the Hanoi Plan of Action (1999-2004) and is discussing preparation of a Subregional Programme for Food Security (SRPFS) in collaboration with FAO. PIF-FIC has prepared a SRPFS, presented and discussed during the side events of the World Food Summit: five years later held at FAO, Rome, Italy in June 2002. The Italian Government has approved funding for some components of this SRPFS. The executive heads of the subregional economic organizations have been meeting on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly and other venues to discuss areas of mutual cooperation. One such meeting was the Consultative Meeting between the Executive Heads of SAARC, ASEAN, Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), Pacific Forum Secretariat (PFS), and United Nations Economic and Social 1.
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP). The Meeting in Bali, Indonesia in September 2002 agreed to consider ways and means of mobilizing resources for cooperation between the Subregional Organizations and identified the Asian Development Bank (ADB) as one of the possible donors for funding collaborative activities between these organizations. These developments provide an excellent base to launch innovative joint programmes to complement national actions to achieve MDG-1. Such programmes can focus on poverty reduction and food security by addressing problems of a transboundary nature affecting sustainable agriculture and rural development. This requires understanding and analysis of the opportunities and scope for regional cooperation to address poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development. In this context, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (FAO-RAP), the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia the Pacific (UNESCAP) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) jointly organized a Regional High-Level Roundtable on 23-24 February 2004 in the United Nations Conference Center (UNCC), Bangkok, Thailand to discuss how Asia and the Pacific can meet the MDG Goals and WFS Declaration through opportunities offered by subregional and regional collaboration, derive lessons learned and formulate a future course of action. Objectives The Roundtable provided a high-level forum to discuss political commitment and building of fruitful partnerships within and amongst the subregional bodies in Asia and the Pacific, and coordination of their respective initiatives and programmes related to agriculture and rural development with a focus on eradication of poverty and food insecurity. It facilitated achievement of a common understanding and modalities for addressing the regional challenges by fostering discussion of the linkages between action by the SREOs, ADB, the UN-system, including ESCAP and FAO, and civil society organizations. The meeting offered a chance to build on the SREOs mandate for subregional economic integration to explore how they can promote the convergence of national interests around selected priority agricultural and rural development initiatives so that Asia and the Pacific can meet the MDG objectives. In particular the meeting:.
spearheaded the process of identifying the priority subregional issues and concerns affecting poverty, food security, agriculture and rural development and formulating and implementing regional programmes to address these issues and concerns and reinforce national initiatives; strengthened the dialogue among the Subregional Economic Organizations (SREOs) and between the SREOs and interested international and regional technical and donor agencies on MDG; and derived views, lessons learned and perspectives towards realigning regional rural and agricultural development policies towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
In addition to the above specific objectives, the meeting laid down a framework to continue the process of realising the MDGs and WFS Declaration and broadening the process of forging partnerships amongst the stakeholders. Participants In attendance during the Roundtable were one prime minister, six ministers, two vice ministers, three secretaries/director-generals and other high-level government officials of the agriculture/food, rural development and planning ministries from ten Asian and Pacific Island countries; heads of subregional economic organizations such as ASEAN and SAARC and high-level representatives of PIF-FIC; representatives of international development agencies, multi- and bilateral donors, selected regional civil society organizations and other relevant institutions. It also involved participation of the Director-General of FAO, Executive Secretary of UNESCAP, Vice President of ADB and Senior Vice President of IFAD. The list of participants is appended to this report as Annex II.
INAUGURAL SESSION.
Opening statements Mr Jacques Diouf, Director-General of FAO, pointed out in his opening statement that the Asia and Pacific region has accomplished much in the fight against poverty and food insecurity, but there is still significant work to be done. These positive results have been achieved because countries of the region have increased productivity per unit of land through expansion of irrigation and have taken advantage of improved technologies and inputs. Mr Diouf indicated that sustained and equitable growth of rural areas depends on multiple components including an improved economic environment, human resource development, participation of the private sector and civil society organizations, good governance, and judicious use of public resources in the provision of key public goods. The region still faces challenges such as sustainable management of natural resources and those caused by globalization. The avian flu outbreak demonstrates the necessity "for improved regional collaboration and communication" in order to address emerging shared policy issues. The existence and continuing work of ASEAN, SAARC and PIF show the region has the capacity to face the emerging challenges. S o m e regional collaboration on food security and poverty eradication already exists under the South-South Cooperation Programme of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security. This kind of collaboration should continue and expand. Additionally, countries of the Asia and Pacific region should cooperate on issues including the prevention of animal disease outbreaks, complementary agriculture systems, and economic integration. This meeting provides an opportunity to discuss how regional cooperation can aid in the fight against poverty and hunger. During this meeting, particular attention should be paid to two issues. First, it is necessary to identify "activities that would help achieve the immense potentials for fair trade expansion unleashed by the Uruguay Round Agreements and the establishment of the WTO." Second, special attention should be given to "the decline in commitment of national, as well as international, resources to agriculture and rural development." FAO is committed to supporting regional efforts to end hunger and poverty. Mr G.H.P.B. van der Linden, Vice President of ADB, stressed that one of the challenges is the MDG of halving extreme poverty by 2015. The Asia and Pacific region has made some progress in meeting this goal. But much remains to be done. The Asian experience suggests that success in the fight against poverty requires policies that simultaneously strengthen three key areas of development. These three pillars for poverty reduction are economic growth, social development and good governance. Economic growth is the most important factor. The growth must be strong, sustained, and focused on improving the lives of the poor. One prerequisite for economic growth is adequate an infrastructure, which is not currently receiving enough investment. The second pillar ­ social development ­ is necessary to ensure that economic development is equitable, that all people in society benefit. Good governance will provide the backbone to the other two pillars by ensuring that the public good is provided for in every way. It is mainly up to individual countries to strengthen the three pillars and to carry out poverty reduction strategies and programmes. But cooperation between developing and developed countries must also occur if the first MDG is to be reached. One means of cooperation would be "the establishment of an open and nondiscriminatory trading system that would bring massive befits to developing economies and accelerate their progress in reducing poverty." Also, developing countries have realized that regional cooperation can prove useful in addressing many issues. This cooperation needs to continue and be used to deal with the problems of poverty and hunger. All actors must work even more closely if we are to reach our goals.
Mr Kim Hak-Su, Executive Secretary of UNESCAP, stated that while significant progress has been made towards eradicating poverty and food insecurity in the region, there is still a need for much more work. UNESCAP has recently undergone a reform in order to better focus on issues in the region. He pointed out that UNESCAP now focuses its efforts on three areas: reducing poverty, managing globalization and addressing emerging social issues. This meeting deals with all three areas. UNESCAP uses many programmes and strategies to eradicate poverty. They include examining the economic and social trends in the region, recognizing specific successful programmes dealing with poverty, and checking the progress made by countries in the region towards reaching the MDGs. Additionally, UNESCAP hopes to work with other agencies to promote good policies that have been adopted throughout the region. Finally, UNESCAP will work to further promote regional cooperation in order to eradicate poverty and food insecurity. H.E. Mr Somsak Thepsutin, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand (Representative of the Prime Minister of Thailand), stated that the Asia and Pacific region is still home to the majority of the world's poor. Because this is the case, even though the region has experienced major economic growth, there may be something wrong with the development models being employed. Human resource development is one area that needs particular attentions. This meeting can serve as a forum for sharing successful and unsuccessful development strategies. While the countries of the region are different, some programmes and policies may be applicable to different situations. Thailand has found that the main problems of poverty are the lack of land for cultivation, indebtedness, and the lack of stable occupation and has set up programmes to deal with these issues. Additionally, the Government of Thailand recognizes that there are issues which must be dealt with multilaterally because they know no geopolitical boundaries.
EXCHANGE OF GENERAL VIEWS.
Mr Cyril Enweze, Senior Vice President, IFAD, indicated that while the Asia and Pacific region has experienced significant economic growth in resent decades, there still exist major problems of food insecurity and extreme poverty. More must be done, especially in the rural regions, if MDG-1 is to be accomplished. IFAD focuses its development strategy on less favoured areas, like remote mountains, and less favoured groups, like women and indigenous peoples. While there are difficulties in addressing poverty and food insecurity at the regional level, this meeting provides a chance to discuss ways to cooperate more efficiently regionally. While IFAD and many other groups have been making efforts at the regional level, much more must be done. A six-point agenda will provide ideas on how this can be accomplished. First, it is necessary to recognize and spread successful strategies and practices used to combat poverty and food insecurity. IFAD can help with this process. Second, regional mechanisms could be useful in facilitating upscaling and replication. Third, countries should collaborate regionally to address the issue of sustainable natural resource management. Fourth, while largely a national and local issue, there is scope for regional initiatives to promote equity and access to productive assets. Additionally, globalization and its effects on markets should be discussed at a regional level. Fifth, discussion of government policy should be carried out at the regional level. Sixth, regional cooperation can help promote peace and stability, which is a necessary condition for development. The Honourable Young M. Vivian, MP, Premier of Niue, stated that one of the major characteristics of the South Pacific region is its physical environmental diversity. Also, resources are unequally distributed among the countries of the region. Because of this, agencies have been established to deal with the resulting "socio-economic disparity". These agencies, including the Forum Fisheries Agency, use a collective approach. The region is using the same collective approach to eliminate food insecurity and poverty through FAO programmes. Globalization poses a special challenge for the small island nations of the region. It is especially important for the region's countries to act collectively in dealing with this challenge. The region also faces the special problem of losing its means of sustainability because of natural disasters. This makes it even more difficult for the South Pacific countries to move forward. International and regional cooperation are necessary for overcoming the challenges that face the region. 4.
The Honourable M.K. Anwar, Minister for Agriculture, Bangladesh, stated that the agriculture sector of Bangladesh has achieved much in the recent past. These accomplishments are due to the combination of international and domestic efforts of "effective public policy interventions in a market driven agriculture sector" and helpful public investment. Two major achievements are the following. First, production of foodgrains has increased per capita availability of food. Second, there has been a notable decline in poverty since independence. But poverty and food security remain major problems for the region and for Bangladesh. This is largely due to "our deficiency in political will to act together and our failure to mount a purposeful, coherent and time-bound regional and subregional effort to end food insecurity and poverty from this region." While leaders have committed to solving these problems, not enough progress has been made. Regional cooperation is crucial for overcoming these problems. Additionally, the cooperation of stakeholders and donors is necessary. A national emphasis on pro-poor economic growth will also help the situation. Moreover, regional cooperation is needed to effectively use the region's water resources and take advantage of the opportunities of biotechnology. Adversities can be translated into opportunities through regional cooperation. H.E. Mr Y.B. Tan Sri Muhyiddin Yassin, Minister for Agriculture, Malaysia, pointed out that for Malaysia the issue of food security consists of two parts: "the first is the right to access to food while the second is to be self-sufficient in food production." Malaysian agricultural policy is focused on making the agriculture sector "modern, dynamic and competitive." The agriculture sector is crucially important and Malaysia sees its greatest challenge as the lessening of dependence on both agriculture and food imports. In addressing this issue, Malaysia's national policy and the involvement of the private sector are important. The elimination of poverty must be done through rural development. Malaysia has concentrated its governmental efforts in these areas and has made significant progress owing to continuous budgetary support and political will. While Malaysia has accomplished much, it must now look towards regional cooperation as a way of dealing with globalization and increasing it's accomplishments in the areas of food security and poverty alleviation. Malaysia is currently working well with ASEAN but sees that progress could be made through cooperation in the areas of research and economic development. While regional cooperation is necessary and beneficial, it requires that all involved parties are committed to the cooperation. Overall, the primary responsibility of overcoming the problems of food insecurity and poverty lies with the individual countries, but regional cooperation can and should be utilized as well. H.E. Maj. Gen. Nyunt Tin, Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation, Myanmar, underlined that while global commitments have been made to fight against poverty and food insecurity, these issues are still major problems for the Asia and Pacific region. More efforts must be made at the regional level if the fight is to be successful. Myanmar has actively supported the development of agriculture and irrigation through its programmes and resources. Rice needs to be at the center of development plans for the region. The accomplishments of the agriculture sector in Myanmar are due to national, international and private actions. In particular, the government of Myanmar focused on improving infrastructure and supporting rural areas. Additionally, Myanmar is currently cooperating regionally through ASEAN, particularly in the area of poverty reduction and food security. Fair trading practices are crucial for increasing income which will in turn increase food security. Regional cooperation can be especially productive in establishing "a level playing field in international trading practices." The Honourable Tuisugaletaua Sofara Aveau, Minister for Agriculture, Forest, Fisheries and Meteology, Samoa, stated that agriculture is of vital importance to Samoa and the country is committed to achieving the MDGs. There appears to be an absence of hunger in Samoa, but anecdotal evidence suggests the presence of relative poverty and food insecurity. A more complete and accurate study is necessary to complete