RAP publication 2004/10.
Introductions and movement of Penaeus vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris in Asia and the Pacific.
Matthew Briggs, Simon Funge-Smith, Rohana Subasinghe and Michael Phillips.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 2004.
The designation and presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries. All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Aquaculture Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand or by e-mail to simon.fungesmith@fao.org.
For copies please write to: Simon Funge-Smith Aquaculture Officer FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Athit Road Bangkok 10200 THAILAND Tel: (+66) 2 697 4000 Fax: (+66) 2 697 4445 E-mail: simon.fungesmith@fao.org.
References .........................................................................................................................
Acknowledgements.
This document was prepared in response to requests from governments for advice on the impacts from introduction of economically important alien Penaeid shrimps to Asia. The review was conducted by FAO, Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA), World Wildlife Fund (WWF), and the World Bank (WB) Consortium Programme on Shrimp Farming and the Environment (http://www.enaca.org/ shrimp/). The review is published as an FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (FAO/RAP) publication through its generous assistance. This document was made possible by the contributed country reviews of a number of country correspondents several of whom have preferred to remain anonymous due to the often sensitive nature of this subject. Additional valuable comments and suggestions were made by many colleagues. The authors would therefore like to thank the country correspondents from Viet Nam, Indonesia, India, Sri Lanka, Thailand as well as the following individual experts: Chen Aiping, Fred Yapa, Dato Mohamed Shariff M. Shariffb, N. Gopinathc, Ng Chee Kiatd and Ben Poniae. The authors would also like to thank Shunji Sugiyama for his assistance with the statistics presented in this document.
SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department, Iloilo, Philippines Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia Fanli Marine and Consultancy, Petaling Jalya, Malaysia Intersea, Puchong Malaysia Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea, New Caledonia.
Abbreviations and acronyms.
ADB AFFA APEC APHIS AQIS BFAR BMNV BMP BP CCRF CNA CTSA DIAS DNA EIA EPA FAO FCR GAA GAV GIS GSMFC h2 HACCP HH ICES IHHNV INP IRA JSA LOVV LPV MBA (PVB) MCMS MOFI Asian Development Bank Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Australia Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of the USA Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Philippines Baculoviral Midgut Gland Necrosis Virus Best Management Practice Baculovirus Penaeii FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Camara Nacional de Acuacultura Center for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture FAO Database of Introduced Aquatic Species Deoxyribonucleic Acid Environmental Impact Assessment Environmental Protection Agency of the USA Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food Conversion Ratio Global Aquaculture Alliance Gill Associated Virus Geographic Information System Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission Heritability coefficient Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point High Health International Council for the Exploration of the Sea Infectious Hypodermal and Haematopoietic Necrosis Virus Instituto Nacional de Pesca, Ecuador Import Risk Analysis Joint Sub-committee on Aquaculture Lymphoid Organ Vacuolization Virus Lymphoid Parvo-like Virus Monodon Baculovirus Mid Crop Mortality Syndrome Ministry of Fisheries of Viet Nam.
MOV MPEDA MSFP MT NACA NHP NMFS NPV OIE PCR PL ppb ppm ppt RDS REO RNA SEMERNAP SMV SOP SPF SPR SPS TBT TFRC TSV USA USDA USDC UV WB WWF WSSV (SMBV) WTO YHV (YBV).
Mourilyan Virus Marine Products Export Development Agency of India Marine Shrimp Farming Program of the USA Metric tonnes Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific Necrotising Hepatopancreatitis National Marine Fishery Service (of Dept of Commerce) Nuclear Polyhedrosis Baculovirus World Organisation for Animal Health Polymerase Chain Reaction Postlarvae parts per billion parts per million parts per thousand Runt Deformity Syndrome Reo-like Viruses Ribonucleic Acid Secretaria del Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales y Pesca, Mexico Spawner-isolated Mortality Virus Standard Operation Procedure Specific Pathogen Free Specific Pathogen Resistant Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade Thai Farmers Research Center Co. Taura Syndrome Virus United States of America United States Department of Agriculture United States Development Council Ultra Violet World Bank World Wildlife Fund (Worldwide Fund for Nature) White Spot Syndrome Virus World Trade Organization Yellow Head Virus.
Executive summary.
Both Penaeus vannamei1 and P. stylirostris originate on the Western Pacific coast of Latin America from Peru in the south to Mexico in the north. They were introduced from the early 1970s to the Pacific Islands, where research was conducted into breeding and their potential for aquaculture. During the late 1970s and early 1980s they were introduced to Hawaii and the Eastern Atlantic coast of the Americas from South Carolina and Texas in the North to Central America and as far south as Brazil. The culture industry for P. stylirostris in Latin America is largely confined to Mexico, but P. vannamei has become the primary cultured species in the Americas from the USA to Brazil over the past 20-25 years. Total production of this species in the American region probably amounted to some 213 800 metric tonnes, worth US$ 1.1 billion2 in 2002. P. vannamei was introduced into Asia experimentally from 1978-79, but commercially only since 1996 into Mainland China and Taiwan Province of China, followed by most of the other coastal Asian countries in 2000-01. Experimental introductions of specific pathogen free (SPF) "supershrimp" P. stylirostris have been made into various Asian countries since 2000, but the only country to develop an industry to date has been Brunei. Beginning in 1996, P. vannamei was introduced into Asia on a commercial scale. This started in Mainland China and Taiwan Province of China and subsequently spread to the Philippines, Indonesia, Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia and India. These introductions, their advantages and disadvantages and potential problems are the focus of this report. China now has a large and flourishing industry for P. vannamei, with Mainland China producing more than 270 000 metric tonnes in 2002 and an estimated 300 000 metric tonnes (71 percent of the country's total shrimp production) in 2003, which is higher than the current production of the whole of the Americas. Other Asian countries with developing industries for this species include Thailand (120 000 metric tonnes estimated production for 2003), Viet Nam and Indonesia (30 000 metric tonnes estimated for 2003 each), with Taiwan Province of China, the Philippines, Malaysia and India together producing several thousand tonnes. Total production of P. vannamei in Asia was approximately 316 000 metric tonnes in 2002, and it has been estimated that this has increased to nearly 500 000 metric tonnes in 2003, which is worth approximately US$ 4 billion in terms of export income. However, not all the product is exported and a large local demand exists in some Asian countries. The main reason behind the importation of P. vannamei to Asia has been the perceived poor performance, slow growth rate and disease susceptibility of the major indigenous cultured shrimp species, P. chinensis in China and P. monodon virtually everywhere else. Shrimp production in Asia has been characterized by serious viral pathogens causing significant losses to the culture industries of most Asian countries over the past decade and slowing down of growth in production. It was not until the late 1990s, spurred by the production of the imported P. vannamei, that Asian (and therefore world) production levels have.
In 1997, the majority of cultured Penaeid shrimp were renamed according to the book "Penaeid and Sergestid shrimps and Prawns of the World" by Dr. Isabel Perez Farfante and Dr. Brian Kensley. Most scientists and journal editors have adopted these changes. Whilst the names Litopenaeus vannamei and L. stylirostris are technically now considered correct, the majority of the readers of this report will probably be more familiar with the original name Penaeus vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris. For the purposes of this report, therefore, the genus name Penaeus will still be used throughout. Throughout this document one billion is equal to one thousand million.
begun to rapidly increase again. By comparison, P. vannamei production has greatly reduced in Latin America also as a result of disease problems, however, there has so far been little sign of recovery. In Asia, first Yellow Head Virus (YHV) from 1992 and later White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) from 1994 caused continuing direct losses of approximately US$ 1 billion per year to the native cultured shrimp industry. In Latin America, first Taura Syndrome Virus (TSV) from 1993 and later, particularly, WSSV from 1999 caused direct losses of approximately US$ 0.5 billion per year after WSSV. Ancillary losses involving supporting sectors of the industry, jobs, and market and bank confidence put the final loss much higher. It is widely believed that these three most economically significant viral pathogens (and a host of other pathogens) have been introduced to the Asian and Latin American countries suffering these losses through the careless introduction of live shrimp stocks. Most Asian countries have legislated against the introduction of P. vannamei due to fears over the possibility of introducing new pathogenic viruses and other diseases from Latin America to Asia. Many governments have allowed importation of supposedly disease free stocks that are available for this species from the USA. The encouraging trial results, the industry-perceived benefits, including superior disease resistance, growth rate and other advantages, allied with problems in controlling the imports from other countries, have led to the widespread introduction of this species to Asia, primarily by commercial farmers. Unfortunately, importation of cheaper, non-disease free stock has resulted in the introduction of serious viral pathogens (particularly TSV) into a number of Asian countries, including Mainland China, Taiwan Province of China, Thailand and Indonesia, and maybe more. Although TSV is not reported to have affected indigenous cultured or wild shrimp populations, insufficient time and research have been conducted on this issue and there is a need for caution. TSV is a highly mutable virus, capable of mutating into more virulent strains, which are able to infect other species. In addition, other viruses probably imported with P. vannamei, for example a new LOVV-like virus, have been implicated in actually causing the slow growth problems currently being encountered with the culture of the indigenous P. monodon. There remain many unanswered questions regarding the possible effects of introduced species and associated pathogens on other cultured and wild shrimp populations in Asia. For such reasons there has been caution on the part of many Asian governments. However, this caution has not been demonstrated by the private sector, which has been bringing stocks of illegal and often disease carrying P. vannamei into Asia from many locations, as well as moving infected stocks within Asia. The commercial success of these introductions, despite disease problems, has allowed the development of substantial culture industries for these alien Penaeids within Asia and in China and Thailand in particular. One effect of this is that it is rapidly becoming difficult to control the importation and development of this new industry. Despite the problems with disease transfer, P. vannamei (and P. stylirostris) does offer a number of advantages over P. monodon for the Asian shrimp farmer. These are largely associated with the ability to close the life cycle and produce broodstock within the culture ponds. This relieves the necessity of returning to the wild for stocks of broodstock or postlarvae (PL) and permits domestication and genetic selection for favourable traits such as growth rate, disease resistance and rapid maturation. Through these means, domesticated stocks of SPF and specific pathogen resistant (SPR) shrimp have been developed and are currently commercially available from the USA. Other specific advantages include rapid growth rate, tolerance of high stocking density, tolerance of low salinities and temperatures, lower protein requirements (and therefore production costs), certain disease resistance (if SPR stocks are used), and high survival during larval rearing. However, there are also disadvantages, including their acting as a carrier of various viral pathogens new to Asia, a lack of knowledge of culture techniques (particularly for broodstock development) in Asia, smaller final size and hence lower market price than P. monodon, need for high technology for intensive ponds, competition with Latin America for markets, and a lack of support for farmers due to their often illegal status. Informed decisions regarding.
these pros and cons need to be taken, with close cooperation between governments, the private sector and NGOs to decide on the best course of action to take. Unfortunately, due to the rapid rise of P. vannamei, there has been little time for such considered actions concerning shrimp imports and movements. The recent publication of a number of codes of conduct and management guidelines (BMPs) for the transboundary importation of alien shrimp and their subsequent culture by, amongst others, FAO, the OIE, NACA, ASEAN, SEAFDEC and the GAA have clearly defined most of the issues involved. With the availability of SPF and SPF/SPR stocks of P. vannamei and P. stylirostris from the Americas, Asia has had the opportunity to decide whether to responsibly undertake such importations for the betterment of their shrimp culture industries and national economies, whilst avoiding the potential problems with viral diseases and biodiversity issues. However, a number of factors are described to have prevented this ideal situation from manifesting. Although many of the potential problems related to transboundary movements of shrimp and their viral passengers are as yet unknown, it is important that Asian governments take action in legislating control over this industry. Examples of countries that have managed to legislate for and enforce codes of conduct and management practices (as outlined in this report), and develop successful industries for the culture of imported P. vannamei, include the USA (and especially Hawaii), Venezuela and Brazil. These countries have succeeded despite early failures and disease episodes, demonstrating that such measures can and do work if rigorously applied. This report has attempted to gather all of the currently available data on the extent of P. vannamei and P. stylirostris importation and culture in Asia, its potential problems and benefits, and in this way serve as a source document from which to investigate further the means by which control over this issue might be re-established. Recommendations aimed at controlling the importation, testing and culture of these species have been made for all levels and are included in this report.
In 2002, global aquaculture production reached 39.8 million metric tonnes with a value of US$ 53.8 thousand million. This represented an increase in production of 5.3 percent by weight and 0.7 percent by value over the previous year. Although cultured crustaceans represented only 5.4 percent of total production by weight, they comprised 20.1 percent of total global aquaculture by value in 2002. Despite being affected by serious disease outbreaks in both Latin America and Asia, the annual rate of growth of the cultured shrimp sector grew by 6.8 percent (by weight) between 1999 and 2000. Although this had dropped to 0.9 percent during 2002, these growth rates are still high relative to other food producing sectors. The global shrimp production has decreased to more modest levels over the last decade (averaging 5 percent) relative to the double-digit growth rates which were observed during the 1970's (23 percent) and 1980's (25 percent) (FAO Fishstat database3, 2003). Modern shrimp farming began in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when French researchers in Tahiti developed techniques for intensive breeding and rearing of various Penaeid shrimp species including Penaeus japonicus, P. monodon and later P. vannamei and P. stylirostris. At the same time, in China, P. chinensis were produced in semi-intensive ponds, while P. monodon were produced in small intensive ponds in Taiwan Province of China. Also, in North America, the Department of Commerce's National Marine Fishery Service (NMFS) began funding research into shrimp farming. Early Penaeid culture efforts in the Americas during this period concentrated on indigenous species including P. setiferus in Panama, P. aztecus and P. occidentalis in Honduras and P. aztecus and P. duorarum in southern USA, P. schmitti and P. brasiliensis in Brazil, and then P. stylirostris in Panama. However, initial work with P. vannamei in 1972 gave much better production than the other species. When Brazilian authorities initially banned the import of P. vannamei, culture was started in Panama in 1974. Although P. stylirostris was producing well in Panama, and eyestalk ablation led to easy spawning, year round production was impossible. The better results obtained with P. vannamei encouraged work on maturation and spawning of wild broodstock. Once nutritional requirements of the broodstock were met, eyestalk ablation techniques led to successful all year reproduction of P. vannamei, and it replaced P. stylirostris in Panamanian commercial production in 1978 (Rosenberry, 2001). By the mid-1970s, fisherfolk and hatcheries were supplying large numbers of postlarvae (PL) shrimp and global cultured shrimp production started to increase rapidly reaching 22 600 metric tonnes in 1975. At this time, Ecuadorian farms were starting to produce large numbers of P. vannamei through extensive culture. Mainland China and Taiwan Province of China were producing P. chinensis semi-intensively and Thailand's P. monodon industry was just starting. Over the next decade, production grew to 200 000 metric tonnes, 75 percent of which was from Southeast and Eastern Asia. By 1988, production increased rapidly exceeding 560 000 metric tonnes principally as a result of increased production from Mainland China, Taiwan Province of China, Ecuador, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines (Rosenberry, 2001). The first major production crash occurred in Taiwan Province of China during 1987-89, when P. monodon production suddenly declined from 78 500 metric tonnes to 16 600 metric tonnes, widely considered to be due to pollution, stress and increased susceptibility to pathogens, especially viruses. Following this crash, Chinese technicians and culture techniques spread around the world, particularly to Thailand, which saw the rapid development of many small intensive farms for P. monodon and which became the world's leading shrimp producer starting in 1993, a position it held until the year 2000.
http://www.fao.org/fi/statist/statist.asp.
In 1989, the first major crash in price for farm-raised shrimp occurred, when the farm gate prices for Asian shrimp fell from US$ 8.50 to US$ 4.50/kg. This was largely due to the extended illness and subsequent death of Japan's emperor Hirohito, which stopped shrimp consumption in Japan, which was the world's largest market at the time. This price decrease may also have been due to the oversupply.
Total cultured shrimp.
Production (mt).
P. chinensis.
P. vannamei.
0 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Year.
Source: FAO Fishstat (2003).
of shrimp on the world's markets, which had grown by 25 percent over the fairly static 2 million metric tonnes level sustained for years from fishery, due to the increasing production from shrimp farms. Further crashes in production have subsequently characterized the world's shrimp farming industry, largely viral disease-related. These occurred first in Mainland China, when production fell from 207 000 metric tonnes in 1992 to 64 000 metric tonnes in 1993-1994 due to White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) outbreak. Similar continuing problems in Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia, first with Yellow Head Virus (YHV) and then WSSV, have occurred since the early 1990s. A similar scenario has also been seen in Ecuador and the rest of Central America owing to bacterial and then viral disease problems, first with Taura Syndrome Virus (TSV) in the mid-1990s and then WSSV from 1999 onwards. In Asia, during the early 1990s, Viet Nam, India and Bangladesh also developed sizeable industries with P. monodon. In Latin America, Honduras, Mexico and Colombia developed large semi-intensive industries based on P. vannamei and P. stylirostris. Through the early to mid-1990s, production hovered around 700 000-900 000 metric tonnes as some countries experienced severe production downturns, due largely to YHV and WSSV in Asia and TSV in Latin America, whilst others developed their industries (Table 1). Subsequently, production has risen again, largely due to increased competence in the management of viral problems with P. monodon in Asia, and the closing of the life cycle and development of domesticated and genetically selected lines of P. vannamei in Latin America, and particularly now, with the increasing culture of P. vannamei in Asia.
Total shrimp and prawns Value (US$/kg) 6.59 6.54 6.68 6.52 6.23 6.32 6.73 6.63.
Quantity (mt).
Value US$ million.
FAO Fishstat (2003).
Globally, marine shrimp continue to dominate crustacean aquaculture, with three major species accounting for over 75 percent of total shrimp aquaculture production in 2002 (the giant tiger prawn, P. monodon; the fleshy prawn, P. chinensis; and the whiteleg shrimp, P. vannamei) (Figure 1). The giant tiger prawn only ranked 16th in terms of global aquaculture production by weight in 2002, but it ranked second in terms of value at US$ 3 371 thousand million (second only to the massive production of freshwater silver carp). World cultured shrimp production levels reached 1.48 million metric tonnes by 2002 (accounting for more than 49 percent of global capture and cultured shrimp production) (FAO, 2002; Chamberlain, 2003) (Table 1 and Figure 1). The contribution of P. monodon has remained stable at around 600 000 metric tonnes from 1994 through 2002, whilst its contribution to world shrimp production has declined from over 63 percent to 40 percent in 2002, as P. chinensis and now particularly P. vannamei productions have increased to more than 500 000 metric tonnes between them (FAO, 2002). Current estimates compiled for this report suggest that the rapid growth of P. vannamei culture in Asia, particularly in Mainland China and Thailand, may result in a production of nearly 500 000 metric tonnes of Asian P. vannamei in 2003 (Table 3). Projections estimate that the world's shrimp culture industry will continue to grow at 12-15 percent/year, although prices in the US market have been steadily decreasing by 4 percent/year from US$ 10 to US$ 8/kg since 1997 (National Marine Fisheries Service website4) (Figure 1). In 2003, first quarter figures showed record imports into the US market, with fairly stable prices, although consumer confidence and the US and Japanese national economies remain low. Additionally, the increasing oversupply of P. vannamei from first Mainland China and soon other Asian countries, as well as Brazil and other South and Central American countries, will probably lead to a continuation in declining prices. This is compounded by the slow growth rate (9 percent/year since 1996) of the world's largest shrimp market, the USA (importing 430 000 metric tonnes in 2002), the slow European market (300 000 metric tonnes in 2002) and the declining Japanese market (250 000 metric tonnes in 2002) (Chamberlain, 2003; Globefish website5; NMFS website) (Tables 8 & 9 and Figure 3). Costs have also increased as the industry adjusts to increasing international standards on product quality and the environment, putting huge pressures on the majority of the world's shrimp producers. In Thailand, declining prices and uncertainty over market access have led a signficant number of farms to shift back to the culture of the indigenous Penaeid, P. monodon in 2004.
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/(US Department of Commerce) http://www.globefish.org/.
History of introductions of Penaeid shrimp.
The use of alien6 animal species to increase food production and income has a long history and has been an established practice since the middle of the 19th century. Controversy over the use of alien species arises from the many highly publicized and spectacular successes and failures. The FAO database of introduced aquatic species7 (DIAS) reports that aquaculture development has been the primary reason cited for most introductions, accounting for 40 percent of all cases. It also indicates that the number of introductions (65 percent being intentional) has increased exponentially since 1940. Most of these introductions are of fish, with only 6 percent or 191 records being of crustaceans. Such movements have been facilitated by recent advances in transport, which have made large-scale movements of many species increasingly easy. They are also directly related to the rapid global development of aquaculture and the demand for new species to culture (DIAS; Fegan et al., 2001).
Natural range of Penaeus vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris.
Penaeus vannamei is native to the Pacific coast of Mexico and Central and South America as far south as Peru, in areas where water temperatures are normally over 20ºC throughout the year (Wyban and Sweeny, 1991; Rosenberry, 2002). It is not currently known whether there is one population or if isolated populations exist, although there appear to be differences between stocks from various areas under culture conditions. Penaeus stylirostris is native to the Pacific coast of Central and South America from Mexico to Peru, occupying the same range as P. vannamei, but with higher abundance, except in Nicaragua at the peak of the range of P. vannamei (Rosenberry, 2002). It has recently been demonstrated that there are at least six morphologically and genetically distinct populations of P. stylirostris in the Gulf of California, Mexico alone (Lightner et al., 2002), raising the probability that there will be variations in their suitability for aquaculture.
Early movements for experimental culture.
The first experimental movements of Penaeid shrimp began in the early 1970s when French researchers in Tahiti developed techniques for intensive breeding and rearing of various alien Penaeid species including P. japonicus, P. monodon and later P. vannamei and P. stylirostris. In the late 1970s and 1980s, P. vannamei and P. stylirostris were transferred from their natural range on the Pacific coast of Latin America from Mexico to Peru. From here, they were introduced to the North-western Pacific coast of the Americas in the USA and Hawaii, and to the Eastern Atlantic coast from Carolina and Texas in the north through Mexico, Belize, Nicaragua, Colombia, Venezuela and on to Brazil in the south. Most of these countries now have established aquaculture of these species. Penaeus monodon and P. japonicus were also introduced in the 1980s and 1990s from Asia to various Latin American countries and the USA, including Hawaii, (where SPF populations have been established), and Ecuador and Brazil, where introductions were not successful.
An alien species as defined by the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio de Janeiro, 2002) is i) a species that has been transported by human activities, intentional or accidental, into a region where it does not naturally occur (also known as an exotic, introduced, non-indigenous, or non-native species) or ii) a species occurring in an area outside of its historically known natural range as a result of intentional or accidental dispersal by human activities (also known as an exotic or introduced species)(UNEP, 1995). http://www.fao.org/fi/statist/fisoft/dias/index.htm.
Introductions of P. vannamei to Asia began in 1978/79, when it was introduced to the Philippines (FAO correspondent), and in 1988 to Mainland China (FAO correspondent). Of these first trials, only Mainland China maintained production and started an industry. In 1988, a batch of P. vannamei PL were introduced into Mainland China from the Marine Science Institute of Texas University. By 1994, the Chinese aquaculturists were producing their own PL, and commercial shrimp culture began in the late 1990s. A similar early introduction of less than 100 000 PL P. vannamei into the Philippines in 1987 from "Agromarina" in Panama was not successful (Fred Yap, per. com.) and culture of this species was suspended for another ten years (Table 2). SPF P. stylirostris have also been experimentally introduced to many Asian countries (including Brunei, Taiwan Province of China, Myanmar, Indonesia and Singapore) from secure breeding facilities in Mexico and the USA. These introductions began in 2000, but have yet to make a major impact on the culture industries in those countries (with the exception of a small industry in Brunei), but without notable problems so far. Penaeus stylirostris was also introduced into Thailand and Mainland China in 2000, but has yet to make much impact in these countries.
Movement for commercial production.
The introductions of P. vannamei to non-native areas of the Americas, the Pacific and lately to Asia, have had a significant positive effect on the production capacities of the countries involved. This is probably the first time that this has ever been recorded with cultured shrimp. However, potential negative impacts are already being reported and will be discussed further in this report. Brazil Due largely to an inability to breed and rear local shrimp species intensively (especially under high temperatures and low dissolved oxygen conditions), Brazil first imported P. japonicus in 1980, P. monodon in 1981 and P. vannamei and P. stylirostris in 1983, followed by P. penicillatus in 1994 (Roberto Andreatta et al., 2002; de Barros Guerrelhas, 2003). Commercial production of P. vannamei began in 1983, but it was not until 1995 that this species became predominant. This was due largely to the importation of highly productive Panamanian stocks (in 1991), the mastering of its captive maturation, fast growth, efficient food conversion and high survival rates obtainable in ponds and its good market potential in Europe and the USA. USA Penaeus vannamei was first imported to the USA as postlarvae from Panama in 1985 into South Carolina, USA. It has steadily risen in popularity to become the main species of shrimp farmed in North America (Sandifer et al., 1988). Penaeus monodon were also imported into South Carolina from Hawaii in 1988 and subsequently escaped and have since been captured along the Eastern Atlantic coast down to Florida, although it is still not considered to be established (McCann et al., 1996). Six species of Penaeid shrimp (P. vannamei, P. monodon, P. stylirostris, P. japonicus, P. chinensis and P. indicus) have been introduced into Hawaii for culture and research purposes. Only P. vannamei is currently under commercial 