RAP Publication 2004/07.
Report of the.
FAO-ASEAN STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP ON HARMONIZATION OF STANDARDS FOR SHRIMP EXPORT-IMPORT.
Bangkok, 4 to 6 November 2003.
Report of the FAO-ASEAN STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP ON HARMONIZATION OF STANDARDS FOR SHRIMP EXPORT-IMPORT Bangkok, 4 to 6 November 2003.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
Bangkok, 2004.
DISCLAIMER The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this document do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations or the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) or of the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) concerning the legal or constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.
NOTICE OF COPYRIGHT All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holder. Application for such permission should be addressed to the Aquaculture Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Athit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT Due to the increasing concerns regarding disparities in quality control and inspections standards among ASEAN countries and the ability to export seafood commodities (especially shrimp) to other regions, the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries (ASWGFi) meeting in Lao PDR in May 2003 formed an ASEAN Sectoral Task Force to harmonize quality and inspection standards for shrimp export and imports in the region. As the lead country nominated by the ASWGFi for this issue, Thailand, through the Department of Fisheries, has requested FAO for technical and financial assistance in organizing the first strategic planning workshop of the Task Force. In response to this request, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, in collaboration with FAO Fisheries Department, ASEAN Secretariat and the Thai Department of Fisheries organized the "FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import" held at the ChaoPhya Park Hotel, Bangkok, Thailand, 4 to 6 November, 2003. This document contains the report of the workshop as well as selected parts of the presentations made at this workshop. The contents of the report were compiled and edited by Simon FungeSmith (FAO Regional Office Asia and the Pacific),.
ACCSQ ASEAN ASWGFi AVA BFAR BMP CCP CoC CODEX CoP DGCF DOF ELISA EU FAO FDA FVA GAP GC GHP GMP HACCP HPLC IAFI LC-MS-MS MRA MRL NACA NAFIQAVED NFSA NFSNC NSA RA SEAFDEC SPS SSOP TBT TSV US FDA VPHL WHO WSSV WTO YHV ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standard and Quality Association of South East Asian Nations ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (Singapore) Bureau of Fisheries and Aquaculture Resources (Philippines) Best Management Practice Critical Control Point Code of Conduct FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission Code of Practice Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (Indonesia) Department of Fisheries Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay European Union Food and Agriculture Organization Food and Drug Administration Food and Veterinary Administration Department (Singapore) Good Aquaculture Practice Gas Chromatography Good Health Practice Good Manufacturing Practice Hazard and Critical Control Point High Pressure Liquid Chromatography Integrated Quality Management Program Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry Mutual Recognition Agreement Minimum Residue Level Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific National Fisheries Quality Assurance and Veterinary Directorate (Viet Nam) National Food Safety Committee National Food Safety and Nutrition Council (chaired by the Ministry of Health, Malaysia) National Standardization Agency Risk Analysis South East Asian Fisheries Development Center Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement Taura Syndrome Virus United States Food and Drug Administration Veterinary Public Health Laboratory (Singapore) World Health Organization White Spot Syndrome Virus World Trade Organization Yellow-head Virus.
Introduction and background.
In the year 2000, global aquaculture production exceeded 35 million metric tonnes with a value of over 52 thousand million US dollars. Although crustaceans represented only 4.8 percent of total production by weight, they comprised almost 21 percent of the value of global aquaculture in 2000. The giant tiger prawn is ranked first by value at over four thousand million US dollars and more recent estimates indicate that white shrimp produced in Asia are making an increasing contribution to the overall production of Asian farmed shrimp. The USA has been the major market for farmed shrimp over the past few years and the market condition in the USA is now the predominant factor affecting international market prices. Shrimp is the number one seafood consumed in the USA and imports have reached 430 000 tonnes per year, worth 3.4 thousand million US dollars and are still increasing The Japanese market is also important with 80 percent of its imports in 2002 coming from Asian countries (particularly Indonesia, Viet Nam and India), compared to just 20 percent from Latin America. The European market is more difficult to penetrate than the United States or Japanese markets due to pressure from consumers as well as increasingly stringent European Union regulations about a range of issues that include sustainability criteria, traceability, contaminants and residues. The issues concerning antibiotics that have led to recent bans on importation and blacklisting of farmed shrimp from many Asian countries has caused considerable economic losses in many Asian countries. Part of the problem is due to the disparities in quality control and inspection standards among ASEAN countries. If it were possible to harmonize these, it would result in substantial savings while contributing to the stimulation of intra regional trade. Common standards could also enhance the reputation of the region as an exporter of safe products of consistent quality and composition. These considerations have been acknowledged by ASEAN in incorporating a move towards harmonization and equivalence in the ASEAN Strategic Plan 1999-2004. As the world moves towards a system of food regulation based on an assessment of risk, there will be a need to evaluate existing standards and regulations on a country by country basis. In the year 2000, FAO, in collaboration with the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, considered that it would be timely to examine opportunities for action on a region-wide scale. A consultation was convened1 in Manila, Philippines on 23 to 24 November 2000, immediately following the 7th ASEAN Food Conference and was attended by 23 representatives from the 10 ASEAN countries. This consultation recognized that differing priority levels within the ASEAN countries makes regional negotiations and consensus difficult especially when linked to the differing value and rate of growth of the fisheries sector. With respect to export products, the ASEAN states are frequently in a competitive position with one another, both for foreign and intra-ASEAN markets, further constraining cooperation and coordination. The conclusion of the Manila `Workshop on Harmonization of Regulations and Standards for Fishery Products in the ASEAN Region' identified the need for: 1.
open and transparent discussions to promote confidence building between the various inspection systems; the development of food control capacity through training and exchange of information;.
Workshop on Harmonization of Regulations and Standards for Fishery Products in the ASEAN region, 23-24 November 2000, Manila, Philippines.
working towards equivalence between the different control systems with the goal of concluding mutual recognition agreements between all ASEAN members; the preparation of a hazards and control guide specific for ASEAN products coupled with encouragement of increased CODEX participation; and the formulation of regional risk assessments for products of particular importance to the region.
Since this consultation, there has been increasing awareness of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and its implications for regional and global trade. There is recognition of the need for concerted action and a concerted voice in decision making on issues related to quality and safety standards and this has been most recently highlighted by the focus on antibiotic residues in farmed shrimp. To address these critical emerging issues and in recognition of the need to raise the profile of these issues at a policy level, the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries meeting in Lao PDR in May 2003 established an ASEAN Task Force to work towards recognition of regulatory inspection and control system of antibiotic residues in cultured shrimps. Thailand was assigned as the lead country. As the lead country, Thailand, through the Department of Fisheries, requested FAO for technical and financial assistance in organizing the first strategic planning workshop of the Task Force which was held at the ChaoPhya Park Hotel, Bangkok, Thailand, from 4 to 6 November 2003.
Purpose and objectives.
The participants at the workshop included national counterparts from the ASEAN countries comprising: - focal points for the ASEAN Sectoral Working Group on Fisheries and - a representative from the national agencies in the ASEAN countries with competence for coordination on the issues of harmonization and equivalence of standards for shrimp products FAO provided resource persons with competence in health and safety in seafood products, and also aquaculture production and management. The ASEAN Secretariat provided a resource person with competence in fisheries issues and the ASEAN processes that concerned regional harmonization and equivalence and trade with other regions. As lead country for the task force, the Department of Fisheries Thailand provided several additional resource persons competent in seafood safety and quality, the shrimp farms' code of conduct certification programme, as well as aquatic animal health. A list of participants is given in Appendix.
The workshop was opened with statements from the Thai Department of Fisheries, the ASEAN Secretariat and the regional office of the Food and Agriculture Organization. These statements can be found in Appendix.
The strategic planning workshop process included presentations by country representatives which outlined the current status of their national mechanisms for safety and quality of exported shrimp. The presentations also included references to the various national initiatives that had been undertaken to improve the quality of the shrimp produced at farm level. A synthesis of the country papers is presented in Section.
Resource persons at the workshop made presentations covering the following subject areas: a description of the steps required and issues which need to be covered in the development of regionally harmonized standards and quality management systems (Presented paper);.
presentations on global harmonization and equivalence2 efforts (FAO HQ); and strategic approaches in the region for addressing the problem of shrimp product quality at the farm level (with emphasis on cluster approach and certification systems).
The workshop process included three working group sessions which were dedicated to the task of identifying issues and solutions to the following three key areas of harmonization and equivalence: how to initiate a process to conclude Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRA); how the concept of an acceptable level of risk to the domestic and export food chains could be applied as a tool for encouraging equivalence and how to establish Risk Analysis as a basis for strengthening the negotiating position of producers; identification of the existing and potential mechanisms for achieving harmonization and equivalence.
The report of the workshop is a synthesis of the outputs of the working groups discussions and indicates areas for action and possible mechanisms by which this may be achieved. The schedule of the workshop can be found in Appendix 3.
`Equivalence' is the term used by Codex Alimentarius. `Harmonization' is a more restrictive term meaning "equal regulation"; whereas "equivalence" means "equal effect". In addition `harmonization', in principle, does not require risk assessment (e.g. see EU current food regulations).
Regional synthesis on issues relating to the import and export of cultured seafood products and harmonization and equivalence.
3.1 Introduction.
The top five largest producers of cultured shrimp are Asian countries i.e. China, India, Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam,. It is estimated that around 1.0-1.5 million tonnes per year of shrimp are traded internationally. Major importing countries are the USA, the European Union (EU) and Japan. ASEAN countries such as Malaysia and Myanmar are also developing shrimp farming with the goal of generating foreign income. There are potential areas for shrimp farming in these two countries, however, development of the sector requires both culture techniques and investment. The Philippines export of cultured shrimp has declined over recent years compared to other ASEAN countries (excluding Singapore where shrimp is imported and re-exported). Cambodia, Brunei and Lao PDR are not key players in the area of shrimp production and export, although there are shrimp farms in Cambodia and Brunei. Table 1 presents the updates of export of fresh and frozen shrimp from ASEAN countries based on the country papers presented at the FAO-ASEAN Strategic Planning Workshop on Harmonization of Standards for Shrimp Export-Import. According to the available data, Thailand and Indonesia were surpassed as the largest shrimp producers and exporters of the region by Viet Nam in 2002. Cultured shrimp, especially, Black Tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon), has always been the most important cultured shrimp species for ASEAN countries. More recently, there has been the introduction of White shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) into the region and this is now making up a significant part of the region's production. Whilst there is strong interest in the culture of white shrimp, it has been subject to bans on importation for culture in some ASEAN countries over concerns of its possible impact on indigenous shrimp species and the potential transmission of viral disease. Despite these bans, these shrimp are now forming an increasing percentage of the cultured shrimp in several ASEAN countries. Table.
Export of fresh and frozen shrimp from selected ASEAN countries Country Indonesia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Viet Nam 2001 Volume (Tonnes) 124 064 NA 21 454 12 061 8 069 144 606 87 151 Value (US$ 1,000) 924 667 NA 251 000 144 651 92 090 1 303 524 777 820 2002 Volume (Tonnes) 121 526 NA 22 868 23 621 6 570 102 753 114 580 Value (US$ 1,000) 831 965 NA 317 000 50 648 61 285 819 619 949 418.
Note: NA = Not available.
Shrimp farming and processing in ASEAN is targeted at the export market which means that the quality and standards of shrimp products depends largely on the requirement of importing countries. Consumers worldwide are increasingly demanding safe and high quality seafood. Issues of contaminations with pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella, Vibrio cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus etc. and drug residues such as chloramphenicol and nitrofurans, have triggered importing countries to.
tighten their import requirements and regulations. This now requires ASEAN countries to produce and export shrimp that meet these standards of these importing countries. Thailand, which is both an exporter and an importer of cultured shrimp from other ASEAN countries (for re-processing and re-export), has responded to this concern by imposing import regulations. As of July 25, 2003, imported cultured shrimp must be accompanied by health certificate and animal health certificate assuring that the shrimp is free from chloramphenicol, nitrofuran as well as TSV (Taura Syndrome Virus), WSSV (White Spot Syndrome Virus) and YHV (Yellow-head Virus). Consignments without the certificates can still enter the country, but will be subject to sampling and analysis by Department of Fisheries (DOF) laboratories. The shrimp will be held at the importing company's cold storage until the analytical results reveal that there is no violation to DOF's regulations. There is growing concern among ASEAN countries that existing systems for inspection and testing are not adequate to respond to the new requirements of importing countries (both within the region in internationally). There are acknowledged discrepancies in the inspection and analytical capacities of the ASEAN countries and well as concern regarding differences between the exporting and importing country. There is a need for improvement and upgrading of inspection systems and analytical capacity of the competent authorities within the region. The aim of this would be the harmonization and equivalence of the inspection and control systems, which would facilitate intra regional trade as well as guarantee safe and high quality seafood for local consumption and for export outside the region to the global market. Cooperation among ASEAN countries would also enable a stronger negotiating position with major importing countries, especially in situations where standards are developed or imposed that do not reflect actual risk or internationally accepted levels. This section discusses the existing controls in place for safety and quality of cultured shrimp in the ASEAN region. The problems encountered by the member countries and ways to harmonize their standards are also addressed.
Existence of inspection authorities.
This section on the existing inspection bodies and control systems will focus only on 7 countries, i.e. Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam, since they are the regional key players for shrimp culture and export. To date, Brunei, Cambodia and Lao PDR have not yet had developed control systems for the import and export of fish and fishery products. These six ASEAN countries listed above, except for Myanmar, are recognized by the EU as third countries entitled to export fish and fishery products into the community. However, Myanmar is able to export to the EU on interim status, pending a visit of EU official inspectors to assess its inspection and control system if in compliance with the EU Directive 91/493. Table 2 shows the import and export control authorities of the seven countries. Controls for both import and export of fish and fishery products lie under fishery agencies in most countries. For Singapore, import and export of food and agriculture products are the responsibility of Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore (AVA). Malaysia and Thailand have similar structures where fishery imports are covered by the Ministry of Health, while the export is controlled by Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture. This is an example of where different government agencies have jurisdiction over different parts of the inspection and control system. An example of the potential problem is the case of Thailand, where there has been import of shrimp and tuna to the country for further processing and re-export. The imported raw material must meet the country's standard (and is controlled by one department), and when processed and re-exported must meet the standard and requirements of the importing country (and is under the jurisdiction of another department). The government of Thailand foreseeing the 5.
potential disruption to trade, authorized DOF by Cabinet Decision on March 4, 2003, to control imports of shrimp and tuna under the authority of Food Act (1979). The Act is actually enforced by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Ministry of Health. Modern inspection systems emphasize the risk analysis approach and verification measures cover both plant inspection and analysis of finished products. Increasingly, certification is seen as a means to reassure consumers and is becoming part of a farm-to-table approach. It should be noted however, that `certification' is not recognized under the food safety regulations for either the EU or USA. It is important that the agency authorized to deal with health and safety of products should have overall control, capacity and expertise in the area to ensure health and safety throughout the production chain. Often, this responsibility is shared between more than one government department. Revision or promulgation of new laws to give this authority might not be practical in some countries or could take considerable time. Interim measures would be more effective cooperation between Ministries to strengthen control systems. An example of this is Indonesia, which established a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture to jointly set-up a compulsory Fish Inspection and Quality Control Regulation in 1975. this was based on the Health and Hygiene Acts of 1960 and 1962 and in the MOU, the Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (DGCF) took over responsibility for inspection and quality control of fish and fishery products.
List of ASEAN export and import control authorities.
Country Indonesia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Export Control Directorate General of Capture Fisheries (DGCF), Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture Department of Fisheries (DOF) Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) Food and Veterinary Administration Department (FVA), Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA) Import Control Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Ministry of Health NA Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) Food and Veterinary Administration Department (FVA), Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA) Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives and National Fisheries Quality Assurance and Veterinary Directorate (NAFIQAVED) DOF have control of imports of shrimp and tuna only. Other products are still under jurisdiction of Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Ministry of Health No reference regarding import authority in the country paper Remarks.
Thailand Viet Nam.
Department of Fisheries (DOF), Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives National Fisheries Quality Veterinary Directorate (NAFIQAVED) Assurance.
Controls in place from farm-to-table.
Control at production level In 2002, the EU imposed a 100 percent scheme of all shrimp imported from Indonesia, Myanmar and Viet Nam, after shipments were found to contain Chloramphenicol residues. Later Thailand was put on the same probation when metabolites of another type of antibiotic, Nitrofuran, were detected in Thai shrimp shipments. Although monitoring programs on drug residues had been initiated previously in these ASEAN countries, the differing detection methods and sensitivities of the equipment used between the exporting and importing country resulted in considerable disagreement over the existence of the residues and the levels they were present at. Oxytetracycline and Oxolinic acid are permitted to use in shrimp farming in some countries, where withdrawal periods and maximum residues are controlled by regulations. Chloramphenicol and Nitrofurans are prohibited in most ASEAN countries for use in feeds for animal for human consumption. However, the illegal addition of the drugs in aquatic animal feeds, vitamins or biological products is still widely conducted without the authorities' knowledge. Since intensive farming is promoted to obtain higher yield in limited farming areas, the use of drugs and chemicals is considered essential by some farmers, to sustain production by preventing or curing aquatic diseases. In addition, farmers may be misled by sales representatives and encouraged to use prohibited drugs and chemicals. The solutions to this issue is not only improved production practice, but also more effective control over access to and the marketing of veterinary drugs. With the ban or 100 percent inspection imposed by the EU is a strong incentive for ASEAN countries to strengthen their own controls over the import and distribution of prohibited drugs An approach to prevent farmers using prohibited or restricted drugs and chemicals in the first place would be the introduction of some form of code of conduct for shrimp farming in the region. There are several different terms for this and these are known variously as a `Code of Conduct (CoC)', Code of Practice (CoP)', `Good Aquaculture Practice (GAP)', `Best Management Practice (BMP)'. The use of a Hazard and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system for aquaculture is also considered as a mechanism to ensure safe and good quality raw material and has been already implemented in aquaculture production in a number of countries for a number of species. These includes salmon (e.g. Norway and Canada), seabream and seabass (a number of Mediterranean countries); trout (a number of European countries) and catfish (USA). Unfortunately for the ASEAN context, HACCP is very difficult to implement at the farm level where the unit of operation is very small (this is the typical form of aquaculture producer in Asia). The use of HACCP at the farm level makes it particularly easy to identify the use of veterinary drugs (either approved or not approved) and in the case of approved drugs the management of the course of treatment and withdrawal time to assure an accepted Minimum Residue Level (MRL) HACCP is already in place in many processing plants, where CCP (Critical Control Points) can be more effectively controlled to assure product safety. The challenge is to seek ways to introduce some regionally acceptable form of HACCP to the production level3. Indonesia has responded to the global trend for a Farm-to-Table approach by establishing a program to monitor the use of antibiotics (especially Chloramphenicol) in shrimp farming and during processing. Awareness among farmers on proper use of therapeutic agents is created through dissemination. Each lot of finished product is examined for the residue prior to export. Malaysia has established Code of Practice for fish and shrimp farming. A `Malaysian Aquaculture Farm Certification Scheme' is being launched to certify farms for GAP, on a voluntary basis.
CODEX code of practice and guidelines are currently proposing the use in HACCP for fish production. It is also expected that future EU regulations will include HACCP in production and in feed production. US regulations cannot currently enforce HACCP in production.
Shrimp farms are to be registered with the Department of Fisheries of Myanmar and although GAP is not practiced in the country yet, since currently there are only semi-intensive culture systems in Myanmar. It is planned to be implemented in the future. CoC and GAP concepts are acknowledged and practiced in the Philippines, however, there is no information as to the extent BFAR is involved in promoting the operation and what percentage of farms are currently certified. One activity which should be recognized as a good initiative for the Philippines is the certification of private hatcheries and accreditation of private shrimp laboratories. Since shrimp is the major export fishery commodity for Thailand, it has a national initiative to promoting the Farm-to-Table approach through a voluntary Code of Conduct for responsible shrimp farming, first introduced in 1998. In addition there is a second initiative for small farms known as `Good Aquaculture Practice', which targets the practices of smaller farmers and is less comprehensive. While the CoC deals with both environmental management and controlling of product safety (and is more easily implemented in larger farms), GAP narrows the scope by focusing only on safety of the products. Currently there are approximately 5 000 shrimp farms certified for CoC and GAP by DOF in Thailand. The country is targeting the remaining 25 000 farms (which are mostly small scale with areas less than 1-2 ha), to be certified by the end of 2004. CoC and GAP are in the initiation stage or undergoing pilot implementation in some provinces of Viet Nam. In order to promote regional cooperation, Thailand is working with Viet Nam to achieve its goal in implementing CoC and GAP countrywide. Whilst the ASEAN region is becoming proactive in developing systems for the production of safe and high quality shrimp to supply the world market, there are considerable discrepancies in capacity and legislative authorities in the member countries. To ensure that production of shrimp is free from prohibited drugs, controls must be in place that covers the import of the chemicals, distribution channels and the production of aquatic animal feeds. In many countries, such as Myanmar and Thailand the import of drugs is controlled by Ministry of Health, however, the registration of feed mills and feed formulations are mostly under jurisdiction of Fishery Agencies such as Thai DOF and NAFIQAVED of Viet Nam. More effective monitoring of the production and distribution of animal feeds and chemical sales outlets are needed for an effective traceability system. Traceability, as a means to ensure product safety, is an emerging mechanism that has been introduced by major importing countries such as USA and the EU. Traceability (whereby individual batches of shrimp could be traced back to the pond they were produced in) is not well developed in the ASEAN countries. Establishment of such a system is hampered by small farm size, the large numbers of farms, lack of effective farm registration systems, monitoring capacity (and the costs involved) as well as the diversified nature of farm harvesting collection and transport to the processors. In order to effectively introduce a traceability system requires comprehensive documentation throughout the whole production chain from hatcheries, to farms, through to processing and the export of the finished product. The ASEAN countries should seriously consider how to establish such systems that would enable the tracing back from finished product to origin of the raw materials used. Thailand has enforced the use of a `Movement Document' which should accompany the harvested shrimp from the farm via the broker or shrimp collector, through to processing plant. Processing plants are required to implement a coding system for product recall purposes, which can be linked to the movement document. If finished products are found to contain prohibited drugs by an importing country, this system can assist Thai DOF to trace back to the farm of origin as well as link to feed or chemical suppliers. This system is not fool proof, since shrimp are still marketed in central markets and supplied by a large group of shrimp collectors, which compromises a system based on individual documents for each batch of shrimp. In this situation shrimp from many farms are often mixed to supply specific sizes as required by the buyers; compromising the ability to track individual harvests. Contract farming or buying directly from reliable farms is a mechanism that enables far better control batches and thereby traceability of products. Contract farming requires the agreement of harvest prices as well as compliance with codes of practice. There are examples in the region where this has been attempted, although there are a range of problems that limit its attractiveness to farmers. International.
price fluctuations are a major reason for farmers leaving such systems as fixed prices may not reflect buoyant price at the time of sale and farmers felt that they have lost opportunity. A crucial aspect of limiting the illegal use of drugs in production is a more effective control over the distribution and sale of such drugs, which are typically readily available and often do not require veterinary certificates or documentation for their purchase. As mentioned above, there is often more than one government authority responsible for the control of such drugs and chemicals and effective coordination between these departments will be necessary if controls are to be effectiv