Technical Consultation on Decentralization.
FAO, ROME, 16-18 DECEMBER 1997.
Decentralization and Local Government Performance.
Jean-Paul Faguet London School of Economics.
Working Group 6: Decentralization and Natural Resources Management.
DECENTRALIZATION AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE 4 December, 1997 Jean-Paul Faguet Centre for Economic Performance and Development Studies Institute, London School of Economics This paper is taken from a study financed by a grant from the World Bank Research Committee. The full report should be available from mid-1998. I. Introduction The latter half of the twentieth century has witnessed the sustained growth of central state apparati throughout both the developing and developed world. Driven by the secular growth of the welfare state in the industrialized world, and in the developing world initially by the political imperative of creating national identities out of the ashes of colonialism, and subsequently by developmentalist attempts to guide the economy to growth and prosperity, central governments increased their authority and involvement in the political and economic lives of their electorates to degrees undreamt of by their 19th century forebears. In the wealthiest OECD countries, central government expenditures rose to between 40 and 50 percent of GDP,1 and throughout the world governments nationalized large segments of their economies and circumscribed much of the remainder in a web of tariffs and regulations. The effects of this increase in mandate were not entirely positive, however. With centralized policy control, regulation and production came high concentrations of political power and discretion over resource allocation, which in turn brought proportional incentives to corruption and clientelism. Electorates grew disenchanted with bureaucratic regimes which seemed distant, and which produced uniform outputs often unrelated to local needs and conditions. Local cultural and ethnic variation was quashed beneath the steamroller of national identity defined by the capital. And income in the developing and communist world did not converge with that of the richest countries, but mostly fell further behind, while the developed countries themselves grew more slowly than during the boom years of the 1950s and 1960s. The modern debate about decentralization and the optimal size and structure of government begins with the perceptions of these and other failings of the modern state. Proponents of decentralization condemn the impotence and waste of centralized government, and seek to invigorate it and focus its efforts; the ills of corruption, clientelism and political alienation are often regarded as the natural by-products of a bureaucracy distant in space and rendered insensitive, inefficient, and inflexible by its size. Policy failure in the sense of sub-optimal choices is diagnosed as resulting from poor information and incentives that are skewed away from ideal outcomes. Reformers advocate the decentralization of political authority and public resources to sub-national levels of government as a general cure for these ills, operating through the reduction of government to more manageable dimensions, thereby making it responsive and accountable to the governed.
World Development Report 1995.
As the reader will surmise, the decentralization debate is both broad and often frustratingly imprecise. Arguments for and against decentralization frequently assume the character of sweeping, cross-disciplinary claims about the effects of administrative measures on the quality and efficiency of both government and social interaction. The lexicon in which discussion occurs is as varied as the backgrounds of those who participate (i.e. Economics, Political Science, Sociology, Anthropology, Public Administration, etc.), greatly impeding comparisons of proposed measures and of the effects they are designed to produce. Writers on decentralization, whose work more often than not consists of reports on past, or advocacy for future, reform, seldom specify the mechanisms by which favorable changes are meant to occur, and often fail to isolate the variables involved in a way which is both satisfactory and consistent. II. An Unresolved Debate Partly as a result of this, the economic and political literature on decentralization is inconclusive. The debate ­ both theoretical and empirical ­ on whether decentralization increases or decreases social welfare and efficiency is still very much unresolved. As we shall see in more detail below, arguments in the political science literature in favor of decentralization rely on incomplete, often anecdotal reasoning which describes situations where decentralization may be beneficial, but with a loss of generality and without distinguishing the conditions (assumptions) which are strictly necessary for this conclusion to obtain from those which are not. Often this literature simply assumes away the central problem of decentralization by asserting that "it brings decision-making closer to the people". That devolving power and resources to smaller administrative units will necessarily result in better decision-making and an accompanying increase in social welfare is, at least, highly contentious and unproven. Additionally, such an assertion directly contradicts the nation-building and developmentalist theories of the 1950's and 1960's, which made diametrically opposed claims that were equally unsubstantiated. Before boarding the decentralization train, it would seem prudent to establish stronger reasons for embracing it than the fact that it is the opposite of a previous, failed strategy. The economic treatment of decentralization is similarly ambiguous. Notably, it is much easier to write an economic model which demonstrates that a highly centralized regime is more productively efficient than a decentralized regime (as is demonstrated below). The issue of allocative efficiency ­ a supply of goods and services that meet people's needs and wants - is less straightforward, and involves questions of the formation and aggregation of preferences that economists have turned to only recently. But it is nonetheless fair to say that the advantage of decentralization in terms of allocative efficiency has not yet been established. Empirical results reported from a wide variety of decentralization experiences throughout the world are also mixed. Rondinelli, et al. (1984) report that Indonesia, Morocco, Thailand and Pakistan showed perceptible, but small, improvements in resource distribution, local participation, the extension of public services to rural areas, project identification and implementation, and employment generation after implementing decentralizing reforms of the public sector. Studies of decentralization in Algeria, Libya and Tunisia show that the performance of decentralized administrative units have been positive in some cases, but have not always met the goals of the original policy reformers. Devolution in Papua New Guinea increased popular participation in government, and has improved the planning, management and coordination capacity of provincial administrators. Reform there does seem to have made government more responsiveness to people's local needs, but has also added an additional layer to the state bureaucracy, thus weakening.
government's ability to attract foreign investment and stimulate long-term economic growth. Positive results from decentralization reported in this and other studies (notably Bennet 1993, Cheema and Rondinelli 1983, Rondinelli et. al. 1981, and Veira 1967) include, in general terms:.
Decentralization has increased the access of people in previously neglected rural regions and local communities to central government resources, if only incrementally, in most of the LDCs where it has been tried.
Decentralization seems in some places to have improved participation and enlarged the capacity of local administration to put pressure on central government agencies, thus making available to them large quantities of national resources for local development.
The administrative and technical capacity of local organizations is said to be slowly improving, and new organizations have been established at the local level to plan and manage development.
National development strategy now increasingly takes account of regional and local level planning. Negative results include:.
Decentralization and privatization of state activities has a tendency to create greater inequities among communities and regions with different levels of organizational capacity.
This opens the door for local elites to play a disproportionate role in the planning and management of projects.
The absence of or weakness in supporting institutions (public or private) needed to complement the managerial capacity of local governments, as well as weaknesses in the linkages and interaction between local and central administrations, have led to disappointing results from decentralization in Africa and Asia.
Programs are usually justified on grounds of efficiency and administrative effectiveness, but then judged on their political results. Where political aims are important, considerable deviation from best practice is tolerated. Not surprisingly then, decentralization seldom lives up to expectations. In general, these and other studies show that decentralization has achieved moderate success in some countries, moderate failure in others, and both in many. But the reasons for this are poorly understood. As the workings of decentralization remain largely a mystery, it is difficult to judge whether specific decentralization programs failed due to weakness in design or implementation, and more difficult still to recommend improvements. III. Definitions of Decentralization Before entering into the substance of arguments for and against decentralization, it is important to review the various meanings which the word has been given by both authors and the governments that implement it. Because such a discussion becomes very quickly an exercise in taxonomy, it is useful to proceed as succinctly as is prudent. As alluded to above, the word "decentralization" is more a semantic umbrella beneath which are gathered many and different concepts than it is an analytically precise term. This study will concentrate on the more representative academic usages given "decentralization" by both political scientists and economists. Perhaps the best general definition of decentralization is by Rondinelli, et. al.:.
the transfer of responsibility for planning, management, and resource-raising and allocation from the central government to (a) field units of central government ministries or agencies; (b) subordinate units or levels of government; (c) semi-autonomous public authorities or corporations; (d) area-wide regional or functional authorities; or (e) NGOs/PVOs.2 If we add "and private firms" to (e), then we have a good general definition with which we can approach most theoretical and empirical issues. Bennet (1990) highlights a useful distinction between two general decentralizing thrusts: intergovernmental decentralization, which involves transfers of authority, responsibility, power and resources downward among different levels of government, and market-based decentralization, where these are transferred from governments to the market and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Each category embraces numerous specific strategies for transferring functions. Wolman (in Bennet, 1990) delineates three types of decentralization: political decentralization, administrative decentralization, and economic decentralization (though admitting that there is no clear distinction between the first two). An additional complicating factor is introduced by the question of the general class of regimes within which decentralization takes place. Aside from the issue of whether effective decentralization is more likely to occur under democratic, authoritarian, theocratic, or other regimes, the type of regime under which decentralization occurs is likely to have a great impact upon its effectiveness. For the sake of focus, this thesis will concentrate on decentralization under democratic regimes. We shall see that the presence and nature of democratic controls will play a large role in our ability to theorize about decentralization. It is clear that the underlying concepts regarding the forms which decentralization takes are broadly similar, but also that the taxonomic exercise could continue through innumerable divisions, definitions and categorizations.3 The reasonable course to take, then, is to choose one definition and proceed. This study elects the following: Decentralization will be understood as the devolution by central (i.e. national) government of specific functions, with all of the administrative, political and economic attributes that these entail, to local (i.e. municipal) governments which are independent of the center and sovereign within a legally delimited geographic and functional domain. It will be useful to keep in mind the definition of Rondinelli, et. al. during the theoretical discussion, as most authors have adopted a more general approach to the question of decentralization than that proposed above. The empirical work and theoretical proposals, however, will stick closely to the latter definition. The two reasons for choosing this usage are both powerful and fortuitous. First, the clarity of the proposition greatly simplifies analysis, allowing it to focus on discrete, well-defined decentralizing measures and exogenous variables in order to gauge the empirical effects of each on policy outputs. Second, the empirical case which will be used to test these relationships involves precisely this form of decentralization (see below), implemented uniquely and vigorously.
"Government Decentralization in Comparative Perspective: Developing Countries", International Review of Administrative Science, 47(2), Rondinelli, et al. (1981) Some authors add a "Hybrid" category to the ones listed above. This would seem to be a futile gesture, as any categorization involves idealized forms abstracted from reality, and therefore most unlikely to be detected in their pure form, but which exist in order to facilitate exposition and understanding.
IV. The Political Economy of Decentralization The intellectual case for decentralization originates in the most basic arguments concerning democratic government and the effective representation of citizens' interests, to which economic arguments based on efficiency have been added more recently. Political philosophers from the 17th and 18th centuries, including Rousseau, Mill, de Tocqueville, Montesquieu, and Madison distrusted autocratic central government and held that small, democratic units could like ancient Athens preserve the liberties of free men. In several of the Federalist Papers, Madison theorized about the prevention of tyranny via a balance of powers not only among the branches of central government, but between central and regional and local governments as well. The modern case for decentralized government is well represented by Wolman (in Bennet, 1990), to whom we now turn. Wolman groups his arguments concerning decentralization under two main headings: Efficiency Values and Governance Values. Efficiency Values comprise the public choice justification for decentralization, where efficiency is understood as the maximization of social welfare. Wolman contrasts the provision of public goods with the market for private goods. Within the private economy, individual preferences are expressed through a market mechanism which facilitates continuous signaling between supply and demand via prices. The nature of public goods, however, is such that competitive markets will not provide them. When public goods are provided, tax and service packages should reflect as accurately as possible the aggregated preferences of community members. However, because individual preferences for public goods differ, there will be some divergence between the preferences of individual community members and the tax and service packages reflecting the aggregated community preferences. It is likely that the average divergence of individual preferences from the tax and service package adopted by the community through its government will be less in small communities of relatively like-minded individuals than it will be in larger, more heterogeneous areas. [...Allocative] efficiency and social welfare are thus likely to be maximized under highly decentralized political structures.4 One counter argument to this rationale highlighted by Wolman is that decentralization will complement, or even exacerbate, disparities among communities with different economic means. In principle, however, this objection is easily addressed through grants administered centrally, designed to equalize localities' resources. Similarly, decentralization to low levels of government may reduce efficiency by inhibiting the achievement of economies of scale in the provision of some services, though this too is easily solved via different levels of government providing these services according to their technical characteristics. A more serious objection is posed by the existence of externalities5 in the provision of local public goods, which reduce overall efficiency for society. These can be solved by reverting to higher levels of government, which internalize the externalities in their taxing and spending decisions. But the fundamental objection to such efficiency arguments, and one which is generalizable for this literature, is that it simply assumes that central government will produce more standardized, less-differentiated outputs less suited to local preferences than local government. Although this is intuitively appealing, the lack of an explanation for how this comes about amounts to assuming.
Wolman in Bennet, p.27. Uncompensated costs or benefits imposed by one unit on others - e.g. downstream water pollution from waste treatment.
away the problem. We can easily draw up a model where central government installs agents in each community to gather information and detect local needs and preferences, which data is then relayed at low cost back to the center (see Annex 1). All outputs are produced centrally, and then distributed in the desired amounts and qualities to all localities. If we assume economies of scale in at least some outputs, and transportation costs low enough that these gains are not canceled out (neither unreasonable), then it is easy to see that such a system would dominate the decentralized solution on (productive) efficiency grounds.6 This could form the basis of an argument for the centralization of government which, in purely logical terms, is every bit the equal of its opposite. Some authors have sought refuge in the position that the competing claims are a metric question, and therefore resolvable through empirical research. But this response is also highly unsatisfactory. The issue in question - whether central government is likely to produce outputs that are more or less similar to individual's preferences - is intimately tied to the structure of governmental institutions and to the incentives that these produce. As such it is tractable to theorizing about cause-effect relationships concerning structure, product and aggregate outcomes. It is, in fact, a question unsuited for empirical study, as attempts to measure the allocational efficiency of "central" versus "decentralized" government, in ignorance of plausible mechanisms, are likely to omit important explanatory variables and result in models which conflate causes and produce meaningless estimates. It is therefore important to provide a mechanism which adequately explains the central feature of the standard efficiency argument. Governance Values comprise Wolman's second grouping, in which he includes: (i) responsiveness and accountability, (ii) diversity, and (iii) political participation. The first values, responsiveness and accountability, are easily the most important of these and comprise the political parallel to the argument about efficiency detailed above. Decentralization, by placing government closer to the people, fosters greater responsiveness of policy-makers to the will of the citizenry and, it is argued, results in a closer congruence between public preferences and public policy. This is not only because decision-makers in decentralized units are likely to be more knowledgeable about and attuned to the needs of their area than are centralized national-government decision-makers, but also because decentralization permits these decision-makers to be held directly accountable to the local citizenry through local elections.7 However this argument, as presented by the political science literature, is also a priori. Politics in decentralized governments may be more closed than national politics, and more susceptible to interest-group capture or manipulation by powerful agents. Alternately, local elections may be contested on non-local issues, such as the popularity of the national government (as occurs in the UK). Wolman asserts that the question of whether responsiveness and accountability increase or decrease with decentralization is an empirical one. Diversity in public policy is another argument in favor of decentralization. Diversity is valued because (i) it offers citizens a greater choice in public services options when they are deciding where to reside (see the Tiebout model below); and (ii) it is thought to encourage.
Additionally, such a system of public goods-production would arguably have lower staffing requirements/running costs, as reproduction in local democratic government structures could be replaced by a smaller number of agents.
Wolman in Bennet, p.32.
experimentation and innovation in public policy. Decentralization will thus result in a variety of policy approaches at the local level, some of which will be more successful than others. Once given policies have been shown to work, they can be taken up by other decentralized units as well as central government. This argument obviously depends critically upon the empirical question of whether decentralized structures really do foster greater policy diversity than central government. Limited research suggests that it does, but the question cannot yet be considered closed. The question of the diffusion of successful policy experiments to other units and levels of government is also an open, empirical one. We note, however, that the organizational literature stresses that decentralized structures promote innovation, while centralized structures promote adoption. The devolution of real power to localities is also thought to enhance political participation amongst the people, because of the increased levels of interest and involvement in local government which it brings about. This process, it is argued, enhances democratic values and performs a systems-maintenance function, thus promoting political stability. Similarly, decentralization provides the opportunity for citizens to debate and decide upon those local issues which matter most to them, thus promoting political education. Lastly, local politics provides a training-ground for local leaders, who can then progress to become national leaders. These claims are also subject to empirical investigation; initial results are inconclusive, but not favorable. Participation levels measured by turnout at elections in the United States, a country considered decentralized, are notoriously low, especially for local elections (typically around 30%). It is also low in the UK (around 40%), but much higher in countries considered more centralized, such as France (70%) and Italy (85%).8 Nor is the educational function of decentralization evident in the level of political discourse in the US and UK. This last point is probably related to the importance of mass media in the modern political discourse. When most political debate is mediated by a technology that displays extremely centralizing characteristics, the electorate is likely to be better informed about the intricacies of the national and international politics that fill the airwaves than they are about the state of the municipal sewerage system, or the performance of local police. In conclusion, and in the wake of a wide variety of arguments, it is important to note that the intellectual core of the case in favor of decentralization is composed of a combination of the allocational efficiency argument with that concerning the responsiveness and accountability of local government. Other arguments regarding diversity, education and leadership development may bolster this reasoning, but are of secondary importance. The possibility that local government can be designed in such a way that it accurately perceives the needs of its electorate and faces clear incentives to attend to them, both to greater degrees than central government, constitutes a powerful hypothesis in its favor. V. What is the mechanism? But the above discussion, though it would seem to point us in the direction of a theory of decentralization, does not explain in rigorous terms how decentralization achieves these results. Much of the argument is a priori, counterclaims are not adequately examined before being dismissed, and the conditions necessary for decentralization to succeed are not clearly delineated. What is the mechanism by which decentralization of the public economy brings about improvements in allocative efficiency? Is local government accountability an input or an output? Are local.
Wolman in Bennet, p.34.
elections the only necessary legal/institutional prerequisites, or are other conditions necessary? It is to these issues that we now turn. We begin by examining the economic literature. The most influential economic model of the local public sector is Tiebout's (1956) A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. This paper imagines a world where efficient local governments compete to lure perfectly informed individuals, who move costlessly between localities and choose the one which offers their optimal bundle of public services and taxes. This revelation of preferences through migration brings about a competitive equilibrium in locational decisions which ensures that no individual can make himself better off without making someone else worse off: a Pareto-efficient result. But the mechanism which Tiebout posits ­ individual mobility in a context of fixed public service supply ­ amounts to moving voters around while holding politicians constant. This directly contradicts our experience of the world, where ­ save for extreme cases9 ­ it is individuals who are largely fixed and governments which, via elections, change. Even in a highly mobile country such as the United States, during any given electoral cycle the overwhelming majority of the population is geographically static, and it is their governments and politicians (local, state and national) that change. Thus we must conclude that this model is fundamentally flawed: it posits a relationship which does not by and large exist in the world, and ignores a series of others (amongst voters, between voters and governors, amongst politicians vying for power) which do and may very well be important to the question of decentralization and social welfare. Another way in which decentralization might improve public service provision involves information. Although the economics of information is a relatively new and still-developing field, the basic argument is that information about local preferences, along with technical data concerning the production and provision of public services, is so voluminous and complex that central governments are incapable of gathering it all and processing it adequately. Thus, important information will not be reported, or will be lost in transit, or will be interpreted incorrectly at the center, or some other sort of informational obstacle will arise which prevents the center from knowing what services the periphery most needs and how best to provide them. These models' inability to explain why this is so in a precise and convincing fashion, however, amounts to an assumption that it is true. Though admittedly more elegant, this is not far removed from the operative element of the political arguments examined above. Perhaps more importantly, it is not clear in the closing years of the 20th century that distance poses a significant obstacle for the fluid transmission of information. In an age when CNN and MTV reach most corners of the globe, it is simply not credible that data on local preferences and other relevant conditions, once accurately gathered, somehow cannot be transmitted to the center without significant distortion or cost. Indeed, the modernization of communications systems would seem to have the opposite effect; as bandwidth increases and unit costs fall, central government becomes more viable, not less. And yet we should not dismiss this line of thinking entirely. There is intuitively some sense in which local people have easier access to better local knowledge than non-locals. But to call this an information problem is to conflate distinct concepts. For the problem does not lie in the information per se, but rather in the agent who collects it. With proper incentives and local cooperation, a non-local agent could easily gather the relevant information necessary to provide a routine public service. And indeed, a local in the same position would require comparable conditions to succeed. But the local has obvious advantages on both counts. As a local, it is she, her family, friends and community who benefit from the efficient provision of that service. Thus she.
9 Rwanda is one recent example. 8.
has natural incentives to perform her job accurately and honestly which her colleague does not. For similar reasons, she may find obtaining cooperation less costly. And she will have obvious, though not necessarily large, advantages of familiarity with local conditions, which it would cost an outsider to learn. This argument is completely independent of the character, quantity or quality of the information involved, and concerns instead the performance incentives which agents face. As such, it is easily generalizable to a large number of tasks incumbent upon government agents, whether central or local, and therefore to the question of central vs. local government generally. Indeed, this insight lights the way to a deeper understanding of the efficiency implications of local government. As discussed above, where economies of scale dominate, central government will enjoy productive efficiencies in the supply of public services. Local government will enjoy advantages in allocative efficiency, however, to the degree in which local officials' professional incentives are more in line with the interests of the local population than the incentives of central government officials. This condition will obtain where local officials are fully accountable and responsible to the local population, and where electoral representation is sufficient to ensure that all groups have a voice in local affairs. Compared to such an environment, the incentives faced by national public servants, with a much broader and probably more diverse constituency, would by definition be less propitious to satisfying the needs of a given local population. Such an argument constitutes the kernel of a theory of institutions, incentives and accountability in the provision of local public services. It comprises the heart of a political-economy model of decentralization, local government and optimal local-service provision which I am developing elsewhere, in a larger theoretical and empirical study of decentralization. I will not present a formal, fully specified version of this model here, but will instead limit myself to saying that such a model relies explicitly on local government autonomy in a context of real local power and resources, open and transparent local democracy, good (though not necessarily perfect) information on the part of voters, and some form of countervailing power or safeguard, institutional or otherwise, to protect against abuses of power by local leaders. It can be shown with this model, and in a systematic and rigorous way, that decentralization changes the incentives which public officials face by making local government accountable to its electorate. Local officials will tend to respond to their voters' needs more than their central government peers, in the knowledge that their jobs depend on doing so. Local government will in this way produce outcomes (i.e. pu