METHODOLOGICAL GUIDE.
Participatory Appraisal of Nutrition and Household Food Security Situations and Planning of Interventions from a Livelihoods Perspective.
Text by Karel Callens (ESNP) and Bernd Seiffert (SDAR).
The authors would appreciate to receive feedback and comments regarding this document.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Background and Introduction.
Key Concepts and Principles.
Uses of the Guide.
Methodological Steps Step 1 ­ Orientation, training and planning Step 2 ­ Participatory appraisal Step 3 ­ Causal analysis of nutritional vulnerability Step 4 ­ Objective Oriented Planning Annexes.
Secondary data analysis.
Focus group discussions on 4 thematic areas.
Problem tree analysis.
Documentation matrix.
Example of a framework and agenda for the appraisal.
Objective tree analysis.
Daily evaluation matrix.
Field methods ­ tool box.
Sample selection 10. Village profile 11. Regional profile and SWOT 12. Strategy analysis.
Background and introduction.
Background The present guide is based on the experiences gained from FAO executed projects in Ethiopia, Mozambique and Zambia. The projects were community-based and aimed at improving nutrition, household food security and poverty alleviation. The projects were designed through a preparatory phase or pre-project, whereby extensive use was made of methods and tools for participatory appraisal, analysis and planning. The preparatory phase was not a one-off exercise. It also served as a starting point for an iterative process of participatory appraisal, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, although the steps beyond project design are not subjects of this guide. Many different stakeholders representing interested parties and institutions at various levels participated in the pre-projects. They came from the community level, sub-district, district, provincial or regional and the national levels. International stakeholders in the form donor agency representatives, specialised technical agencies and non-governmental organisations were also involved at specific points during the process. The process that was followed in both cases can be split into four broad steps. These included: (1) A district-based orientation and training exercise. (2) A participatory appraisal at community level. (3) Based on the results of step (1) and (2), a holistic situation analysis. (4) Followed by an integrated and objective-oriented planning process at district, regional and national level. Aim The aim of this guide is to provide a methodology for persons tasked with the responsibility of appraising and analysing nutrition and household food security situations with a view to use this information for project design, planning and evaluation. The users may be external consultants or resource persons, as well as field staff involved in projects or programs. Purpose The purpose of guide is to appraise and analyse food security and nutrition situations from the perspective of people's livelihoods. This may be done with a view to use the resulting analysis for the design of free-standing nutrition and household food security projects, as was the case in the above mentioned projects. The guide also provides suggestions on how to adapt the process so that it may be used for the integration of nutrition and household food security considerations and objectives into sector-specific or poverty alleviation projects or for participatory monitoring and evaluation. Stakeholders Multiple stakeholders are involved in the process. External consultants and resource persons are only involved as facilitators and are as such not stakeholders per se. Although they may have been recruited by a stakeholder like the national.
government or a development agency. They use their expertise to train, help design and carry out the appraisal, interpret and analyse the results and develop intervention strategies. The real stakeholders are the local people and those with direct or indirect links to them. They include first and foremost the individuals, households, communities and community groups whose livelihoods are being investigated. A second stakeholder category is civil society, which in the broadest sense comprises all those organisations that form a link between the local people and the public/private sector institutions. The third category comprises the public sector including government institutions from local, district, regional or provincial, national and international level. The last and often forgotten category is the private sector. Contents To guide the user, the guide is divided in four parts. Part 1 provides useful background and information on how this guide was developed. Part 2 looks into concepts, approaches and terminology that are used in this manual. Part 3 explains the different uses of the methodology provided and shows how to use the manual depending on the purpose. Part 4 constitutes the main methodological guide and deals with the four major steps of preparing for and carrying out appraisal, analysis of the findings and planning of interventions. Part 5 provides a series of guidance sheets to facilitate the different events and exercises, from stakeholder workshops, over participatory appraisal tools, to analysis and planning methods.
Key Concepts and Terminology Thematic Focus: Nutrition and Household Food Security from a Livelihood's Perspective.
Nutrition Nutrition, as all other concepts that are being used in this guide, needs to be defined from both a local and an outsider perspective. This is important given that local people may have their own way of naming or describing specific nutrition problems and have their own understanding of the reasons for these problems. Reaching a good understanding of local perspectives is crucial to understanding how people address their problems. From a scientific perspective, nutrition is an area of knowledge that is concerned with the provision of food and its utilisation in the body. The body needs nutrients for growth, development, health and general wellbeing. Often, people's understanding of what nutrition is concerned with is limited to the visible effects of under- or overnourishment on bodyweight and health. The relationship between nutrient intake and health status is clearly important. In the case of protein-energy malnutrition, this relationship is quite straightforward, even to the layman. The effects of specific nutrient deficiencies may be more insidious and remain hidden to the non-nutritionist as in the case of most micronutrient deficiencies. Apart from the health-nutrition relationship, there are many other, but not necessarily less important, aspects to nutrition. These include the relationships between nutrition and: (1) physical activity, development and work capacity; (2) mental activity, development and educational performance; (3) social behaviour and cultural practices, etc. Household food security Household food security refers to the ability of a household to have year round access to an adequate supply of nutritious and safe food to meet the nutritional needs of all family members. Hence, household food security is a key determinant for the nutritional status of the individual household members. Often, the term `household food security' and `food security' are intermingled. Food security is defined in its most basic form as access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy life. The focus in `household' food security is on the household as the most basic social unit in a society. This distinction is important because activities directed towards improving household food security may be quite different from those aimed at improving national level food security. The latter often being more related to macro-level production, marketing, distribution and acquisition of food by the population as a whole. The focus in household food security is on how members of a household produce or acquire food throughout the year, how they store, process and preserve their food to overcome seasonal shortages or improve the quality and safety of their food supply. Household food security is also concerned with food distribution within the household and priorities related to food production, acquisition, utilisation and consumption. It is clear that the focus is not just on food but also on people and households and how.
they give shape to the food chain. Household food security introduces the livelihood's perspective and looks at vulnerability factors within the household as well as external sources of vulnerability including national policies, environmental conditions, access to infrastructure and facilities, etc. Sustainable Livelihoods A livelihood refers to the means a person has access to for securing the necessities of life, including one's abilities, the resources at his disposal and the activities through which he makes a living. A person's livelihood is sustainable when one is able to cope with and recover from stress and shocks, maintain or improve one's capabilities and assets, and ensure that the next generation will equally have access to sustainable means of living. There is also a collective aspect to sustainable livelihoods. Abilities and assets are developed over time and carried over from one generation to another. They are continuously exchanged and transformed within and among households, communities, nations and globally. There is also a continuous drive to adapt and change to new conditions. These may be caused by developments, stresses and shocks beyond one's direct control as well as by changes that are taking place within one's own household, community or society. People's livelihoods are therefore interdependent across time, location, socio-economic class, ethnic or religious group, nation, etc. At a collective level, livelihoods are sustainable when all members in society benefit equitably from their combined and shared abilities, resources and activities. From a livelihoods' perspective, nutrition and household food security are basic livelihood outcomes that provide objectively verifiable indicators for the sustainability of people's livelihoods, as well as for the success or failure of development. Through its impact on an individual's health, growth, development and general wellbeing, nutrition is in itself also a key determinant of a person's ability to make optimal use of his abilities, and the resources and opportunities at hand. Given this close relationship, the objective of this guide is to introduce relevant livelihood analysis concepts, approaches and tools in the appraisal and planning process. 2.2 The levels of the appraisal and planning process.
The appraisal and planning methodology allow for the specific needs, interests, aspirations and opportunities of different stakeholders to be addressed. It is therefore important to differentiate between these stakeholders on the basis of the type of household they belong to, the form of communal organisation, their socio-economic background, the agro-ecological environment they live in, etc. When this differentiation is made during the appraisal, the planning phase will lead naturally to the development of interventions that are appropriate for these different groups. Household A household may be defined as a unit of people living together, headed by a household head. This is often a man or a woman, in case there is no man. Increasingly, grandparents are taking up this role, as well as adolescents, in those households where both parents have deceased. Apart from the head of the.
household, there may be a spouse, children and permanent dependants like elderly parents or temporary dependants like a divorced daughter or son.
A community may be defined as a group of people living together in one place and considered as a whole especially in terms of social values and responsibilities. The group may have either an official or a customary form of administration. There are also cases where both forms co-exist. Local terminology may exist to distinguish between the two. There may be a more or less clear agreement and understanding regarding the application of customary versus statutory law and regarding the roles, responsibilities and powers of traditional versus government organisations. Community group For the purpose of this manual, a community group can be defined as a group through which community members co-operate. These may be informal groups such as mutual assistance societies or more formal organisations such as co-operative societies. In a self-help group, all members benefit from their combined skills, resources and activities. Common social and economic interests of members may help to keep the group together. Socio-economic group A socio-economic group is a group of people who share similar social norms and valued and have a comparable economic status. Agro-ecological zone An agro-ecological zone can be defined as an area or stretch of land that is particular in terms of what organisms live in it, how they relate to one another and their physical surroundings, and how people make use of these natural resources for agriculture. 2.3 A Participatory Approach.
In the context of program and project design, broad stakeholder participation is key to sustainability as it leads to increased local ownership, commitment to achieve objectives, durable social organisation, and empowerment. Participation in development How local people understand participation depends on their specific social and cultural background. Reaching a good understanding of local people's perceptions is key to the successful incorporation of objectives and considerations related to people's participation in development policies and programmes. Participation in development can be defined as a process of equitable and active involvement of all stakeholders in the formulation of development policies, strategies and programs. It implies that people from different socio-economic, cultural, religious, gender, age and other groups take part in an equitable manner in appraisal, analysis, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. For a fair and impartial development process to take place, disadvantaged stakeholders need to be empowered to increase their level of knowledge, influence and control over their own livelihoods, including the development initiatives affecting them. 7.
Participation in development is also seen as an organised effort within institutions and organisations to increase people's access and control over resources and decision making. Participation implies an iterative process involving the continuous re-adjustment of relationships between different stakeholders in a society in order to increase stakeholder control and influence over development initiatives that affect their lives. There are various levels of participation ranging from providing information and consultation, over joint planning and decision-making, to empowerment and selfmanagement by the stakeholders themselves. Stakeholder participation For the purpose of this guide, a stakeholder is defined as an individual, group of individuals or organisation with an interest or concern in development. These comprise in the first place the local people whom are directly affected by development or the lack thereof, including individuals, households, community-based interest groups and their associations, socio-economic groups, local businesses, etc. A second group comprises those agents that work directly with the local people, including local government, government support services, non-governmental and private sector organisations. The third group comprises those who are remote and work with the local people through local intermediaries, like those belonging to the second group of stakeholders. They include policy makers, development agencies and government ministries. The level of participation of the different groups of stakeholders in the development process depends on their negotiating power. In the absence of effective democratic institutions and processes, the balance may be biased towards those belonging to the second and third group, depending on the institutional arrangements. Indigenous knowledge There are many closely related concepts in use - local knowledge, indigenous knowledge, traditional knowledge, etc. - which refer to the knowledge that people in a given place and culture have developed over time, and continue to develop. Local knowledge, or indigenous knowledge, is thus based on experience, often tested over centuries of use, adapted to local culture and environment and dynamic and changing. Local or Indigenous knowledge is often contrasted with "scientific" or "modern" knowledge ­ the knowledge developed by universities, research institutions and private firms using a formal scientific approach. In the context of project design, it is important to consider that knowledge of the people inside a typical community may differ from the knowledge of those tasked with appraisal and planning who are often the better-educated, scientifically trained specialists. There may be considerable conflict between these two different sets of knowledge and ways of viewing the world. It is also important to realise that different people within a community have different knowledge. The type of knowledge people have may be related to gender, age, education, labour division within the family, enterprise or community, occupation, environment, socio-economic status, experience, etc. The type of traditional.
knowledge people have translates into different attitudes and practices under specific circumstances, and often affects nutrition and household foods security. Gender Gender refers to the state of being male or female with reference to the social and cultural differences between men and women rather than to the biological ones. One of the key concepts used in this manual is people's participation and people centred development. People are not a homogenous group, but include both men and women. Within and among households, communities, socio-economic groups, cultures, agro-ecological zones and geographic areas, the lives of males and females may be organised very differently. Gender is one of the many important social characteristics, along with ethnicity, religion, age, socio-economic group and other features that need to be considered to better understand people's livelihoods and their ability to achieve good nutrition. Because of gender, men and women have different roles, responsibilities, access to resources and capabilities, constraints and opportunities. It is therefore important when appraising a livelihood situation that all information and findings should be disaggregated by gender ­ meaning that information should be collected and findings analysed separately for men and women. Also for planning purposes, gender should be considered to make sure that interventions are appropriate and acceptable for and will benefit both women and men. Even interventions that are technically successful may lead to social changes and trends that are not desired and had not been anticipated. If women are not involved in planning, interventions that aim at increasing food production may be biased towards cash crops under the control of men. Because of social norms, women may have to provide their labour without having access or control over financial benefits. Having less time and resources available for child-care and home gardening, household food security and child nutrition may suffer. It is therefore important to determine who does what, whom has access over assets and who controls the benefits. Apart from including specific gender analysis tools, all appraisal and planning tools should also be designed and applied in such a way as to be gendersensitive.
THE USES OF PARTICIPATORY APPRAISAL AND PLANNING.
The various methodological steps presented in this guide may be used to achieve different purposes. The four major ones include: (1) The appraisal of a nutrition situation within the broader context of a livelihoods analysis. (2) The design of a strategy, a programme or a project with the improvement of nutrition as development objective. (3) The integration of nutrition objectives and considerations into sector-specific and poverty-alleviation projects and programmes. (4) The development of a baseline for participatory monitoring and evaluation of nutrition and household food security indicators Depending on one's background and what one wants to achieve, the user of this guide may wish to use part or all of the methodological steps presented in Section.
If one has already embarked on an inter-sectoral and iterative process of appraisal, analysis and planning, one may wish to adapt the appraisal design and tools to one's own purposes and skip the process steps. In case of time or financial constraints, one may wish to base the analysis solely on secondary information and hence skip step.
The first purpose of the appraisal is always to prepare a profile of the nutrition situation of a specific area or population. Local government may use such a profile to sensitise national policy makers and planners and solicit their support. A district or area profile may also provide useful information to organisations interested in supporting specific programmes in the area. In this case, the appraisal may be a one-off exercise and the information may be updated from time to time. In any of those cases, those tasked with the appraisal may break off the exercise after Step 3, once the findings have been analysed. The appraisal team should avoid creating false expectations and inform local stakeholders that no immediate action will follow from the appraisal. Without having the resources available to support action, one may decide to go one step further and move into the identification of objectives and potential strategies. This would be the case where for example a district based development committee would wish to seek funding from central government or donor agencies. In several countries, district development committees have designed their own district development plans, incorporating nutrition objectives and considerations. These are financed through decentralised rural development and sector investment programmes. In this case, the appraisal team should implement all four steps so as to be able to present a basket of strategic interventions. While the objective of the exercise may be poverty alleviation, the methodology allows for a focus on nutrition as a basic livelihood outcome and determinant. To capture other livelihood outcomes, one may wish to adapt or use alternative tools. The prioritisation of these interventions will assist donors and central government together with local stakeholders to make decisions on what programmes to implement first. Such a situation would also require that the district-based consultation process started off in Step 1 is already or will be institutionalised.
Institutionalisation requires the establishment of an iterative process of appraisal, analysis and planning and the involvement of grass roots stakeholders. Often, the establishment of such a process is not immediately applicable. The institutional framework may not be adapted to decentralised and participatory decision making and existing funding mechanisms may not allow for the devolution of budgetary and financial authority to the lower levels of the administration. In such cases, one may wish to demonstrate how such a system could work and lead to greater impact and sustainability. This can be done through projects and programmes, whose experiences may later on be up-scaled or replicated and institutionalised. In this case, the team tasked with project design may wish to run through all four steps and establish a process through which stakeholders from the various levels can participate in the different stages of the project cycle. The appraisal may also be used as a baseline against which to measure change over time. Monitoring may be done through a regular measurement of those indicators that were found to be sensitive to capture nutritional vulnerability in specific groups. Beneficiary assessment building on the results of previous appraisals may be used to measure project or programme impact during as well as following implementation. For the purpose of a beneficiary assessment, one may use Steps 1 to 3 and if one wishes to use this information for a mid-term adjustment in project design Step 4 provides, with some adjustments, an appropriate planning methodology.
METHODOLOGICAL GUIDE ­ BASIC STEPS.
STEP 1: ORIENTATION, TRAINING AND PLANNING Objectives: · Based on already available information from secondary sources and local resource persons, carry out a preliminary objective oriented analysis of the nutrition situation. · Provide the resource persons to be involved in the field appraisal and analysis with guidance on the underlying key concepts, approaches, methods and tools to be applied. · Based on the key issues that emerge from the preliminary analysis, design a thematic participatory appraisal focused on opportunities and constraints for improving nutrition within the broader context of people's livelihoods. Participants: Step 1 makes use of key resource persons and stakeholders from various sectors that work directly or indirectly with the local people, as described under Section 2 ­ Stakeholders. They are expected to participate in training the field appraisal teams, in the analysis of the appraisal findings and in the local level strategy identification and planning. Description: Secondary data review Prior to the appraisal, a review of secondary data should be carried out in order to focus the exercise on critical information gaps. To gather secondary information, one may, if time and resources are not limited, commission sector or thematic reviews from national consultants to gather and analyse secondary information. Sector reviews could be organised in such a way as to review the sector's performance and its impact on nutrition and household food security. Although, the latter may become very difficult when appropriate data are missing. A guidance sheet on how to proceed with secondary data analysis has been attached in annex.
District training cum planning workshop The quickest and most cost-effective method to proceed with the preparation of the appraisal is to organise a `training cum planning' workshop involving stakeholders that work directly or indirectly with the local communities. At such a workshop, sector representatives can be invited so as to provide the necessary specialist technical input. Ideally, such a workshop is held at district level because this is the level that is closest and most relevant to local people in terms of stakeholder participation and knowledge on the local situation. If several districts and regions are involved, one may proceed through a national workshop to cut down on the time needed for the follow-up district-based workshops. Although, a national workshop cannot substitute for a district workshop, given the need to involve those stakeholders that work directly with the local people. The `training cum planning workshops' are designed as a participatory learning exercise. External experts and local resource persons share information and 12.
knowledge with the ultimate goal of reaching a better understanding of the local situation. Identification of stakeholders One of the very first tasks in preparation for the appraisal is the identification of the major local and external stakeholders. This should ideally be done prior to a `training cum planning' workshop, so as to ensure that all major stakeholders are invited. The workshop may then refine this identification and list the main roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder. Information should be included on their roles and responsibilities in relation to nutrition, their linkage to other stakeholders, and how they work with local people and institutions (e.g. by gender, socio-economic criteria, by affiliation with religious or other groups, etc.). A Stakeholder Venn Diagram is a good tool to get such a discussion going. The method is described as Tool 5 in annex.
Thematic focus and approaches Following the stakeholder appraisal, the focus should shift to the theme of the appraisal and the underlying approaches. This can be done through a brainstorming session in working groups, whereby the participants reflect on the following four themes: (1) nutrition and household food security from a livelihoods perspective; (2) people's participation and community institutions; (3) indigenous knowledge; and (4) gender and socio-economic differentiation. Guidance sheets on how to facilitate this session have been attached in annex.
Apart from orientating the participants, the brainstorming session also provides a first opportunity to raise important issues that will be dealt with in the causal analysis that is to follow. Such issues include: (1) what do local people understand by nutrition, (2) who are the nutritionally vulnerable groups, and (3) how do gender, socio-economic and other factors play a role. It is important that these issues are raised at this early stage, as the causal analysis will be developed around those groups that were identified as being particularly vulnerable. These may not just be age groups, but gender, socio-economic and agro-ecological factors may also play a major role. Problem tree analysis Based on the secondary data and the specific knowledge of the participants, the workshop may then proceed with a causal analysis of malnutrition. Ideally, this is done separately for all groups that were identified as nutritionally vulnerable. Problem tree analysis provides an excellent tool for this purpose. A Guidance sheet on how to facilitate such an analysis is given in annex.
Documenting workshop findings Throughout the workshop, it is important to keep track of issues that need further investigation and information that is missing, doubtful or needs to be differentiated. For example, participants may be tempted to present unconfirmed hypotheses for facts and these may need to be verified. It may also happen that certain information has been over-generalised. Such generalisations may be true for some but not for all, depending on their socio-economic background, the agro-ecological zone they live in, the age group or gender they belong to. When there is an indication that this is the case, one should document such differentiation. Another major and very frequent source of error occurs when the absence of a solution is presented as a.
problem per se (e.g. lack of irrigation instead of drought). Such a statement preempts the selection of a specific solution, even if such a solution may not necessarily be appropriate. The facilitators should be extremely alert to avoid these possible sources of bias, as they will influence the ultimate outcome of the exercise. A guidance sheet has been attached in annex 4 on how to keep track of issues that need to be further investigated and information that needs to be gathered through the appraisal. Objective tree and strategy analysis From the problem tree analysis, the workshop participants continue with an objective tree analysis and identification of potential strategies. Guidance sheets on how to carry out objective tree and strategy analysis are attached in annexes 6 and 12. One may wonder about the use of proceeding with what looks like a planning exercise, prior to having carried out the actual appraisal. The purpose is dual. First, given that workshop participants will be involved at all stages of the exercise, it is important that they are familiar with all aspects of the methodology from appraisal, through analysis to planning. Secondly, and this is an aspect that is often overlooked and surfaces later on when there is little opportunity left to address the issue, planning is not just about the formulation of solutions from a purely technical perspective. While solutions should be technically sound, they should equally be locally acceptable and feasible. Hence, by having identified potential solutions, prior to the appraisal, the opportunity has been created to use the appraisal to investigate their local acceptability. Designing the appraisal Once the workshop participants have gone through the entire analysis, from problems, through objectives to strategies, a good overview should now be available of those issues that the appraisal is to investigate. If this information has been documented as explained in annex 4, it now becomes very easy to prepare a list of key iss