Draft 27/05/1997.
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation Rural Development Division IG-1: Public Rural Development Institutions.
DECENTRALIZATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT: FAO'S EXPERIENCES.
BACKGROUND TO THE DECENTRALIZATION PROCESSES WARNING AGAINST THE RISKS OF DECENTRALIZATION.
Substitution of a supply philosophy by a demand philosophy.
Informational imbalances do not facilitate activity co-ordination.
The legacy of paternalism may lead to a poorer supply of support services.
The clientelist tradition creates the risk of appropriation.
Institutional rigidity and the pace of decentralization FAO'S KEY ADVANTAGES: KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE.
Focus on public institutions A) The agricultural production systems approach: the role of surveys and typologies in dialogue between the State and rural populations B) Decentralized planning and the role of training C) Restructuring of agricultural support services.
Focus on civil society A) Promotion of land management projects and contractual links between local communities and the State B) Extension policy within the participatory approach C) Popular participation programs and structuring peasant organizations.
Focus on local government levels A) Local government levels in a decentralization process B) The capacity of local government levels to become true poles or rural development C) The building of interfaces between national and local levels of government THE RED-IFO DECENTRALISATION MODEL.
Decentralization methodology: demand regionalization and policy differentiation (RED).
Support policies: information, training and organization (IFO) A) The role of access to information in dialog with the State B) Training as a means of avoiding institutional vacuums C) Organization and mediation mechanisms LINKS BETWEEN DECENTRALIZATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT.
Conclusions and recommendations.
Directions for pursuing analysis of and research into decentralization and its links with rural development Bibliography Footnotes.
BACKGROUND TO THE DECENTRALIZATION PROCESSES.
Massive recent withdrawal by the State (privatization, deregulation and finance policies of restricted public spending) initially fuelled a large-scale reduction in public institutions' intervention capacity and, in rural development terms, triggered a contraction in the public institutions which had been furnishing agricultural services, the down-scaling or abolishment of subsidies and the privatization of certain agricultural support services. Rural development institutions, therefore, are engaged in a restructuring process of equally massive proportions. Decentralization and the transfer of operational functions and certain support services to intermediate and local government levels, producer organizations and civil institutions, form a key facet of these developments. State withdrawal has created a window of opportunity for other rural development agents to undertake action. The present report commences by presenting a study carried out by FAO on the risks associated with processes of decentralization. An account is then provided of the valuable knowledge-base and experience which FAO has built up, which places it in a position to propose appropriate ways of responding to such risks. Identification of the latter and of FAO's valuable advantages makes it possible, finally, to put forward a decentralization model based on a methodology of regionalization and differentiation and three associated policies: information, training and organization.
WARNING AGAINST THE RISKS OF DECENTRALIZATION.
By decentralization is meant the process whereby government institutions transfer decision-making powers and resources closer both to the target populations of public policy and to all protagonists in civil society, in the context of the re-definition of the role of the State, deregulation and privatization. Essentially decentralization can take three forms:.
Deconcentration to regional and/or local levels (for example, a Ministry which transfers some of its activities and legal powers to its regional and/or local units). Such a transfer fundamentally constitutes administrative decentralization in that it does not really involve a shift in decision-making power but only in "some administrative responsibilities from the central government to the regional, zonal and district level government offices, retaining all powers of control and authority with the centre" (IV4, p. 3).
Delegation of functions to regional semi-public bodies (for example a Ministry transferring some of its activities and legal powers to regional and specialist agencies). Delegation consists of "assigning some tasks to the lower level. It implies that the central government creates or transfers to an agency or administrative level certain specified functions and duties, which the latter has broad discretion to carry out. The agencies may or may not be under the direct control of the central government (but) indirect control is implied in delegation" (IV4,p. 4).
Devolution of functions and resources to the populations themselves or to local government levels (transfer to organizations representative of populations or to municipalities, village authorities or rural communities). Devolution "involves creating or strengthening independent levels or units of government through transfer of functions and authority from the central government. The local units of government to which functions and authority are devolved would be mostly autonomous, with the central authority only exercising indirect, supervisory control over them" (IV4, p. 5). Devolution is the most advanced form of decentralization since it implies a transfer of power to a local institution or association which enjoys a high level of autonomy. Popular participation in the decision-making process is most important in this type of decentralization. Evidently decentralization is simply a general process covering all spheres of government action, and its particular conditions for success need to be specified for each branch of the economy. However, this report deals exclusively with conditions for decentralization in relation to State rural development action. In the context of the legacy of centralized policies, the State's retrenchment and, in particular, decentralization, carry a number of risks which FAO's experience in the field has contributed to identifying. There are five decisive legacy/risk pairs:.
Substitution of a supply philosophy by a demand philosophy.
Centralised policies were guided by a pure supply philosophy: a global development strategy which did not take specific local conditions into account.
Lack of mechanisms which would make it possible to adjust the instruments to suit the specific problems of each region, branch or type of producer.
There is a risk that governments will be tempted to base their intervention approach on a pure demand philosophy, which would have the merit of taking account of the particular circumstances of each locality or type of producer, but the disadvantage that action would be diluted and that an overall philosophy to guide the definition of rural development strategies would be lost.
The lack of an overall philosophy can be particularly serious since the sum of local solutions does not necessarily provide an overall solution to the problem of rural development, or higher and more stable levels of investment, employment and production.
Informational imbalances do not facilitate activity co-ordination.
When intervention is centralized, information is not distributed in a symmetric fashion, but is concentrated at central government levels.
There is a risk that rural populations are unable to gain a general view of their demands and specific problems and co-ordinate their activities.
There is a strong possibility that local development strategies, albeit grounded in a solid knowledge of conditions surrounding each problem at local level, may not be consistent with a regional philosophy and, even more, with the global development model.
Decentralization, therefore, provides insufficient possibilities for participation, and the conditions for such participation must be created. popular.
The legacy of paternalism may lead to a poorer supply of support services.
The tenet of centralized policies is that State intervention alone is able to correct market weaknesses and make it possible to advance towards development. This paternalistic development approach hinders the capacity for autonomous action and initiative of both rural populations and local government levels.
If the relocation of functions is not accompanied by a transfer of legal power, decentralization can produce institutional vacuums, a reduction in the supply of support services and a widening of income disparities between urban and rural areas.
The clientelist tradition creates the risk of appropriation.
Under centralized policies resources were allocated in ways that sustained State clienteles which had a greater capacity to formulate their needs clearly and coherently in terms of projects and programs, as well as a level of organization that allowed them to lobby the State to obtain the lion's share of public expenditure on rural development.
The imbalance in the organizational levels of rural populations creates the risk of an appropriation of the functions and resources transferred under decentralization by the richest, best organized municipalities and organizations.
In addition, the absence of strong, representative intermediate regional associations may diminish regional conflict-mediation capacity tilting it in favor of local powers which are less concerned with leading a global development strategy based on mediation and consultations.
Institutional rigidity and the pace of decentralization.
Intermediate and local levels of centralized institutions were devised for the implementation of policies for whose definition they were not responsible. They are, therefore, characterised by a degree of inflexibility in terms of adapting to a changing environment and taking account of the new conditions under which participatory, decentralized policies are formulated.
Decentralization may lead to the paralysis of intermediate and local levels of government as well as of producer organizations, which are unable to assume the challenges posed by decentralization policy.
It is risky to think that it is simply enough to pass a decentralization law to ensure the latter's immediate, consistent implementation.
On the contrary, it is necessary to ponder the question of the desired pace of decentralization: it should not be too swift, to allow for adaptation, nor too slow, in order to allow the decentralization process to forge ahead.
This point concerns, for example, the scheduling of training programs in relation to the scheduling of decentralization: "Experience even shows that there seems to be a stage before which it is not advised to start organizing training. In Niger, the impact of the training was limited, in particular because the trainees, who were government officials working at sub-national level, did not yet have the responsibility to plan" (IV1, p. 33). "In India, the programme was too much anticipating on decentralization and the conditions were not yet adequate to allow participants to apply what they had learned. Successful experiences of anticipatory training are not known. Experience shows that training can be most effective and useful when decentralized institutions have been established and when the government is trying to define their working procedures" (IV1, p. 35). The knowledge and experience which FAO has built up places it in a position to propose both an approach and a methodology for implementing a well-conceived decentralization process which can by-pass the risks just identified.
FAO'S KEY ADVANTAGES: KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE.
FAO's knowledge and experience relate to a number of actions concerning the overall support policies for processes of decentralization as well as to the restructuring of institutions themselves. Projects and programs developed by FAO represent particular responses to one of the following four situations, or a combination thereof:.
A structural or temporary weakness in state institutions;.
A decentralization process which has led to the emergence of institutional vacuums with regard to the supply of a certain number of support services;.
Decentralization processes which have put forward the need for a certain number of support policies;.
The restructuring of expensive, inefficient agricultural support services due to their excessive degree of centralization or the lack of ability to reach small farmers. In the first two cases, FAO has sought to perform action to permit populations to play an important role in the new policy situation (state withdrawal, deregulation, privatization) or in a situation in which policy is lacking (state weakness, institutional vacuums). In the latter two cases, action by FAO is geared towards improving the effectiveness of government agricultural support bodies by promoting a greater involvement by rural populations. From another standpoint, FAO's projects and programs make it possible to provide an overview of decentralization processes, based on three complementary focuses:.
Focus on public institutions: production of information to improve the effectiveness of State action, institutional restructuring, decentralized planning and training.
Focus on civil society: strengthening management capacity through a contractual approach, participatory extension work, popular participation programs and peasant structuring.
Focus on local government levels: the role of municipalities and geographical communities, intermediate towns and development poles, building of interfaces and regionalization. A certain number of experiences has been gained from each focus, which should be born in mind during the formulation of a decentralization process.
Focus on public institutions.
These are actions which make it possible to enhance the effectiveness of government agricultural support bodies through the promotion of a new relationship between these institutions and rural populations, with particular emphasis on.
participation by small-holders. These actions give rise to three complementary lines of action: a) based on a production systems approach, surveys are carried out and typologies established to improve the State's knowledge of the real situation of the rural populations, which makes it possible to enhance dialogue between the latter and the State; b) training action to enable local partners (populations, producers, officials and elected representatives) to play a better part in decentralized planning activities; c) a key plank, namely providing consultancy on the restructuring of government agricultural support and rural development institutions. A) The agricultural production systems approach: the role of surveys and typologies in dialogue between the State and rural populations.
One of FAO's first lines of action concerns the production of basic information on changes in agricultural production systems, which provides development policy decision-makers with a better knowledge of the development constraints which arise from these production systems.(1) The idea is to integrate into the policy formulation process the needs of producers and rural communities, which are identified by means of surveys and typologies. The underlying theory is that, in order to formulate effective policies, not only is improved knowledge required, and hence more information, but that this should be obtained from grassroots level. The experience which FAO has built up regarding the production of this type of information is an asset which makes it possible to deal with the risk linked to an imbalance in access to information and, therefore, with the obstacles to coordination of activities. This approach, which has been largely directed towards researching technical realities and, therefore, towards zoning based on local agro-environmental similarities, is today seeking to evolve to take into account the heterogeneity within regions themselves. As it proceeds along this path, it will be possible to use this approach as a means of formulating differentiated policies. The production systems approach provides an interesting means of revealing specific constraints on agricultural producers and, in more general terms, on rural populations, to public institutions. From this point of view, the approach permits public institutions to greatly enhance the effectiveness of policy formulation by providing them with basic information on the characteristics, constraints and potential of the production and reproduction systems. The approach's value also lies in the fact that it was one of the first attempts to build popular participation into the identification of constraints and their solution. Four main stages make it possible to link constraints with foreseeable solutions: i) identification of constraints with the involvement of partners; ii) analysis of constraints to determine the exact causes of each one, iii) building of participatory solutions and decision-making, by involving the three levels of intervention (local, regional and national), iv) implementation of solutions at local, regional and national levels. Dialogue and building partnerships between the different partners involved in the constraints and solutions are decisive to this approach. FAO has gained valuable experience regarding how to build such partnerships and to develop frameworks for dialogue.(2) It calls for a strong determination to record peasants' opinions and to create structures for dialogue at regional level. In sum, training is as important as access to information when it comes to the social partners' decision-making and action capacity.
A second important characteristic of this process concerns the movement which has occurred from the State towards the private sector, the civil society associations and the NGO sectors concerning the type of partners to be involved as a priority in the contractual relationship established by rural communities with other partners. This trend has evidently been accompanied by the new configuration in project financing resources, which consists of a reduced utilization of central State resources, and a greater one of decentralized development funds that communities should be able to manage themselves. Finally, the third characteristic of this approach, seen in nearly all FAO's areas of action, is an emphasis on partnership at every level. A network of partners should be created for each level of intervention: public sector representatives, elected representatives, individual economic partners or groups of the latter, and representatives of other social groups and institutions. This partnership focus is, perhaps, one of the most interesting experiences which FAO has gained in terms of building new relationships between the State, rural populations and other rural development partners. B) Decentralized planning and the role of training.
FAO recognises that decentralization is a complex process whose viability depends on fulfilment of a certain number of pre-conditions. In order to succeed, decentralization requires, inter alia, new patterns of behaviour and a solid policy for the continuous training of staff and populations or organizations which will assume the decentralized functions and responsibilities. The implementation of new decentralized planning mechanisms and training programmes tailored to this type of planning is one of FAO's strong lines of action. One of the main concerns in the work of training for decentralized planning has been to include rural populations in policy formulation and, therefore, to gear training not only towards government executives or local administrations, but also towards rural organizations.(3) Decentralized planning is defined as "the result of an overall institutional effort undertaken by a given country to decentralize decision-making according to a process defined throughout the country. Accordingly, the concept differs from local level planning which appears more as a result of local, often isolated, initiatives, without special institutional set-up or links with the national level" (IV1, p. 1). Part of this effort concerns the creation of skills required by the decentralization process. Inservice training is recognized, therefore, as an important element of decentralization programs. In this context, FAO has gained valuable experience in developing an analytical tool to permit planners to analyze the decentralisation process and use the analysis to evaluate the training needs which arise from it. The second valuable experience relates to efforts oriented towards involving rural populations in policy formulation. I) A framework for the analysis of decentralization.
Given that under decentralization, decision-making power passes down to subnational level, it is necessary to reinforce or, in some cases, create local planning capacity. The transfer of planning responsibilities must be accompanied by training to bring local staff up to the skills-level required to carry out their new.
responsibilities. In order to assess the training needs required during a process of decentralization, it is first necessary to evaluate the type of decentralization which is taking place, and to identify the responsibilities and tasks which must be carried out by those involved in development planning and management. The second stage of the training needs assessment concerns the financial rules which pertain to decentralization, since these establish the extent to which subnational levels will be called upon to make decisions concerning development financing, which determines, in turn, the scope of the decentralization and also the spheres in which training needs may arise. Once the training needs arising from the scope of the decentralization and the financial instruments adopted, have been assessed, it is necessary to turn to the planning process itself. The issues which should be clarified concern the decisionmaking capacity which the sub-national levels have in relation to project location, the existence of sub-national sectoral objectives, their formulation at local level, the existence of local sectoral plans, and the existence of global or sectoral data bases at sub-national level. All of these questions will also shape the content of the training programmes. The final aspect to take into account when assessing the training needs which arise under decentralization, is the importance given to popular participation in the decentralized planning process. This is important when the participation approach includes popular participation in project formulation and management at village level, and even more important when the object is to involve populations in devising policy. This is an important area of experience, since it permits FAO to support governments in targeting training activities at the key players in the decentralization process, by selecting and giving priority to those playing a central role, and finally in determining the knowledge, skills and behaviours which are needed to match decentralization.(4) ii) Involving rural populations in policy formulation.
One of the key problems with decentralization policies concerns the extent to which populations support the aims of decentralization and, therefore, their degree of motivation in participating in the planning process. .Moreover, one of the training functions carried out by FAO consists in forging a real culture of decentralization within popular organisations and among government officials. The experience of FAO demonstrates that it is not always easy to involve the poorest groups in society in development activities. The first problem with achieving participation by rural populations derives from the fact that instead of involving them from the project planning and formulation stage, projects tend to come sealed and delivered by experts, in response to a demand by the State. A second constraint which arises in relation to the participatory approach is the time required to encourage and organise it when projects must often be formulated in short time periods. A third constraint is the multiplicity of methods utilised for project formulation, which leads to a multiplicity of modes of.
intervention in the field in terms of setting quantitative objectives, restricting spheres of intervention, designating target villages, the more or less strict earmarking of budget lines and the setting of time frames for execution of activities. However, one may ask oneself whether the main stumbling block which exists in relation to experiences of involving populations in policy formulation, is not the lack of organisation or immaturity of the intermediate associations. Under a decentralized, participatory approach, "projects trigger the creation of peasant organisations with a view to allowing the populations to take charge of their development activities. (However) the organizations in question here are modern associations created by the projects, and not at all spontaneous groups set up at the initiative of the villagers. The majority of these peasant institutions disappear when the projects which have created them have ended" (I1, pp. 51-53). Hence a certain number of conflicts arise, for example, between the village management committees set up by the projects and traditional chiefs who are trusted by the populations. FAO has obtained three main conclusions and insights from these experiences, namely:.
In order for training to form the main plank of a participatory approach, it must certainly be geared towards the officials in the support institutions, but also, and sometimes especially, towards the populations.
Training efforts cannot be truly useful unless the teaching topics and procedures focus on the creation or reinforcement of the knowledge and organizational capacity of grassroots partners, and take into account, equally, local know-how and skills.
Decentralization increases training needs in the same way that training increases the chances of success of decentralization. Lack of training and organization seem to be a strong reason which explains the shortcomings observed in relation to popular participation in policy formulation. It is important to note that, starting out from an analysis of FAO's experience in the field of training, we have progressively moved to two complementary topics: the lack of organization of populations and adequate information flows to ensure coordination. These three types of problems are highly inter-linked, and one of FAO's valuable experiences is to have understood this and sought to integrate them in a single proposal for the creation of well-conceived decentralization policies.(5) C) Restructuring of agricultural support services.
The third line of action implemented by FAO directly concerns supporting the overall decentralization process through projects for the restructuring of rural development institutions.(6) Here, restructuring is not viewed simply as action to organize services and improve their management, but rather as one of the key elements in structural adjustment, which accompanies and determines the implementation of the new political and economic approaches, based on the generally accepted principles of democratization, empowerment of and participation by populations, transparency, consultation and dialogue among the development partners. The experience acquired has made it possible to:.
Define the new role of the State and transfer to the partners in civil society, in a decentralized manner, important activities and responsibilities which, until then, had been a matter for the central administration;.
Revise relations between the different decision-making levels, giving the power which pertains to them to local levels in order to give meaning to the principles of decentralization and popular participation;.
Redefine relations between the State and the private sector - in particular with agricultural trade organizations and associations of rural producers - on the basis of dialogue and consultation and, therefore, of participation in decisionmaking choices and formulation of development policy;.
Propose and put in place a model for representing local agricultural diversity, informing and regularly consulting farmers on issues of interest to them, defending their points of view at decision-making bodies from local level to central level and, finally, supporting a structuring at grassroots level of rural communities. The two planks of this line of action have to do, on the one hand, with the functions of the ministries of agriculture and, on the other, with agricultural support services i) The new functions of flexible, decentralized agriculture ministries and the need for intermediate associations Two principles inform FAO's approach to restructuring rural development institutions. On the one hand, institutions must be first and foremost instruments for formulating and implementing development policies. On the other, these policies will be more effective if supported by rural populations and if the latter participate in their formulation. In other words, in order to be effective, development policies should be an expression of the desires of populations "responding to their needs and taking account of their real problems and constraints while situating them in their environment with all its physical and human diversity" (IV5, p. 1). FAO believes that "rural development institutions should possess significant power and sufficient intervention capacity, but the former should be used in the framework of, and with respect for functions which are clearly redefined for each type of rural development operator, in a spirit and relations which encourage co-operation and consultation among them" (IV5, p. 1). The basic principles for identifying the functions which should fall to agriculture and rural development ministries during a process of decentralization are as follows:.
Public services should not carry out commercial or productive activities, and these should be gradually transferred to the private sector, producer organizations or local government levels. The spheres in which public intervention specifically would occur are: the promotion of private enterprise; strengthening of peasant and local execution and management capacity; regulation and control and the protection of natural resources.
"Involvement by populations in selecting and executing development action and, in general terms, managing matters which concern them, particularly at local level. This participation involves reinforcing agricultural trade organizations at.
every level (and) calls for the setting up of consultation bodies at every level" (IV5, p. 2).
Decentralization of powers, responsibilities and action-financing methods in order to give greater freedom and scope for action to levels closest to local realities.
A global development approach in which sectoral actions are integrated into overall development action, and one which seeks to ensure local, regional and national co-ordination.
Regular follow-up and assessment of results and, hence, of the adaptation capacity of programs and projects. In this context, training is essential to motivate partners, encourage initiatives and promote team work.
Finally, institutions can only be gradually restructured to move from an interventionist approach to a support approach whose intensity diminishes as training efforts grow. The restructuring methodology which has developed comprises three stages, which are essential if the public institutions are to adapt to the processes of decentralization while avoiding the risks posed by the latter.
Stage of analysis/assessment of existing institutions and proposal of the restructuring blue print. Here it is a matter of distinguishing between what corresponds to the new modes of State intervention and what the latter should release. This analysis also makes it possible to propose a new sharing of powers and responsibilities among the different levels and services, as well as a concerted decision-making process. A third diagnostic element concerns relations between ministries, other institutions concerned with rural development and farmers and their trade organizations. Finally, another important strand, introduced above, is the identification of training needs.
Stage of formulation of the restructuring plan. This is an operational plan which takes account of the views and suggestions of the partners involve