The Role of Local Institutions and their Interaction in Disaster Risk Mitigation: a Literature Review.
By Norman M. Messer September 2003.
Introduction The present paper is a non-academic and thus, hopefully, unpretentious, attempt at reviewing the literature on the the role of local institutions and their interaction in disaster risk mitigation (DRM). The motivation for immediately cautioning the reader from the outset about the less than revolutionary character of this review is twofold: first, it is based on the appreciation that, unfortunately, there exist relatively few documented local experiences which are, honestly speaking, innovative and "worth writing home about" ­ a lot of disaster management is still organised almost exclusively by the military and/or central government; second, a deliberate attempt is made to keep away from the "dev-speak" jargon that has come to beset many recent laudible contributions to the development policy debate (such as the Sustainable Livelihoods framework), so that those (under pressure to keep) looking for new frameworks and methodologies will remain largely disappointed. On the other hand, what will be found on the following pages is a non-exhaustive compendium of strengths and limitations of local institutions involved in DRM and some suggestions for tapping the former and tackling the latter. As recently as the late 1990s, scholars complained of "the absence of much social science research on disasters in developing countries" (Quarantelli, 1998: 35). There is still a relative dearth of research and (electronically available) information, in particular from from SubSaharan Africa, and, while the situation is better in the case of Asia, the present review draws a lot of examples from Central America. Not least, this is because "in the 1990s, Central America has played a pilot role in efforts aimed at reducing natural disasters and has thereby achieved important progress not only in conceptual but also in practical terms. For this to occur, one of the essential features is the acknowledgement of the local-, and, especially, the local government, level in preventing natural disasters and the involvement of local stakeholders that this implies" (Bollin, 2003: 5 [transl. by author])1. To this must be added the tremendous impact in 1998 of hurricane Mitch and of the 2001 El Salvador earthquakes which, widely covered by the media, boosted awareness and catalysed changes in attitudes towards more proactive stances.
Background and Justification There is evidence to suggest that in many countries there has been an increase in the risk of natural disasters occurring - natural hazard risk - due to environmental degradation (World Bank 2002). Natural disasters are complex and multifaceted events resulting from mismanaged and unmanaged risks that reflect current conditions and historical factors (Alexander 2000). Disaster risk is collective in its origin and remains mainly a `public,' shared risk that makes finding individual, and often community solutions, difficult (Comfort 1999). A disaster is said to take place precisely because the losses originated by a given event overwhelm the capacity of a population (local, regional or national) to respond and recover from it. Disaster risk emerges from the interaction between a natural hazard - the external risk factor - and vulnerability - the internal risk factor (Cardona 2001). International consciousness raising about integrated disaster risk management (of which disaster risk mitigation is a part) was given a boost by the recently concluded United Nations International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR ­ 1990-1999). The World Food Summit in 1996 recommended `support for disaster prevention and preparedness' as a priority area of intervention. The FAO of the UN, through its Rural Institutions and Participation Service (SDAR) "promotes community based approaches and bottom-up capacity building.
1 There, the period from 2000 to 2004 was declared the Half-Decade of Intensified Efforts at Reducing Disasters. The Strengthening of local structures for disaster prevention is one of the explicit action areas of this initiative.
processes through participatory analysis and the dissemination (and facilitating adaptation) of new concepts and training materials that help strengthening local public institutions and civil society organisations such as farmer organisations, pastoral herder associations, cooperatives, and water user associations" (FAO, n.d.: 4). It is within this context that increases in natural hazard risk are addressed, given that there is growing evidence of the urgent need to involve human resources, local population groups and their organisations, in more vertically and horizontally integrated efforts at DRM. The task of exploring avenues for doing so, based on existing experiences and distilling lessons there from, thus lies with the mandate of FAO/SDAR, who commissioned the present literature review, and who are also carrying out a series of complementary field-level case studies in a number of countries in several disasterprone developing regions.
Conceptual Background and Working Definitions The conceptual and methodological underpinning (see FAO, n.d.) of this report recognises that the effectiveness of any risk mitigation strategy will depend on the nature of the risks, household, population group and institutional characteristics, and the availability and range of risk management alternatives. In reference to local institutions, risk strategies are assessed considering the type of instruments used by the poor and near poor, the degree of formality or informality of these instruments, and the type of actors and institutions that have typically supplied or supported these instruments. The issues (listed in the six bullet points in the next section) below are thus approached with a clear commitment towards improving rural livelihoods by better understanding and supporting people's organisations. The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (Geneva 2001) defines a `disaster' as `a serious disruption of the functioning of society, causing widespread human, material or environmental losses which exceed the ability of affected society to cope using only its own resources'. Disaster risk is usually conceptualised as being made up of two elements, hazard and vulnerability, which can be expressed in an equation: disaster risk = hazard x vulnerability. Risk is therefore dependent on the existence of a household's vulnerability to a natural event. Disaster Risk Mitigation (DRM) strategies refer to a household's or local institution's preparedness to reduce the impact of a risk event, either one that has already occurred or one that may occur in future. Mitigation includes prevention and preparedness (WFP, 1998: 4). The concept of Disaster risk management implies a notion of household vulnerability, which is often said to contain a `risk chain': the risk itself, the options for managing risk and the outcome ­ in terms of welfare loss, in the case of households, and of financial loss and adverse consequences for sustainability in the case of local institutions (Alwang et al. 2001). A paper by the WFP (1998) claims that: "A review of donor practices and the literature reveals that there are no universally accepted definitions of the terms [...] mitigation, prevention and preparedness. Moreover, the distinction of terms is often blurred. In one situation an activity may be considered to be an act of preparedness, and in another it is prevention. For this reason, many of the definitions found in the literature are vague and all-encompassing" (p3).
For lack of space, readers are referred to the literature (e.g., FAO 2003, IFAD 2002, Uphoff 1997) for a definition of the term `local institution', as both `local' and `institution' are concepts that are difficult to unpack2. The usage of the latter conforms, in the broad sense of the term, to the widely accepted definition of `the rules, organisations and social norms that facilitate the coordination of human action'. The fact that to some large extent they are context-specific helps us fend off the unappealing prospect of getting embroiled in long-winding conceptualisations: for the intents and purposes of this review we may unworriedly hope to get away with employing the term loosely to refer to `an organisation of local actors'. For lack of space (see the next Section below), the emphasis in this endeavour is on their displaying some degree of "formality" (read as: "visibility", for a proxy) and on their containing some element of collective (i.e., suprahousehold) action. The Disaster Management Cycle (FAO n.d.) The Disaster Management Cycle is illustrated in the below diagram. It consists of a number of phases, each requiring a different range of response activities. The different phases, however, are often grouped together under three main categories: the pre-emergency phase, the emergency phase and the post-emergency phase. In the course of this paper, the activities of UN entities in the disaster management cycle will be examined under these three broad categories.
Disaster Impact.
Preparedness.
Emergency Phase.
Development.
Pre-Emergency Phase The emphasis in the pre-emergency phase is on reducing the vulnerability of communities to suffer from the impact of natural phenomena. Measures to achieve this objective include riskAn often used definition of `local' ­ particularly by FAO ­ is that provided in the 1980s by N. Uphoff, who postulates that the term includes three levels of society: 1) the locality level, which is a set of communities having cooperative/commercial relations; 2) the community level, which is a relatively self-contained, socio-economicresidential unit; and 3) the group level, which is a self-identified set of persons having some common interest; maybe a small residential group like a hamlet, or neighbourhood, an occupational group, or some ethnic, caste, age, sex or other grouping (1986).
mapping, application of building codes, land zoning as well as structural measures such as the construction of dams against flooding. They are grouped under the heading risk reduction, comprising prevention, mitigation and preparedness. !Prevention Includes all measures aimed at avoiding that natural phenomena turn into disasters for settlements, economies and the infrastructures of communities. !Mitigation Involves measures taken to limit the adverse impact of natural hazards and related environmental and technological disasters. Examples of mitigation are the retrofitting of buildings or the installation of flood-control dams, and specific legislation. !Preparedness Involves measures taken to ensure effective response to the impact of disasters. Preparedness measures include, for example, evacuation plans, early warning systems, pre-stocking of relief items ­ all being part of a national disaster relief plan. !Emergency Phase In the emergency phase of a natural disaster, response mechanisms are automated. This phase is normally short-lived and may be over within days or weeks. !Response Involves measures taken immediately prior to and following the disaster impact. Response measures are directed towards saving life and protecting property. They deal with the immediate disruption caused by the disaster. They include search and rescue, and the provision of emergency food, shelter, medical assistance. The effectiveness of responding to disasters largely depends on the level of preparedness. Post-Emergency Phase The transition from relief to rehabilitation is rarely clear-cut. On the one hand, the foundations of recovery and reconstruction are usually laid in the immediate aftermath of a major disaster, while emergency response activities are still ongoing. On the other hand, there is often, in the aftermath of a natural disaster, a phase when basic needs must still be met as the long-term benefits of rehabilitation and reconstruction projects have not yet been fully realised. As a result, the phasing-out of relief assistance must be managed carefully. !Recovery Is the process by which communities are assisted in returning to their proper level of functioning. The recovery process can be very protracted, in some cases up to a decade or more. Typical activities undertaken under this phase include: restoration of essential services and installations, and long-term measures of reconstruction, including the replacement of buildings and infrastructure that have been destroyed by the disaster. !Development.
Its inclusion in the disaster cycle is intended to ensure that following the natural disaster, countries factor hazard and vulnerability considerations into their development policies and plans, in the interest of national progress. The rationale behind the use of the expression `disaster management cycle' is that disaster and its management is a continuum of inter-linked activities. Yet, the expression is slightly deceiving in that it suggests that the periodic occurrence of natural disasters is something inevitable, always requiring the same response. On the contrary, if effective prevention and preparedness measures are implemented, natural disasters may be avoided by limiting the adverse impact of inevitable natural phenomena.
4. Objective, Methodology and Scope The objective of this review is to demonstrate whether, on the basis of literature available, local institutions play a role in natural DRM at the household and at several institutional levels, and, if they do, to understand how this occurs, and what are the strengths and weaknesses of the actors and stakeholders involved in increasing DRM capacity at several levels. Achieving this objective implied: · · · · · · Investigating how local institutions have dealt with actual disaster events and/or mitigated their impact on their members/constituencies; Analysing how population groups in disaster-prone areas have usually dealt with and are dealing with disaster risk, rehabilitation and development through local institutions; Assessing the implications of mitigating disaster risk for local institutions and their effectiveness at doing so as well the impact of the wider institutional environment; Identifying lessons learnt from local institutions' involvement in DRM, focusing on potential improvements in terms of their role and organisational development needs; Providing elements of a pro-poor DRM strategy that highlights and strengthens the role played by local institutions, and that leaves local actors better equipped to deal with the disaster management cycle; and Elaborating how policy and operational support at sub-national, national and international level can better sustain local institutions in DRM and longer-term development.
This literature review focuses less on the myriad of "informal" local institutions that are also standard local practices such as those derived from custom (like, e.g., certain context-specific agricultural traditions within a given farming system that have evolved and become adapted over many generations to suit local exposure to potential natural disasters4). In looking at existing local institutions, emphasis was placed on those with relatively more potential to bridge the mitigation-development continuum, and microfinance institutions (MFIs) were singled out as promising to that effect. With respect to natural disasters, the present paper concentrates on rapid onset phenomena such as floods, hurricanes, snowstorms and earthquakes and their associated effects (e.g., landslides, heavy rains, etc.), rather than slow onset phenomena such as droughts, or some other often protracted events such as rodents, predators and pests, or human and animal epidemics ­ which is another reason for more examples coming from Asia and Latin America rather than from.
3 To illustrate progress in reducing a country's vulnerability to the impact of natural phenomena through the implementtation of risk-reduction measures, the series of events applying to disaster management should be represented as a spiral. In a spiral, disaster-related activities are linked as a continuum, but not in a cyclical manner. At the beginning of the spiral, the country's vulnerability to natural disasters is high since inadequate focus is placed on riskreduction and more efforts are correspondingly required during the emergency phase of a disaster. An upward movement along the spiral indicates that prevention and preparedness measures are gradually put into place, thereby reducing the country's vulnerability to natural disasters and the need for emergency assistance in the event of a disaster. 4 In this way, the huge question of local institutions governing access to and use of land is avoided - although these contribute to tenure (in)security and (dis)incentives for investments in DRM.
Africa. Neither included are volcanic eruptions, because of their more localised effects, nor bush and grassland fires and other such events, because these are mostly man-made (and thus not `purely natural'), rather than predominantly meteorological and seismic in origin5. The secondary data collected comes from all developing regions and sources; the way to access the material has been mostly through the internet, where a range of studies, project documents, strategy briefs, newsletters, etc. has been downloaded in either English, French, Spanish, Portuguese or German. Other information was provided by colleagues working in or with projects that contain DRM components.
Overview of Local Institutional Responses to Natural Disasters Certain local institutional responses have taken place within project frameworks that sought to coordinate local government and civil society contributions with those of DRM experts. The `Proyecto Fortalecimiento de Estructuras locales para la MItigación de Desastres' (FEMID), for example, implemented from 1997 to 1999 in Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama, was a pilot initiative aimed at responding to communities' interests to participate in jointly analysing the causes of natural hazards, the risks and vulnerability involved, and the actions that can be taken to mitigate negative disaster impacts. Diagramme 1: A Local Risk Management System in Guatemala (Source: FEMID/GTZ 2002) THE PROCESS TO ACCOMPLISH A LOCAL RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
Actors (population at risk).
Awarenessraising.
Introduction to the notion of risk.
Activities to manage and reduce risk.
Civil society: - Individual players - Locally organized players Local institutions: - Local government - Sectoral institutions with local representation.
Local history of visible risk Community experience.
Risk Hazards.
Prevention Mitigation.
Vulnerabilities Preparedness (PMP).
To perform the planned joint analyses in an organised and systemic manner, an approach referred to as Local Risk Management (LRM) was developed, using the inter-related.
The `Working Concept' Note of the GTZ (German Bilateral Cooperation) lists the following as a "hazard posed by pure natural phenomena": volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and seaquakes, storms, hurricanes and tornadoes, heat and cold waves, and tsunamis; the following are classified as a "hazard also due to human intervention": floods, droughts, forest fires, landslides, avalanches (2002: p17). Although floods are featured in the list of `hazards also due to human intervention', they are included in the present review both because of their relative importance in terms of disaster risk and because they often follow `purely natural' events such as earthquakes and seaquakes.
dimensions of Prevention, Mitigation, and Preparedness (PMP) to group and structure activities to be carried out. Based on lessons drawn from the practical experience gained, Diagramme 1 above shows the process elaborated and applied over the three year period to put in place local DRM capacity in the countries covered by FEMID. Within the project programming framework, training activities too involved central and local government, as well as a range of civil society actors and community groups (as visible on the left side of the Diagramme).
The Legal and Regulatory Environment: Implications of Sectoral Approaches Legal and regulatory environments differ enormously from region to region, country to country, and government to government, as does the degree to which their contents is actually applied and enforced. Very important in this respect are the legislative tradition of a given nation state, the historical trajectory of its institutions and the separation of powers within them, including the magistrates. Steurer and Bollin (2001) find that "in developing countries, the necessary norms that would allow to Oasis Development in the Mauritanian Sahara reduce disaster vulnerability among the population through settlement policy, land The multi-functional Associations de Gestion use planning, or standards for Participative de Développement des Oasis (Participatory Oases Development Associations) set infrastructure (construction of housing, roads and bridges, electricity, telephone up under the OASIS II Project in Mauritania differ from many of the village committee-type and water provision) are usually absent. Or else, the laws, decrees or plans in institutions typically created on donor demand. For question are not applied" (p3; transl. by these associations to take on certain rural development responsibilities, the legal framework author). Turkey's earthquake fatalities in needed to be amended, and eventually a law (Law 1999 were victims of ineffective building 016/98) was passed: without it, the associations codes, not poverty. would have to had to be constituted as cooperatives, Special bodies are sometimes set up to monitor their enforcement, and, depending on the degree of effective decentralisation, the states that make up some of the large federal republics such as Brazil, Nigeria, or India, may institute their own monitoring arrangements and pass their own separate laws and regulations. As laws and regulations stand or fail the test of facilitating and streamlining responses during the urgency of a catastrophic event, their contribution to the efficiency with which natural disasters are handled by the government and non-government sectors alike becomes an empirical question that only case studies can illustrate. The latter, alas, do not normally examine the role of the legal and regulatory environment explicitly, or else do so in passing. In India, following the cyclone of 1971 (which cost the lives of 10,000), the government of the state of Orissa prepared a report outlining a series of measures to be taken to prepare for future cyclones, which later led to the Orissa Relief Code. This Code provides the basic framework for the implementation of emergency measures under all types of emergency.
and the responsibilities assigned to them in terms of the management of common property natural resources within their oases would not have had any legal backing. Or else, they would have had to be constituted as (development) associations, but then their handling of credit would not have had any legal backing. The associations have contributed very successfully to building water infrastructure to counteract the effects of drought by recharging groundwater flows. A number of other, direct disaster risk mitigation activities have not figured very prominently until recently - plans are based on local priorities. But as income-generating activities are increasingly successful, this trend is changing, and local reforestation and sand dune fixation initiatives will become more effective at fighting drought and desertification. Most importantly, though, social commitment to such activities has been "relocated" from a narrow tribal hamlet level to that of the entire oasis watershed. It is only at this level that DRM can become meaningful, and the associations thus hold major potential for sustainable NRM and preventive disaster risk management. According to their members, it is the first time in history that oasis inhabitants have come together to discuss NRM problems in an open, oasis-wide forum such as the associations; the federation of associations represents an even more important innovation in this respect, fostering the exchange of experiences and cross-fertilisation as well as the collaboration with government line agencies in regional-level DRM planning. Source: Author's mission notes 2002 8.
situations, as it details the specific responsibilities of the state's Special Relief Commissioner and its different line ministries. During the latest cyclone of 1999, planning responses were still hindered by a lack of updated and available vulnerability maps and databases on conditions on the coast. A study on that catastrophic event (IMM n.d.) postulates that "whilst diversity of approaches may be beneficial, a lack of norms for designing specific interventions (such as Cash- or FoodFor-Work (FFW) Programmes, agricultural input distribution, etc.) has led to some difficulties between NGOs and communities (...), (...) [and] the feasibility, viability and sustainability of some inputs is unclear. Perhaps a greater level of sharing of information and experience and the agreement of some standardisation/norms of interventions early in the programme would have assisted. There was consensus between the NGO staff that sharing and harmonisation of approaches (especially in areas such as FFW) would have been useful but would have to have been led by an outside agency such as DfID India if it was to be achieved. [Although the line ministries] had a regular presence in the coastal areas (...), most of them tended to have a narrow sectoral focus and this was to prove an obstacle to them preparing proposals for DFID support under a wider livelihoods umbrella in the aftermath of the (...) cyclone" (p34). At the same time, the study reveals that "the Revenue Department and the Panchayati Raj institutions were also well represented and both take a much wider perspective. The Revenue Department was to prove crucial in spreading the warnings before the cyclone, and to participating in the planning and coordination of the relief and rehabilitation processes" (p28). Intersectoral ministries, departments and line agencies6, or large and respected NGOs such as the Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA)7 in Gujarat, India, are thus better placed and equipped to bring together the different government and non-government actors to deal with DRM challenges than, say, the Ministry of Agriculture or the line agencies in charge of NRM. Even some of the environmental protection agencies, often set up with donor money during the 1990s, are not necessarily adequate partners because of their selective approach, and, especially, their limited (political) `clout' and outreach given a usually narrowly circumscribed legal remit and mandate.
The Promise of Decentralisation Much has been written about decentralisation and the local civil society institutions-local governments interface, although the political character of the process, particularly in developing countries, has often been underestimated. "Decentralization and participation are both means of bringing a broader section of a given population into public decision-making processes ­ in a role of informing and/or controlling those processes" (Ribot, 1999: 1). The assumption is that greater participation in public decision making is a positive good in itself, and/or that it can improve efficiency, equity, and, especially important in the context of local institutions involved in DRM, development and resource management. By bringing government decision-making closer to the citizenry, decentralisation is widely believed to.
Such as, for example, where it exists, the Ministry of Local Government or Decentralisation, Directorate of Local Collectivities or Community Development, or Ministry of Rural Development. 7 SEWA's post-disaster assistance (see Section 8 below) was very well received by its members due to several factors: first, it had very good knowledge of the area and its population, as it had been working in the affected areas for over ten years, and under normal circumstances had assisted its members with diverse programmes to enhance their food security, housing, and health and employment security. Second, it had experience in previous disasters and an extensive grass-roots network of women members throughout the most affected areas that made a rapid and effective disaster response highly feasible. Third, thanks to its solid reputation and institutional influence, SEWA rapidly managed to obtain tents, medical aid and supplies from specialised agencies. In fact, some agencies like UNICEF and WFP, and the government of the state of Gujarat, channelled relief aid through SEWA. The state government in particular gave SEWA cash doles, in addition to food packets and medical aid, to be passed on to affected members. Fourth, the decentralised and well coordinated nature of its relief distribution network enabled SEWA to provide adequate and timely assistance.
incr ease public sector accountability and therefore effectiveness, whilst contributing to the strengthening of a genuinely people-centred type of democratic culture. Unwittingly, local population groups themselves often do their part to further increase their risk exposure, for example, through unsafe settlements on steep slopes, unsustainable deforestation leading to soil degradation, etc. This has been the unintended outcome of a lot of spontaneous household relocation and formal resettlement programmes promoted by government, in which newcomers lack the necessary local agro-ecological and farming systems knowledge to devise risk coping strategies suited to their novel surroundings. This constitutes all the more reason to inform local population groups about the risks they are exposed to, involving them as responsible actors in disaster prevention activities ­ usually, everyone has something to contribute to the reduction of disaster risk hazard and should be provided with the opportunity of doing so. It is a way of increasing the self-reliance of the population at risk and the sustainability of disaster prevention measures, all of which is more easily achieved at the decentralised, local government level, and below. As Crook and Manor (1998) argue, bringing government closer to people increases efficiency by helping to "...tap the creativity and resources of local communities...". Decentralisation is believed to increase coordination, vertical linkages (discussed in the Section 8 below) and flexibility among administrative agencies and effectiveness in development and conservation planning and implementation. Where it is real, local government bureaucrats and technocrats are in a position to invest in DRM as they have been devolved the power and provided with sufficient funds to do so. It is however often difficult to use scarce public funds for environmental conservation - which contains elements useful to natural disaster prevention given the unattractiveness of such activities in political terms; on the other hand, it is the aftermath of catastrophic events that provides opportunities to accumulate political capital through (donor-funded) infrastructure reconstruction. In sum, if participatory, decentralisation can increase managerial and economic efficiency by: allowing local population groups who bear the costs of resource use decisions to make those decisions, rather than leaving them in the hands of outsiders or unaccountable locals, increasing efficiency by internalising economic, social and ecological costs and benefits; reducing administrative and management transaction costs via the proximity of local participants, access to local skills and local information; and using local knowledge and aspirations in project design, implementation, management and evaluation for better matching of actions to needs (adapted from Ribot 1999). Given that natural disasters rarely hit whole countries, but, rather hazard risk often varies even from one micro-region to another, it becomes essential to use local knowledge for effective prevention measures and to adapt these to local threats and vulnerabilities. Whereas this tends to happen within the confines of DRM project frameworks, (as we will see further below) this is far from being institutionalised in the public sector. National disaster plans may mention mitigation and preparedness, but often lack detail and dedicated resources. Social, political and macroeconomic pressures can undermine the capacity of state authorities to 