FAO-NGO Collaboration for World Food Summit Follow Up.
A report submitted to : Regional Rural Development Officer Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAP) Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations.
Prepared by : Anupama Joshi Consultant FAORAPS Bangkok, March 1998.
Page No.
Background.
RAPS Survey on FAO-NGO collaboration on Food Security, Nutrition and Rural Development RAPS Survey results.
RAPS -FAO HQ collaboration in World Food Summit follow up.
Collaboration of FAO RAPS with UN agencies on NGO involvement in WFS follow up.
RAPS Database on NGOs participating in Food Security, Nutrition and Rural Development initiatives.
Conclusions and Recommendations Annexes Annex - I : Terms of reference Annex - II : List of NGOs collaborating with FAO Representative offices in the Asia Pacific region Annex - III : Survey formats Annex- IV : Proposal from PROSHIKA, an NGO from Bangladesh 14 15-17 18-22 23 1-2 3-4 5-6 7 8 9.
ABBREVIATIONS USED.
ACC ANGOC CSO ESCAP ESN FAO FAOR GO HQ ICN NGO PO RAP RAPS RRDO SDA TCDN UN UNDP UNICEF WID WFS.
Administrative Committee on Coordination Asian NGO Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development Civil Society organisation Economic and Social Commission for the Asia Pacific Food and Nutrition Division Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations FAO Representative Government organisations Headquarters International Conference on Nutrition Non - governmental organisation Peoples organisation Regional office for Asia and the Pacific RAP Sustainable Development Unit Regional Rural Development officer Sustainable Development Unit Technical Cooperation Department United Nations United Nations Development Programme United Nations International Children's Education Fund Women in Development Unit World Food Summit.
The World Food Summit held in Rome in November 1996 was aimed to renew the global commitments to eliminate hunger and malnutrition and the achievement of sustainable food security for all people. The World Food Summit Plan of Action endorsed and adopted by 186 countries outlines seven key commitments for practical activities aimed at reducing hunger and malnutrition by the year 2015. These are in the areas of : · · · · · · · General conditions for economic and social progress conducive to food security; Poverty eradication and access to adequate food; Sustainable increases in food production; Contribution of trade to food security; Preparedness, prevention and response to food emergencies; Optimal investment in human resources, sustainable production capacity and rural development; Cooperation in implementing and monitoring the Plan of Action.
As a follow up to the World Food Summit Plan of Action, a Joint ANGOCFAO Meeting was held in Bangkok in July 1997. Representatives from over 20 Asian NGOs alongwith FAO officers discussed specific ideas and activities for the follow up of the World Food Summit Action Plan. The meeting stressed on the involvement of NGOs and civil society organisations (CSO) in policy and decision making for food security related programmes. The key areas for collaboration between FAO and NGOs outlined as an outcome of the meeting are : · · · Promotion of public awareness on peoples participation in food security, sustainable agriculture and rural development. Favorable policy framework Tripartite collaboration between FAO-GO-NGO for dialogue and joint field level programmes.
At the recently convened expert meeting on civil society involvement in follow up to the WFS, participants worked out three major areas for FAO-civil society collaboration, namely policy dialogue, mobilising public awareness and building partnerships in action. The meeting highlighted the growing role of regional and sub regional offices in promoting dialogue with civil society, and strongly recommends the establishment of a forum for regular interaction with CSO. At the FAO-RAP level, a networking exercise was initiated as a follow up to the Joint ANGOC-FAO meeting by the Rural Development and Nutrition Units. It was aimed at building on already existing linkages with NGOs, POs and CSOs to assess the potentials for collaboration in food security, nutrition and rural development initiatives in the region. This joint activity of the two units worked under the premise that food security and rural development issues are interlinked and cannot be addressed in isolation. Such partnerships within FAO are indeed the.
starting points towards developing household food security for all by the year 2015, as mandated by FAO. This report provides an overview of the ongoing activities to FAO RAP to strengthen FAO-NGO collaborations in the region. These activities were undertaken as per the attached Terms of Reference of the consultant (Annex -I).
RAPS Survey on FAO -NGO Collaboration on Food Security, Nutrition and Rural Development.
Initiated in November 1997, this activity was aimed at providing a platform for interaction with NGOs, sharing ideas and information in the areas of food security and nutrition, rural development and poverty alleviation. During the contract period (Feb.- March 1998), nine more responses from FAORs and NGOs were received, making a total of eleven country responses out of thirteen requested for. The FAOR offices of Bangladesh Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Iran, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam and Western Samoa have already responded. The FAO Representative offices of Nepal and Laos are being followed up to expedite their responses. Some very interesting findings have emerged from this survey. Firstly, a comprehensive list of NGOs collaborating with FAO Country offices is now available. Detailed information on these NGOs is being collected to develop a profile of these organisations . This will be helpful for future collaborations from the regional and national level with NGOs. Secondly, the survey provides insights into the constraints faced in the process of collaboration with NGO partners. It clearly states the expectations of NGOs from FAO to support their programmes. Major findings At the country level, the major areas where collaboration exists between FAO and NGOs are : i) information exchange and dialogue ii) technical inputs and assistance ( to a limited extent ) There exists further scope for joint activities in project planning and implementation, and advocacy related matters, which are currently almost non existing in the surveyed countries. The constraints commonly experienced in collaborating with NGOs are a lack of clear policy framework and guidelines for NGO activities within the FAO and the lack of opportunities and platforms for involving NGOs in FAO projects. Some countries are faced with a resource constraint, both technically as well as financially. It is also noted that there is a wide disparity between the services provided by FAO and the needs of the NGO. Overcoming this gap in understanding the requirements of NGOs may infact become a key factor in sustaining future efforts towards joint activities with NGOs. A brief outline of the survey findings is presented in Table I . Response from NGOs A critical highlight of the survey is the positive response from NGOs regarding the future scope of working together with FAO RAP. Some specific requests for support and technical collaboration have been received from PROSHIKA and Centre for Development Studies Bangladesh, Rural Development Foundation Pakistan ( Annex - III) . MODE Philippines and CARE International.
Vietnam have suggested project planning and implementation, research and evaluations as potential areas for collaboration with FAO. A number of NGOs have also responded positively to the survey. Their replies provide information on previous experiences in collaborative activities, in particular with FAO. NGOs feel the need to collaborate with FAO in order to build linkages with other developmental agencies and potential donors. Their expectations from FAO are in the areas of technical advise and support, sharing of information, education materials, ideas and experiences and for advocacy at policy level. The NGO community has welcomed the efforts of FAO to collaborate, and are of the view that a structured forum to share resources should be set up in order to ensure that information is not lost or manipulated by large international agencies. There is a request for a bottom up approach, consulting with NGOs and civil society groups in order to sustain efforts and optimise resource utilisation. A listing of NGOs currently collaborating with FAO Country offices is presented as Annex - II).
FAO-NGO COLLABORATION : SURVEY RESULTS.
Country NGO Collaboration initiated in (year) 1972-73 Broad areas of collaboration Constraints Potentials.
Cambodia China.
Information exchange Dialogue Technical Collaboration Information exchange Technical collaboration Information exchange Dialogue.
Information exchange Dialogue Technical collaboration(limited).
In the areas of nutrition and rural Financial Communication channels and development platforms Communication channels and Rural credit, rural development platforms projects in rural Lack of policy guidelines and National development framework Financial Communication channels and platforms Lack of policy guidelines and framework technical resources financial Wide gap between NGO requirements and FAO understanding.
Indonesia Laos Nepal.
Status awaited Status awaited Status.
report report report.
NGO Collaboration initiated in (year) awaited 1996.
Broad areas of collaboration.
Constraints.
Information exchange Dialogue.
Philippines.
· · · · · · report report.
Information exchange Dialogue Technical collaboration.
Lack of policy framework Financial communication platforms Lack of policy framework Financial Communication platforms Financial.
guidelines and.
Rural development.
channels and guidelines and.
channels and National projects on nutrition and rural development ( Mothers Movement to combat malnutrition/ Vocational Training for Women ).
Vietnam Western Samoa.
Status awaited Status awaited.
Source : Status reports received from FAO Country Offices ( January - March 1998).
RAPS - FAO HQ collaboration in World Food Summit Follow up.
a) Comments on project guidelines and proposals in the context of World Food Summit follow up. Within the context of FAO-NGO collaborations, the consultant assisted the RRDO in strengthening existing FAO projects in terms of inclusion of peoples participation in community development, involvement of NGOs and farmers groups and decentralised planning. These are :.
The Special Programme on Food Security (SPFS): The Programme documents were studied to familiarise with the programme components and assess the scope of involvement of NGOs and civil society organisations. The SPFS guidelines were found to be comprehensive in covering aspects of water control and land development, plant production, animal breeding and aquaculture, and socio economic constraints analysis but does not specifically respond to people's participation in community planning and the involvement of NGOs in these activities.
Regional and national projects : Inputs from RAPS were provided in regional and national projects such as :.
Regional Development Partnership Programme (RDPP) for Food security and Sustainable Development. 2.Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Income Generation in Ayeyarwady delta(MYA/96/008) 3.FAO-NGO South Asia Programme 4.Participatory Watershed Management Training (PWMTA) Network.
b) Follow up to the Joint ANGOC-FAO/RAP Workshop on World Food Summit.
follow up. Efforts have been made to strengthen linkages with ANGOC to follow up World Food Summit related activities. In addition, ANGOC has been invited to participate in the 23rd FAO Regional Conference in Myanmar in April 1998 to represent the NGO viewpoint. The key recommendations of the the Joint ANGOC-FAO meeting held in August 1997 are a lead to undertake further joint activities with NGOs in the region. The report outlines the potential areas for future collaboration between FAO and NGOs as :.
Need for regular joint forums and mechanisms for dialogue on : a) policy formulation at grassroot level b) FAO project missions.
Documentation, translation and dissemination of grassroot innovations in food security.
Involvement of NGOs in policy decision making.
Information Campaign to simplify and popularise the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
Promoting tripartite collaborations between FAO-GO and NGOs.
Operationalising the Household Food Security Indicators programme. This could be extrapolated to include household nutritional indicators, as well as nutrition focused community level planning.
Practical, do-able grassroot level collaboration.
Strengthening linkages between the FAOR in member countries and NGOs.
FAO officers on missions to member countries should interact with local NGOs. 10. Building linkages with Universities and research organisations.
Collaboration of FAO -RAPS with UN agencies on NGO involvement in World Food Summit Follow up.
a) The UN Coordinated follow up on UN Conferences and Summits The UN Coordinated Follow up of major UN Conferences and Summits aims to translate the normative recommendations of conferences and meetings into operational guidelines with implications for implementation at the country level. In the draft report received from the UNDP, the World Food Summit Plan of Action (1996) is not mentioned though earlier meetings such as the ICN (1992) are accounted for. The World Food Summit was a key conference of the decade and it's Plan of Action has implications on the global food and agriculture status. The recommendations from the WFS should be included in the study. b) ACC Network on Food Security and Rural Development Quote "The objective of the ACC Network is to promote collaborative, "ground up" and not "headquarters down" activities that help to set priorities and to design programmes and projects for rural development an food security and to use more effectively resources available to national institutions and UN system organisations." Unquote Commitment Seven of the World Food Summit Plan of Action assigns the ACC a significant role in the Summit follow up activities. The ACC network mechanism involves both field level arrangements involving participation of national governments, and NGOs and at the headquarters level to promote the sharing of country experiences and updating of progress reports. 8.
RAPS Database on NGOs participating in Food security, nutrition and Rural development initiatives.
An extensive search of information available within the FAO and from outside sources was undertaken to identify NGOs from Asia Pacific region for inclusion in the database. A detailed listing of over 250 NGOs in the region has been established . A hard copy of the listing is available with the Rural Development Unit. This listing will be updated into the already existing database after verification and careful scrutiny of organisations.
Conclusions and Recommendations.
The FAORAPS survey of FAORs and selected NGOs is a modest beginning made at FAO RAP to understand the modalities of collaboration with NGOs in the Asia Pacific in order to promote their involvement in the follow up of World Food Summit activities and in the long term, the programmes and projects of the FAO. This is in line with FAO mandate to involve NGOs and CSOs in policy dialogue, awareness campaigns and building partnerships in the follow up of WFS. This survey has brought about a clear understanding of the constraints faced by FAO and NGOs in collaborating with each other. It has also generated a momentum amongst FAO Country offices, NGOs and FAORAPS to promote active collaborations within the context of the WFS follow up. This positive energy needs to be tapped and channeled into productive activities and programmes to yield positive results . Some innovative ideas and recommendations for sustaining these efforts towards bringing NGOs as partners and in the mainstream of WFS activities are listed below :.
AT FAO HEADQUARTERS LEVEL :.
The World Food Summit Plan of Action underlines the role of civil society and notes that almost 80 % of the investment in agriculture is made by producers themselves . This understanding that people are the main actors in developmental work needs to be applied across the entire gamut of FAO activities, in the fields of rural development, nutrition, women in development, forestry, agriculture and natural resource management. 1.2 . Most replies from NGOs reflect that TCDN within it's mandate to strengthen active consultation and dialogue civil society organisations to undertake joint activities in this region, needs to build up it's capacity to facilitate FAORs and technical units concerned to develop dialogue and collaborations with CSOs in different national contexts. And to keep track of the emerging country experiences with a view to identify innovative CSOs in areas of FAO concerns. The FAO Representative and field staff have a key role to inform the TCDN on these activities.
Collaboration and open channels of communication between various units at headquarters ( TCDN, WFS Secretariat, ESN and SDA ) to utilize the available resources and manpower most effectively.
Establish a seed grant facility to support and nurture FAO-NGO collaborations. This recommendation may not be in line with FAO's role as a technical agency, but seems relevant to be mentioned here in context of responses from NGOs. A practical utilisation of FAO resources would be to directly support selected field level small projects involving NGOs and peoples organisations and thereby strengthen grassroot partnerships as well.
FAO has an important role to play in fostering and nurturing information networking with civil society and NGOs. It's presence in the field as well as an international agency provides for greater opportunities to counterbalance the negative impact of control over food production and supply in the hands of a few.
international economic operators and the consequent vulnerability of developing countries and small producers and consumers.
FAO's role in meeting the challenges of the future will increasingly be those of a catalyst and facilitator in support of other actors in development like NGOs and other civil society organisations, ensuring the production and dissemination of quality information and analysis about peoples participation in development, serving as a mediator among different interest groups and ensuring that there is a "level playing field" to which less powerful players have equitable access.
AT FAORAPS LEVEL :.
The regional and sub regional level of FAO are increasingly becoming important in view of the decentralisation of FAO programmes . FAO regional offices are better positioned to articulate regional needs, issues and experiences in the context of globalisation and it's impact on agriculture development and food security amongst rural communities.
Within RAPS, the capacity to continuously monitor and develop linkages with NGOs in the region needs to be strengthened so as to be able to assist other FAO offices and technical units with relevant information on NGOs. Within a kind of Regional NGO Information Resource Facility, RAPS could facilitate, in collaboration with TCDN the provision of updated data and information on relevant NGO programmes and dialogues in the region. It could in collaboration with TCDN and other technical units , provide information on FAO policy and programmes on FAO NGO collaboration in food security, nutrition, and rural development in follow up of the WFS .
Assist in provision of information and advice to technical divisions for capacity building of rural peoples organizations, farmer producer organisations, and women's organisations for achieving household food security and poverty alleviation in rural communities. .
Facilitate FAO partnerships and innovative methods to build and strengthen information networks with the NGO community at the regional and country level, and assist in the identification of NGOs for follow up of WFS activities. In close collaboration with relevant technical units, the facility could help in building linkages with universities and research organisations within the region for WFS follow up in food security, nutrition and rural development. For this purpose, it could organise regular FAO-NGO meetings and forums at regional and country levels.
Assist in documentation and dissemination of grassroot innovations and collaborations, and distribution of information and audio visual materials related to food security in the context of WFS Plan of Action.
In response to the call from NGOs for regular forums for dialogue, FAORAPS is planning to organize a regional meeting in September-October 1998 on "Development of Cooperative self help mechanisms for the rural poor at community level." This is planned to provide a platform fro establishing UN-GO-NGO-PO linkages for information exchange and identifying common priorities and activities for collaboration. This meeting will be prepared in consultation with relevant FAO technical units such as TCDN, SDA and ESN so as to mobilise necessary support.
FAORAPS has developed on the basis of existing information, an updated database of over 250 NGOs active in food security, nutrition and rural development. This activity is needed in order to fulfill the tasks i) to ix) outlined above. This needs to be periodically updated and disseminated to FAOR offices who are the closest FAO-NGO linkage at national level. 2.8.. Follow up of recommendations of the Joint ANGOC-FAO meeting should be taken up by all FAO Units concerned in order to keep up the momentum for collaborative action on specific issues mentioned in detail on Page 7 . The Regional NGO Information Resource Facility can facilitate contacts and collaborations in close collaboration with FAORs and selected NGOs in the region.
AT FAO RAP NUTRITION UNIT LEVEL : The FAO RAPS survey clearly indicates the interest of the FAORs and NGOs to undertake joint activities with FAO in the field of nutrition surveillance, maternal and child care and household food security . Further action from FAO Nutrition Unit maybe to :.
Together with FAORAPS efforts to involve NGOs in WFS follow up and keeping in mind the complementary interests of the two units in the context of the WFS, pool resources, expertise and knowledge. This would also ensure the optimal utilisation of knowledge, experience and resources within FAORAP to develop successful and sustaining partnerships with NGOs.
Link up with NGOs specifically interested in nutrition and food security (please refer Annex - II) to undertake joint programmes and activities.
The database on NGOs provides an exhaustive list of NGOs who can be contacted for initiating practical grassroot level interventions in the field.
The Household Nutritional Indicators Programme proposed by ANGOC has great potential for collaboration with FAORAP Nutrition Unit . This can be further discussed and finalised with ANGOC to promote nutrition focused community planning exercises in FAO projects.
Undertake information dissemination and documentation on nutrition and food security programmes.
Collaborate with other UN agencies such as the UNICEF and UNESCO in programmes for field level nutrition intervention and youth involvement in development respectively.
AT FAO COUNTRY OFFICE LEVEL :.
FAOR's should be facilitated to develop a forum for regular dialogue with NGOs and farmer producers organisations at the national level. With the current trend for decentralisation, the country office is located ideally to keep track of developments, serve as a focal point for dialogue and to identify innovative organisations which are actively involved in the areas of food security, nutrition and rural development. The FAOR office should facilitate donor support for NGO projects in the country.
. The FAOR and field staff have a key role to play in building networks with NGOs and farmer producer organisations within their respective country's political and social scenarios. However, the FAOR office needs to be given the mandate and facilities to respond to the local needs for developing and sustaining collaborations with NGOs.
Facilitate national NGOs and rural peoples organisations to participate in planning, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of FAO project activities in food security, nutrition and rural development.
AT NGO LEVEL :.
For FAO the key target are rural farmers and producers organisations in agriculture, forestry and fisheries. NGOs who are supporting these organisations can facilitate FAO to reach out to producer organisations in countries. To play this role NGOs have to maintain their own legitimacy rooted in a holistic perspective and values.
Regular exchange with FAO on innovations, experiences and programmes in the field and collaborative efforts to create public awareness on issues such as household food security, nutrition and rural development, and promote policy dialogue with governmental agencies.
Assist in building partnerships and tripartite (GO-NGO-FAO) collaborations for undertaking concrete actions to ensure peoples participation in policy and decision making in follow up of WFS. The above outline clearly represents that FAO-NGO collaboration is an activity involving various actors, at regional and national level. Collaboration and consultation within various players within and outside FAO is thus essential to ensure the follow up of WFS. FAORAPS if provided with necessary resources will be able to facilitate and strengthen FAO-NGO collaboration in follow up of WFS in food security, nutrition and rural development.
Prepared by : Ms. Anupama Joshi, Consultant FAORAPS Bangkok March 1998.
The Consultant will submit at the end of the contractual period : 1) A Progress report on the FAO-NGO collaboration with ideas for further action. 2) A Database of NGOs in the Asia Pacific region. Number of working days : 30 days Duration : 9 February - 9 March 1998.
Bangladesh  Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh(ADAB)  Association for Land Reform and Development (ALRD) Bangladesh Disaster Preparedness Centre (BDPC) Campaign for Popular Education (CAMPE)  Credit Development Forum (CDF)  Enterprise Development Network (EDN) Institute for Law and Development (ILD)  Women for Women (WFW) Bangladesh Shishu Adhikar Forum(BSAF)  Gender Development Forum (GDF) Legal Aid Forum Community Development Association (CDA) Voluntary Health Services Society(VHSS)  Friends in Village Development in Bangladesh(FIVDB)  Centre for Development Services(CDS) Cambodia International Development Enterprises Programme in Cambodia (IDE) Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) Agisud Cambodia Development Resource Institute (CDRI) International Development Research Center(IDRC) Concern Worldwide(CONCERN) Veterinaires Sans Frontiers (VSF) Socio Economic Development Organisation of Cambodia (SEDOC)  Hellen Keller International China All China Womens Federation  Ford Foundation India             Center for Indian Knowledge Systems Dharamitra Center for Science for villages Agriculture Man Ecology Programme Deccan Development Society Center for World Solidarity Navdanya Samiti Gramin Vikas Vigyan Academy of Development Sciences Gorakhow Environmental Action Group Sambhav Bharatiya Kisan Union.
Networks : Agricultural Renewal in India for a Sustainable Environment (ARISE).
Indonesia Bina Swadhaya Himpunan Kerukunan Tani Indonesia (HKTI) World Food Day Farmers and Fishers Movement of Indonesia (WFDF & FMI) Pakistan  Bokhari Social Welfare Association  Jinnah Welfare Society  Social Welfare Society  NGOs Coordination Council Tanzeem Khidmat Awam Gobral Kalan  Social Development Foundation  The Welfare Society Islahi Traquiti Committee Bandi Sarya Anjuman javanan Falah-o-Behbood SAFWCO Resource Development Centre(SRDC) National Church of Pakistan  Christian Welfare Society  Peoples Welfare Society  Social Welfare Council Idara Tameer-e-Millat Anjuman--Behbood-e-Khawateen Dr. M. Mohsan Sandhum Memorial Trust Mustafabad Welfare Society  APNA SEHAT Youth Welfare Association Fight Against Drug Organisation Agriculture Welfare Association Trich Mir Council for Social Welfare National Rural Support Programme(NRSP) Philippines Asian NGO Coalition for Agarian Reform and Rural Development (ANGOC) Philippine Peasant Institute National Federation of Peasant Organisations  Integrated Systems for Information Services fro Women (ISIS) Philippine Rural Reconstruction Movement International Institute for Rural Reconstruction (IIRR)  Southeast Asian Regional Institute for Community Education PAKISAMA Philippine Partnership for the Development of Human Resources in Rural Areas (PHILDHRA) Philippine Agrarian Reform Foundation for National Development Philippine Development Assistance Programme Federation of Free Farmers (FFF) Management and Organisation Development for Empowerment Inc.(MODE) Sri Lanka  CARE International SARVODAYA Movement for National Land and Agricultural Reforms  Networks : National NGO Council  Mothers Movement to Combat Malnutrition  Vocational Training for Women.
Vietnam NGO Resource Center  Save the Children Fund (UK)  Oxfam (UK and Ireland)  CARE International  Oxfam (Belgium) CIDSE ActionAid.
As part of the recommendations of the Joint ANGOC-NGO Cooperation Meeting held in August 1997 to support follow up of the World Food Summit plan of action, a networking initiative has been jointly undertaken by the Nutrition Unit and the Rural Development Unit of FAO-RAP to support FAO-NGO Collaboration in the fields of food security, nutrition and rural development. This initiative falls in line with FAO's commitment to promote and ensure food security using a sustainable, participatory approach. This information will be utilised to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses in the existing FAO-NGO collaborative mechanism so that it can be further developed . Please fill up the status report format below and return to Mr. Wim Polman, RRDO, FAO-RAP latest by 20 January 1998.
A . Country / Sub Region : ................................................................................. B. What are the broad areas of collaboration ? : (please tick) a) Information exchange and data collection b) Dialogue c) Technical Collaboration.
C. What are the major constraints experienced ? : (please tick) a) Lack of clear policy framework and guidelines for collaboration · · · at the FAO level at the national level at the NGO level.
b) Lack of human resource capacities c) Lack of technical resources d) Lack of financial resources e) Lack of appropriate communication channels and platforms f) any others, please specify. D. When was the first NGO collaboration in the country initiated : 19... (year).
E. Existing NGO / NGO Network collaborations in the country (attach additional pages if needed) S.no Name of NGO Network affiliations (name) Theme N=Nutrition RD=Rural Development Area N = National R=Regional FAO Project Code.
G. Potential collaborations (please list potential NGO/ NGO Networks for collaboration with FAO in the country) S.no Name of NGO Network affiliations (name) Theme N=Nutrition RD=Rural Development Area N = National R=Regional.
H. Comments and additional information, if any :.
FAO-NGO COLLABORATION ON FOOD SECURITY AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT.
Please return the duly filled format to :Mr. Wim Polman, Regional Rural Development Officer FAO-RAP, 39 Maliwan Mansion, Phra Athit Road, Banglumpoo, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Name of the Organisation :.
Acronym :.
Address :.
Tel No :.
Email :.
Contact person(s) :.
Area of expertise (please tick) : Nutrition and Health     Nutrition assessment and Information systems Household food security and Community nutrition Nutrition education and training Participation in formulation of Nutrition policies and national plans.
Fax No :.
Rural Development and Poverty alleviation     Participatory Community Development / Participatory decentralised planning Sustainable Agriculture and Land reform Skill building in Capital Formation (Credit and Savings) , Marketing and Management for Agricultural Cooperatives and small farmer enterprises. Strengthening Rural Organisations including rural women and youth, farmers, ethnic groups and rural workers organisations.
Brief overview of Programmes currently operational (please provide country wise break up) :.
Previous collaborations with FAO, if any (please provide details) :.
Linkages with United Nations organisations / Developmental agencies :.
Expectations from the proposed network :.
Name of respondent
Name of respond