Household Livelihood Strategies and Local Institutions.
- A Working Paper Series -.
Norman M. Messer Mapping Traditional Structures in Decentralisation Policies: illustrations from three countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Near East Working Paper No. 12.
January 2001.
Rural Development Division.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Acknowledgements Thanks are due especially to the field research teams, led by S. Soumaré (Mali), I. Lundin (Mozambique), and A. Othman (Yemen). Also to be thanked is Jennie Dey Abbas, for her technical inputs and contribution to as facilitating an environment as possible for this work to come to fruition, as well as Robin Marsh, Astrid Blom, Luis Llambí, and Reinhart Kössler.
KEYWORDS: Agriculture; Anthropology/cultural dimensions; Community-based development; Decentralisation; Farmers organisations; Forestry; Governance; Hunting; Indigenous knowledge systems; Institutional analysis; Irrigation; Islamic institutions; Land tenure (common property); Mediation/ conflict management; Natural resource management; Participation/legitimacy; Poverty; Programme design; Range management (Yemen); Rice (Mali); Rural development sociology; Social capital; Stakeholder strategies/organising practices; Traditional institutions; Traditional mutual support networks. POPN. GROUPS: Amakhuwa; Angoni; Dafing; Dogon; Peul; Vangoni. GEOG.: MALI - Diangoumerela (Yanfolila circle, Sikasso region); Samori (Bankass circle, Mopti region). MOZAMBIQUE - Netia (Monapo district, Nampula province); Ntengo-wa-Mbalame/Banga (Tsangano district, Tete central province); Zitundo (Matutuíne district, Maputo province). YEMEN Alhami (Alsher Directorate, Hadramout Governorate); Almisial ­ Almaramid (Bani Saad Directorate, Almahwit Governorate); Hadran (Bani Matar Directorate, Sana'a Governorate).
ABSTRACT It is important to realise that, no matter how "parallel" the two institutional set ups and the different production systems they govern may seem at first glance, some sort of informal articulation and communication normally exists between the traditional and modern sphere, often on land matters. With the probable exception of land conflict resolution, for which decision-making is more focused and ultimately usually lies with only one key authority, at all echelons there is a multiplicity of decisionmaking levels that frame traditional institutions. The involvement of traditional communit y leaders brings natural resource claims and conflicts closer to illiterate persons, who rarely dispose of the many resources necessary to bring to bear their civil rights over livelihood assets through formal government channels and do not understand all the rules and regulations, and the rights and duties that come with them. They may not have any such rights under national statute law, which does not recognise traditional usufruct. The village is not usually recognised as legal entity, yet it is at this level that we find the traditional institutions that could sustain genuinely community-based natural resource management (NRM). As different worldviews and knowledge systems will run, or flow, into each other under decentralisation and devolution, the dichotomy that often opposes "indigenous knowledge" to "modern science" is misleading, and the participatory evaluation of both would appear a fundamental starting point when analysing the dynamics of adopting new technologies, or new management and decision-making procedures. Arguably, communit y participation must take into account the norms upheld by traditional leaders, which implies that "win-win" scenarios are usually rare at any level and some trade-offs unavoidable. Leadership structures must be assessed and informed by local settlement histories, which contribute to determine institutional in- and exclusion. Cross-country comparisons, although in a context of adherence to different legal systems, will still be of use, to the extent that the recording and endorsement of local organising.
practices is based upon certain "cultural traits" common to agricultural and merchant societies. In relation to these traits, among the myths to be dismantled is that the customary authority structures they produce are gender-biased, atavist ic, opaque, unaccountable, unchecked and necessarily "undemocratic": when applying the "modern" criteria of "good governance" to tradit ional structures, most of them fare surprisingly well ­ rather, their roles are tied to different mechanisms for participation, social inclusion and decision-making on NRM. NRM and village development committees have become ubiquitous, but their social legitimacy must be analysed, and the way in which their including traditional authority would modify decision-making mechanisms (and the interface with local government). This inclusion can take place in direct or in less direct ways, but should always be accompanied by providing flexibility in institutional arrangements that can be revised. Committees should not be newly created, but, if possible, existing institutions used, and, if necessary, adapted: in many areas a point of "saturation" with "artificial" committee structures has been reached (some call it "committee-mania") oblivious to farmers' time constraints. Within the time constraints of development agencies there is a need to promote more thorough work on feasability analyses and longer term investigation, which can also take place alongside project activities. The mode of "ownership" will be reflected in local interpretations of, and expectations from, the decentralisation process, which should be explored, as they may augur well or not, so that early "remedies" can be sought. Since for the time being it remains the most visible manifestation of decentralisation at the village level, local perceptions are much related to the process of restructuring administrative territories, as geographical units. Information is provided below on why to involve traditional leaders in the decentralisation and restructuring process. The extent to which this may be happening anyhow (by default) is part of the research hypotheses that guided fieldwork, which have not found to be relevant in all countries.
1.1 Introduction FAO's involvement with the issues emerging below goes back more than thirty years. In 1965, O. Draz, then FAO adviser in Syria, travelled to Saudi Arabia and was struck by local traditional hema range management, by its potential and the religious sanction behind the system; upon his return he began to promote the restoration of tribal control of grazing (discussed below in the context of Yemen). Past centralised approaches to socio-economic development have led to meagre results, which is why advocacy for greater decentralisation is gaining momentum at a global level. Decentralisat ion is no new item on the agenda of policymakers, but it is now taking place in a different, arguably more favourable context in political terms. Former attempts at greater decentralisation have largely failed to take into account the vital dimension of local institutions (Pretty 1995, Uphoff 1997). In the words of N. Upho ff, "for rural development, it is important to consider the capacity of local institutions, not as an alternative but as a complement to central institutions." (...) "Local decisions can benefit from generalized knowledge just as central decisions can be improved upon by considering local knowledge" (1997: 11, 19). Local knowledge embodied in "traditional" community institutions and customary authority systems are not always visible to outsiders ­ unless some representatives of such systems are already incorporated into local government structures, and hereditary positions are confirmed and recognised officially. They may not necessarily be that "traditional" either, and there is an ongoing debate about how tradition has often been "invented" (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983, Douglas 1986, Mamdani 1996) to further the interests of particular actors in the rural setting, especially the colonial regimes of the time1. In rural areas decentralisation policies intervene in already established political arenas which notably are marked by the legacy of numerous development interventions. Development initiat ives using the rural community as an entry point should thus be informed by a detailed.
analysis of the local polity and social structure if the benefits for those who are normally excluded are to be more than marginal (Messer 1998). The involvement of traditional communit y institutions may come at the expense of broad community participation, and not include groups of lower social standing. However, in situations where their involvement is indeed desirable, how could this be achieved? Related to such discussion is the increasingly popular concept of social capital as an analytical tool to appraise the "development value" of autochthonous patterns of collaborative social organisation and cohesion. The present research has therefore asked what constitutes social capital linked to traditional institutions in the context of community-based development, what in- and exclusion rules may lead to the bypassing of certain segments of rural society and/or to disproportionate advantages of certain others? Among the few areas in which some formal articulation has been documented between decentralised government institutions (and NGOs or multi-/bilateral agencies) and traditional (community) institutions is the realm of commo n property resource management (see, e.g., FAO 1999a,b). But in reality informal linkages do already take place. A sustainable operational mode of organisation, articulation and communicat ion among the stakeholders of decentralisat ion processes must be found, and the policy framework be not just "enabling", but one that would allow an iterative process to mature, until such a mode is found and adjusted to. A people-centred development and sustainable livelihoods focus implies reaching beyond the relatively "safe" production and environmental issues to some more sensitive geo-political, socio-economic and cultural concerns, and the rise of civil society. Policymakers often lament inadequate levels of management capacity at local levels, and sometimes use this as an excuse to not further devolve responsibilities. By backing local practices, "advertising" and, possibly, articulating them better, the realisation is endorsed that decentralisation must also take place "from below", and the process equipped with a greater deal of credibility and the reciprocal trust necessary for its success.
1.2 Background2 The present publication builds on a brief literature review (FAO 1997c), which found that the various considerations on these institutions in connection with the particular historical and political background of the different countries have led to government policies that can be related to in five groups: policies of exclusion, policies of integration, policies of adaptation or "modernisation", policies of association or "controlled dualism", and policies of informality or "laissez-faire". These policies defy all generalisation and unilateral relation of cause and effect, but nonetheless reveal a strong tendency toward exclusion among the former command economy countries whereas countries with free market ideologies can be found elsewhere in the typology3. "In general, the role of traditional institutions is much determined by the nature of the layout of local political arenas, the modes of negotiation and confrontation between the different local institutions and the strategic groups that interact with them, the nature of what is at stake, the potential for institutional mobilisation and the social or symbolic capital which the main actors of these institutions dispose of. This "micro-political dimension" is important but often underestimated in the field of development, particularly in respect to the management of resources generated by projects or other interventions" (FAO 1997c: 1). In the past just like today, to refer to the sphere of "tradition" may come in handy for any given individual or group of actors attempting to take advantage of opportunities. In a number of cases, "traditional" authority has thus been enforced by powerful groups from outside the community to suit specific purposes through the legitimacy conferred upon it by the explicit reference to the "traditional", and justified by that same élite in their interactions with internat ional development personnel on that basis, exploiting romantic Western notions of longlost "community life". What may be appealing to outside organisations (trying to find an entry point for commu-.
nit y-based initiatives) is of course the sustainabilit y of these rural institutions, enduring many a change in central government and development paradigm. This sustainability is in large part due to what Douglas (1986) calls a stabilising principle, which is often supernatural, or ancestral. It is this same principle that has frequent ly enabled the imposing of "traditional" leadership and practices on local communities who "should [and would, of course] know better", in other words, they may be aware of the fact that traditions are not impartial, are being manipulated or invented, but may put up with it as long as these arrangements are not seen as socially contrived. The processes unfolding in local socio-political arenas need to be understood on a case by case basis and the relationship of traditional authority to the history and heritage of the population groups of a given community assessed. Only then can we speak of social organisations and "grass-roots institutions" that are traditional in the sense that they are agents embodying important levels of cultural and social capital. It will then be necessary to examine what (type of) "agency" they have, namely, the capacity for action of social actors, or else their pragmatic competence4. Villagers themselves will create strategic alliances and invoke rules and legislation to best suit their needs (Messer 1999). This leads to different ways of trying to secure benefits from a project (or a decentralisation programme), or to impose exclusion or damage to competing social groups, but may also lead to new synergies. Personal identity is to a certain extent pre-determined through kinship, but may emerge in coalitions and change according to the resources to be captured, in function of the necessities felt at a certain point in time, and by a certain member of the household (it will be subject to the dynamics of intra-household resource allocation and decisions based on gender roles). In view of understanding what is "traditional", and how, it is therefore essential to disentangle the actors and their web of interlinked tactics, local norms and their dialect ic relationship to individual strategies. According to Baland and Platteau (1996), "Tradit ion can play two central roles to support.
village-based common property resource management: (a) via norms of social behaviour and (b) via well-established patterns of authority and leadership. These two effects are in fact tightly linked in so far as one of the functions of traditional authorities is precisely to activate and reinforce social or moral norms" (324). The present analysis examines the practical implications of these norms through field research carried out during 1998 and 1999 in Yemen, Mali, and Mozambique. The underlying hypotheses, taken up in section 5 below, were never perfectly relevant in all research settings. Nonetheless, they guided fieldwork inquiries by providing a background against which the same kind of questions were asked5. 1.2.(i) The broad institutional framework of decentralisation and rural development After a period of state formation, many developing countries are now facing the challenge of improving the performance of governance by bringing the latter closer to the daily trials and tribulations of their rural constituencies6. As elsewhere, in Mali, Mozambique, and Yemen, community participation and political decentralisation have in part been determined by the "development paths", the major macroeconomic and political decisions, of these nations, which are quite unlike each other. The latter two countries have only recently emerged from civil wars that have had profound impacts on parts of their countryside and rural development programmes, particularly with regard to the physical and psychological consequences on local institutional relationships. To start discussing wider civil society-state relations the broad institutional framework and some stylised facts are introduced below to set the stage for an analysis of traditional community institutions7. Yemen During the 1960s the Government of Yemen established a "Central Council for Tribal Affairs", to resolve disputes between rural tribesmen at the community level, and to provide suggestions about local needs. After the independence of South Yemen in 1967, the country.
became divided into two states: the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) in the south and the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR) in the north. The latter replaced the councils in the early 1970s with Local Development Associat ions (LDAs)8, formed through local elections and developed independently, and supported these associations technically and through the contribution of 75% of the traditional (religious) tax of zakat, collected by local government authorities at district level. In the mid-1980s the LDAs were replaced by the parastatal Local Development Boards (LDBs), and people felt their local initiatives were constrained by the new LDB laws, as these became less independent and their zakat support controlled by the Ministry of Finance. The People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) was divided into six governorates, superseding the earlier tribal administrative divisions, and the government established state agricultural and cooperative farms. In 1968, it declared a reconciliation among the tribes, prohibited tribal revenges and passed two land reform laws, in 1968 and 1970. These laws confiscated the property of sultans, emirs and sheikhs without compensation, and classified waqf, desert, and forest land, common rangeland and water resources as state property ­ whereby most of land in the southern governorates turned legally into state property. Most rangelands became neglected after the abandonment of traditional (urf) management rules. Mali During the first republic of Mali, the conception and execution of development activities during the period immediately following independence were characterised by strong government involvement and national consolidation (with the associated standardisation of many norms and policies), sometimes to the detriment of local people's initiatives. The circulation of goods and capital was controlled and the country relatively isolated, leading to informal cross-border transactions through a number of illicit networks and a devaluation in 1967. After the national assembly was dissolved after a coup in 1968, GDP slumped and food insecurity expanded, following a phase of ex-.
treme hardship especially for the rural populat ion, transactions and the movement of cereal within the country are liberalised; collective agricultural fields abolished; the population allowed to move freely between the cities, and; contacts facilitated by government with the farmers of neighbouring countries. The government of the second republic of Mali brought about several steps towards decentralisation beginning in 1977 by creating participatory regional, local and sub-local structures called Development Committees and Councils9, which are assigned authority to conceive, programme, implement and control development initiatives. These are converted into budgetary terms by the Council, composed twothirds of elected members and one-third by appointees of the government administration in Bamako ­ the Committee is in charge of their execution, under the supervision of the Council. However, farmers suffered from heavy taxat ion, dissatisfaction spread, and after the growing civil society movements finally overthrew the 2nd Republic in 1991, democratisation became unstoppable. Mozambique At independence (1975), the Government of Mozambique put in place a system of state farms and government marketing boards in charge of administering prices for agricultural commodities, sold through (now abolished) stores part of a nation-wide rationing system. It also introduced Grupos Dinamizadores (GDs), a political branch of the party in power, Frelimo 10, including in the rural areas the Presidentes de Localidades. The idea of decentralisation takes hold in 1984 with Frelimo's fourth party congress, which initiated changes centred on four main reforms: regional prioritisation, administrative decentralisation, liberalisation of commercial activity, and allocation of resources on the basis of economic pragmatism. Military destabilisation by Renamo 11 and ensuing civil war left infrastructure and rural institutions ­ shaped by colonialism, socialism, and local customs that have "survived" both ­ severely damaged. In 1996, an amendment to the 1990 constitution establishes the municipal framework, and in 1997.
twelve further municipal laws are passed (law 2/97), which state that the decentralisation process does not affect the rural areas, but only the autonomy of urban municipalities (cidades, vilas, or postos administrativos). Discussions are in progress on the role to be given to municipal governors, as well as the geography of the decentralised provinces12. Recently, the event causing the most interest among civil societ y groups has been the process of formulat ing the new land law (19/9713) by which individuals or communities can acquire land rights through occupancy and use of a plot for at least ten years, or by occupying land according to "customary norms and practices", provided these are not contrary to the constitution.
COMPARING THE INCOMPARABLE? Placing the issues in a rural development context The first thing that comes to mind, when reading a comparative study based mainly on fieldwork in Yemen, Mali, and Mozambique, is to ask, is there anything among these very different countries that can be meaningfully compared at all, and, in the affirmative, for what use? The metaphor used in methodological discussions is often that of "comparing apples and oranges". Or can we go to scale, and compare them as "fruit"? I would argue the latter, namely that if the issues are placed in a context of current policy challenges for rural development, we must not shy away from such complex concerns. Rather than the unit of analysis and time frame, what needs to be modified and relaxed is the intent of such a normative output: it cannot pretend to do more than give clues and insights, directions for consideration, reflection on the part of policymakers, and further action-research for validation and consolidation, for made-to-measure solutions. This purpose is refered to in the title of the document as "mapping", which "constitutes a basis for a thorough investigation of a specific research question [...] As such mapping is not neutral, but depends on the particular context. It is more than just description, but stops short of analysis" (Engberg-Pedersen 1998: 95).
Communicat ion is a very important part of implementing the decentralisation process (also discussed in section 3 below), both linguistically (the national language is not normally used at the village level) and contents (the dissimilar awareness outlined above). It has become evident that communication problems, and difficulties concerning consensus-building at community level, will inevitably include disagreement among actors located at different levels of the horizontal networks that are entrusted with the promotion of development14. This is relevant to the present discussion in as far as it will bear much influence in the debate on the envisaged role of traditional structures in decentralisation policy, laying out the parameters and "margins for manoeuvre" officially accorded to such structures. It is the point where, to use J. Ribot's (1998) words, "the twain shall meet" ("...if ever..."), the interface between community participation and political decentralisat ion. Both need to be worked on and promoted if this is to happen, but the balance between mobilising existing (possibly "dormant") resources and introducing appropriate new knowledge and technology will depend on what is envisaged in local, village-level development plans and the limitations identified therein. First and foremost, the participatory evaluation of "indigenous knowledge systems15" would appear a fundamental starting point when analysing local constraints (and opportunities) to the adoption of new technologies, given that these systems have evolved over centuries to adapt to agro-ecological realities, labour conditions, gender roles and socio-cultural circumstances16. It is important to point out that technology transfer does not depend solely on the successful articulation between the two knowledge systems, but that new technologies are evaluated and interpreted locally through indigenous knowledge systems. We must ask the question of whose indigenous knowledge are we looking at, and who will decide how to apply it and what for.
2.1 Modern technocratic versus indigenous knowledge As different worldviews and knowledge systems collide during this rapprochement, the bottom-up formula of participation will not easily marry the essentially "top-down" framework of decentralisation. It will lead to a confrontation of social actors with a different epistemology, a different way of knowing ­ particularly when it comes to discussing natural resource management objectives and requirements and their devolution17. The "gap" between what project documents (to take but the most concrete expression of an application of the modern knowledge system of "development") specify as "expected outputs, products, or results", and what has actually taken place, can be measured from a monitoring point of view as an indicator of sustainability ­ in the sense that this gap may reflect the extent of local appropriation, adaptation, and, eventually, "ownership" and therefore institutional and social sustainability. The dichotomy that often opposes indigenous knowledge to modern scientific knowledge is misleading18; says N. Long: "The encounter between different configurations of knowledge involves a transformat ion or translation of existing knowledges and a `fusion of horizons'"(1992: 274). The knowledge systems' institutional settings are described by Usher (1986): "The state system [deriving its legitimacy and authority from the rule of law of the nation-state] rests on a common property concept in which the state assumes exclusive responsibility and capability for managing a resource equally accessible to all citizens. The state manages for certain levels of abundance on a technical basis, and then allocates shares of this abundance to users on an economic and political basis. The system of knowledge is based on a scientific accumulat ion, organization, and interpretation of data, and management problems are resolved in a technical, ahistorical framework. This system of management is bureaucratic, which is to say, hierarchically organized and vertically compartmentalized. Managers become distinct from harvesters, authority becomes centralized.
and flows from the top down. The environment is reduced to conceptually discreet components which are managed separately. As these separate management units take on a life of their own, management objectives diverge and become focused on specialized objectives: maximizing fur production, trophy production, or recreational expenditures. Not least, the management of fish and wildlife resources becomes separated from the management of the lands and waters that sustain them" (71). "The indigenous system [based on selfregulat ion] rests on communal property arrangements, in which the local harvesting group is responsible for management by consensus. Management and harvesting are conceptually and practically inseparable. Knowledge comes from the experience of every aspect of harvesting itself ­ travelling, searching, hunting, skinning, butchering and eating. It is accumulated by every individual, and shared intimately and constantly within the household, the family, or whatever is the social unit of production. It is also shared and exchanged within the larger society, and handed down in the form of stories from one generation to the next. In sum, these observations, like those of the state system's, become coded and organized by a paradigm or a set of paradigms that provide a comprehensive interpretation of them. The knowledge, so produced becomes the cultural heritage of these societies, just as what we call science is part of ours. (...) The indigenous system (...) is therefore intimately linked with their values, ethics and cosmology, which are generally based on an integrated, non-compartmentalized view of the environment" (7119). By way of the development agencies and the complicity of other partners, the state system penetrates the indigenous system through rural and agricultural development projects. The outcome of a given project is the consequence of a negotiation process, visible and, mostly, invisible, engaging the technical-scientific reasoning of development professionals, with an urban-based educational background in the natural sciences, and the "holistic" reasoning of the project "beneficiaries". Their different.
worldviews could be succinctly (and simplistically) characterised as anthropocentric versus cosmocentric (without doing justice to ubiquitous syncretic practices) which are anchored in different historical traditions, whereby the former, derived from Judeo-Christian values (but not affirmed as such), have largely dominated the development paradigms, whilst the latter have been classified in the "risks" category of project documents as "cultural" constraints and irrational, exploitative and shortsighted behaviour, implicitly attributed to what are essentially seen as feudal agrarian relations. 2.2 Traditional institutional structures vis-àvis processes of decentralisation "The state can designate the administrator and the governor, but our chief comes from our traditions." (From a conversation with a group of villagers in Banga, Tete Province, Tsangano District, Mozambique, January 1999 (Lundin and Alfane 1999)). The theoretical and practical foundation of traditional authority is generally of a symbolicreligious nature, and is given legitimacy only by the communities themselves (often finally endorsed through bodies such as councils of elders). They are thus "grass-roots institutions" that in effect have to negotiate their power dayby-day, and therefore embody a degree of flexibility that may be extremely useful for the efficient management of natural resources. The physical closeness to their "constituency" allows for the application of a set of rules and norms that will rarely be out of touch with the ecological reality and the management and conservat ion requirements of the resources in their territory. In West Africa, for example, in the case of negotiating and managing transmigrant cattle corridors, this flexibility is vital if ecological degradation and social conflict are to be avoided. It may also ensure that cultural rights are respected within the complex ethnic mosaic of most rural societies, in Africa including matrilinear as well as patrilinear groups20. In Africa, traditional chiefs act as mediators between a given ethnic group and its environ-.
ment, and their relationship to the land is determined by the location of the burial places of the ancestors of a given lineage (or tribe). Traditional community leaders are the symbol of an intimate alliance with their territory21. The primary function of such traditional authorities is to ensure peace and harmony in the rural communities within their territory. Thus, a "bad" chief or sheikh would be someone not able to assure this, for example, during celebrat ions when people consume alcohol and fights may break out. The main tasks of traditional authority revolve around mediating in land conflict resolution and regulating access to land. Solutions are normally reached among the parties involved, often with the mediation of the respective local lineage chief(s) or sheikh. Only when the latter are unable to reach a verdict acceptable to everyone is the traditional chief or the grand sheikh (sheikh 