Technical Consultation on Decentralization.
FAO, ROME, 16-18 DECEMBER 1997.
Designing and Scaling-Up Productive Natural Resource Management Programs: Decentralization and Institutions for Collective Action.
Talib Esmail Decentralization, Fiscal Systems and Rural Development Programme World Bank.
Working Group 7: Decentralization and natural resource management (NRM) (productive and conservation projects).
THE WORLD BANK.
Work in progress (Draft for comment) December 9, 1997.
Designing And Scaling-Up Productive Natural Resource Management Programs: Decentralization And Institutions For Collective Action.
Talib Esmail.
Rural Development Department The World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW. Washington, DC 20433 Tel. 202 458 5436 email: tesmail@worldbank.org.
{The author is on secondment to the World Bank from the Aga Khan Foundation. The views expressed here are those of the author and should not be attributed to either the World Bank, or Aga Khan Foundation}.
Acknowledgments.
This research was conducted as part of the Decentralization, Fiscal Systems and Rural Development research program. The program is funded by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, the Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway, the Government of Austria and the World Bank. I would especially like to thank Hans Binswanger for assenting to this secondment and for his excellent advice on the intellectual development of this paper. In addition, I would like to thank Veit Burger, Sabine Keinath, and Jeffrey G. Lewis for their challenging and insightful comments on earlier drafts. I am grateful to Keith Virgo at WS Atkins Internation Ltd. and S.K. Datta from the European Commission funded Doon Valley project in India for providing me with very useful information about their program. Finally, I greatly appreciate the support of the Aga Khan Foundation in pursuing this secondment.
Glossary of Abbreviations and Acronyms.
AKRSP(I) AKRSP(P) ASPRO BAAC CAs CPR DRDA DRIF IGWDP JFM LDF LOC MDC MIS MYPC NABARD NGO NIA NPV NRDP NRM NWDP OECD PIAs PNGT PRA PSC SWDF TA UNCDF Village panchayat WOTR Aga Khan Rural Support Program (India) Aga Khan Rural Support Program (Pakistan) Agua Y Solidaridad Para El Progreso - Water and Solidarity for Progress, Mexico Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives, Thailand Community Associations common pool resource District Rural Development Agency Demand Driven Rural Investment Fund Indo-German Watershed Development Program, India Joint Forest Management Local Development Fund Local Organizational Capacity Municipal Development Council management information system Multi-Year Planning Ceiling National Bank for Rural Development, India non-governmental organization National Irrigation Administration, Philippines Net Present Value Northeast Rural Development Program, Brazil natural resource management National Watershed Development Program, India Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Program Implementing Agencies Programme National De Gestion Des Terroirs - National Program for Land Management, Burkina Faso participatory rural appraisal Project Sanctioning Committee Sadguru Water and Development Foundation, India technical assistance United Nations Capital Development Fund lowest level of elected government in India Watershed Organization Trust.
Executive Summary.
Introduction.
The focus of this report is on NRM activities broadly defined as those that promote sustainable agricultural production through improvements in on-farm soil and water management, such as social forestry, micro-watershed management, irrigation water management, and soil conservation. These types of projects directly combine economic and environmental benefits, and entail decentralized actions including investment in socio-economic infrastructure (at the municipal and micro-catchment levels) through active beneficiary participation. Sustainable management of natural resource systems requires: (i) (ii) (iii) locally adapted resource-conserving technologies; coordinated action by groups or communities at the local level; and, supportive external government and NGO institutions working within an enabling policy environment and in partnership with resource users.
Most successes to date consist of small islands of accomplishment; scattered projects working with small numbers of communities. At the heart of these successes are community-based institutions consisting of resource users working together for individual benefit. The challenge lies in implementing programs that achieve sustainable results at a grassroots level through beneficiary participation, while at the same time, operating on a large enough scale to have an impact at the national level. Practical guidance is provided for program planners on how to design community-based NRM programs that can be scaled-up. It is based on a review of programs that have achieved some degree of success in this sphere. Recommendations are put forward on policy preconditions, program strategies, structure of program implementing agencies, and appropriate financing mechanisms (see page xi).
NRM, Institutions For Collective Action, And Decentralization (Chapter 0, page 3).
Sustainable agricultural production resulting in improvements in household incomes would imply that the state does not have a role in promoting productive NRM programs. However, an in-depth analysis of the nature of NRM programs concludes that they provide joint products, wherein an activity gives rise to multiple outputs, some of which are private, purely public, and impurely public. Moreover, most NRM programs are also characterized by being subject to free-rider problems; specifically, when one person cannot be excluded from the benefits that others provide, each person is motivated not to contribute to the joint effort, but to free-ride on the efforts of others. An analysis of successful programs, on the other hand, demonstrates that institutions for collective action are essential for over-coming free-rider problems associated with managing resources with asymmetric costs and benefits. The state therefore has a role in promoting the evolution of such "public" institutions to increase optimal resource allocation and substitute for market failure.
Fo rming and strengthening local institutions is itself a strategy of decentralization to create local capacities for handling authority and responsibility. In addition, through an analysis of the essential characteristics of long-enduring institutions, it is also found that government decentralization of fiscal, political and administrative authority and control to local institutions and local government is an essential precondition in creating the enabling conditions for large-scale evolution of collective action.
Preconditions: Fostering An Enabling Environment For Effective NRM Programs (Chapter 0, page 14) And Socio-Psychological And Environmental Factors Contributing To The Supply Of Successful Institutions (Chapter 0, page 23).
Sustainable NRM and supply of local institutions for collective action requires more than decentralization of fiscal and administrative authority. It also requires fostering an enabling environment through: · · · Sound macroeconomic policies. Investment in rural infrastructure. Policies governing property rights and legal status of local institutions.
In addition, planners need to be aware that the propensity of individuals voluntarily to organize themselves into institutions is related to: · · · Existing levels of local organizational capacity. Extent and rate of environmental degradation or impending crisis that is apparent to resource users. Perceived levels of resource tenure and physical security that affect the extent to which individuals discount future benefits.
Program Strategies For Catalyzing The Supply Of Local Institutions (Chapter 0, page 27).
Evidence indicates that the most effective program strategies are those that build Local Organizational Capacity (LOC) through the implementation of productivity (or well-being) enhancing subprojects. These are positive-sum in there orientation, i.e. creating new values for all participants through mobilization and utilization of resources that would otherwise be differently used. The following strategies strengthen LOC: · · "Entry point" subprojects that result in positive financial and/or economic returns act as strong incentives for collective action - this is the "carrot" for organization formation. Benefits that accrue quickly, locally, transparently, and as equitably as possible given resource constraints, add further impetus for continuing collective action - this keeps the "carrot" appetizing. Reducing delays between subproject identification and implementation to ensure benefits accrue quickly.
Catalytic agencies are required to organize individuals into institutions for collective action. The process of social organizing should include intensive face-to-face approaches with individuals over a period of time; information-sharing, awareness raising, building rapport, participatory micro-level planning, and so on. Participatory micro-level planning techniques are particularly useful in: · · · Stimulating demand for NRM. Identifying appropriate entry-point activities. Resolving potential conflicts that might undermine the viability of natural resource management.
Asymmetric costs and benefits mean that adoption of NRM technologies and institution formation will require appropriate financial incentives and subsidies. The joint products nature of NRM goods means that the decision to use credit or matching-grants for subproject financing is not obvious. The probability of success of using individual or group loans is affected by wealth of target population, inequality of income distribution, gestation period before returns start accruing to individuals, discount rate of individuals, extent of social cohesion, and so on. If the probability of success of using credit is less than 80 percent, then matching grants are proposed. The share of matching-grant provided by the program is determined by the beneficiaries ability and willingness to contribute to a given subproject. This encapsulated in a formula that includes wealth, income inequality, demand, social cohesion, capital cost of subproject, financial profitability relative to economic returns, and so on. (see the section on 5.4 Structuring financial incentives for adoption of NRM technologies and institution formation., page 31, for more detail).
Paths To Scaling-Up Of Participatory Approaches (Chapter 0, page 41).
A number of tested approaches can be used in combination: · Clustering social organizing inputs in "nodes" of 1,000 ha watersheds, or a handful of villages, produces an "impact zone" that can help to stimulate demand by acting as visual demonstrations of program benefits, and as training areas for new institutions. Farmer-to-farmer exchanges used in conjunction with the nodal approach are a cost-effective means of rapidly replicating the program and creating new nodes. Communications campaigns using culturally appropriate media are highly effective at raising awareness about the program objectives, incentives and potential benefits. Structuring the participatory process can improve program planning and coordination between service providers. It also assists in defining an exit strategy so that catalytic agencies reduce their involvement with institutions over time and move on to new geographical areas. Limiting the range of subproject interventions supported by the program focuses the participatory process on outcomes; makes the program less complex to administer because of standardization of subprojects, technical assistance, production of operational manuals, etc. It is also more transparent to beneficiaries.
Standardizing matching grants for agro-ecological areas encourages transparency and reduces the time taken by catalytic agency to negotiate appropriate beneficiary contributions. Transferring responsibilities for implementation, procurement, and operation, to institutions rapidly builds internal capacity as individuals "learn by doing"; reduces the burden on catalytic agencies for day-to-day management enabling them to work with a larger number of communities; and, reduces the cost and time required for subproject implementation by 30 70 percent. Creating and capitalizing a maintenance fund during subproject implementation increases the probability of investments continuing to be maintained after construction. It is preferable to "contracts" between institutions and implementing agency. Mobilizing administrative and political support through Cabinet Resolutions at state and federal level are required to persuade sectoral line ministries to provide technical assistance, budgetary allocations, and acknowledge community rights over use of common pool resources. This reduces the time spent negotiating individual agreements with each ministry and department.
Program Management And Implementation (Chapter 0, page 52).
NGOs have limited potential (and are often unwilling) to scale-up their programs. The responsibility for implementation therefore requires public sector institutions. Two broad types of public sector agencies can be discerned: (i) Multidisciplinary agencies consisting of single unified authorities providing holistic inputs, including a cadre of social organizers, and technical personnel specialized in integrated management of natural resources; (ii) Single sector agencies specializing in motivating and catalyzing resource appropriators relying upon other agencies to provide technical inputs for the detailed design and implementation of subprojects. Donor agencies usually rely upon the creation of multidisciplinary project implementation units with staff recruited from different line ministries. This is effective for the implementation of isolated projects but not sustainable in the long-run; governments rarely continue to support them after the end of the project period because they are not considered to be statutory public institutions. A program approach that is based on a sector-wide strategy and policy framework offers more potential for long enduring systemic change. But this requires improved coordination and collaboration between line ministries. Good practice for promoting this include: · Develop a policy framework spelling out the long-term vision and strategy for achieving program goals; and, respective roles, responsibilities, systems and procedures of different public sector agencies. Get Cabinet/Council of Ministers approval of policy framework.
Create apex working and learning groups to ensure that the policy framework is implemented and coordination occurs at multiple layers. Review and restructure public sector agencies to identify quick wins in efficiency and responsiveness to clients and also develop a phased strategy for implementation of reforms.
In the absence of any proven model for the formation of local institutions for collective management of natural resources, program implementing agencies need to closely monitor their progress to adapt program approaches. In essence, three types of monitoring activities are required: · · · Assessing efficacy of participatory processes and sustainability of the institutions; Monitoring and evaluating social, environmental, and economic impact; Tracking physical and financial performance.
Design Of Decentralized Financial Instruments For Subproject Financing (Chapter 0, page 61 ).
The financing instrument used by donor agencies must facilitate the following: · · · · Government ownership of the program. Strengthened government capacity to implement the program. Community authority and control over decision-making, implementation, procurement, operation and maintenance. Quick accrual of initial subproject benefits through local level approval and disbursal mechanisms.
Adapted versions of Demand Driven Rural Investment Funds (or Local Development Funds as used by UNCDF) are proposed in preference to a Social Fund because they vest the investment programming functions (the power to reject/select subprojects) in existing local government institutions rather than in specially created quasi-governmental, or non-governmental, agencies. They are also designed to introduce or improve decentralized, participatory planning procedures and to build the capacity of local governments and other local institutions to design and manage local projects. An example is provided in the main document on how complimentarity can be achieved between the catalytic implementing agency, local government and financial instrument (see page 62). The essential attributes required of a decentralized financial instrument are: · Democratic and representative local government bodies responsible for subproject approval to be accountable to resource appropriators and transparent in their operations (using culturally appropriate mechanisms of accountability rather than imposed western values). Geographic targeting is required because the common pool resource aspect of NRM necessitates participation of all resource appropriators in an institution for collective action to: (i) receive program inputs and benefits; and, (ii) avoid the problem of free-riders undermining the authority and control of the institution.
Community procurement of goods and services as part of the strategy to build local organizational capacity and as a pathway for scaling-up.
Advance payments and verification of the use of funds to minimize delays of disbursal, facilitate local procurement of good and services, and ensure quick accrual of benefits.
Recommendations.
Scaling-up community-based NRM programs requires strengthening local organizational capacity. Joint products provided by NRM programs necessitate the involvement of external implementing agencies for awareness raising, catalyzing group formation, soliciting commitment from all appropriators, and identifying subproject interventions through participatory micro-level planning. Decentralization policies and programs can stimulate the voluntary evolution of local institutions for collective action. Program strategies used by agencies need to include incentives for group formation and strengthening, and also private incentives for adoption of new technologies. Scaling-up can be achieved by utilizing de-concentrated catalytic agencies working in nodal areas and employing effective communications campaigns. NRM programs cannot be viewed as isolated endeavors; they need to be part of the rural development agenda and systemic, enduring, change is required in the structure and operation of government agencies to make them more client responsive and effective. Piloting programs on a small scale to fine-tune program strategies, incentives, and also to build the capacities of implementing agencies is essential before attempting to scale-up. Monitoring and evaluation systems must be in place before piloting to learn from experiences and enable adaptive programming. Potential dangers of decentralization in terms of transparency, accountability, and capture of benefits by local elites, mean that monitoring of participatory processes and effectiveness of local institutions must be given greater priority than previously.
INTRODUCTION.
In the developing countries, some 2.3 to 2.6 billion people are supported by agricultural systems based on modern technologies brought by the Green Revolution. After these types of agriculture, some 1.9 to 2.2 billion people are largely untouched by modern technology and are still reliant upon indigenous farming systems. They tend to be in poorer countries with little foreign exchange to buy external inputs. Despite the fact that indigenous systems of soil and water conservation are widespread, soil erosion continues to be a far-reaching problem. Agricultural land continues to lose productive soil, water and nutrients resources. This is, in part, because not all farmland is protected by conservation measures, but also because not all erosion arises from farmland; erosion arises also from degradation of forests, rangeland and other areas (Pretty, 1995 reviewing numerous sources of data). There is growing body of evidence demonstrating that regenerative agriculture requires an integration of different approaches for the sustainable management of natural resource systems. Reducing the rate of environmental degradation therefore requires programs and policies that address the problem in a holistic mode. This includes using: (i) locally adapted resourceco nserving technologies; (ii) coordinated action by groups or communities at the local level; and, (iii) supportive external government and/or NGO institutions working within an enabling policy environment and in partnership with resource users. So far, most of the successes have been achieved despite existing policy environments. It is partly for this reason that most of the success stories consist of small islands of accomplishment; scattered projects working with small numbers of communities. The challenge for governments and donor agencies lies in learning from, and replicating, these islands of success so that whole regions and nations can be transformed. Scaling-up geographical coverage does not mean, however, that programs must just do things bigger and faster. On the contrary, as this paper will demonstrate, at the heart of sustainable management of natural resources, are community-based institutions consisting of resource users working together for individual benefit. Programs therefore need to achieve sustainable results at a grassroots level through beneficiary participation, while at the same time, operating on a large scale. The requirement for participation of beneficiaries in program decision-making is now the accepted mantra amongst most donor agencies. Unfortunately, rhetoric is not matched by reality. This is because there is insufficient knowledge and theory on how to foster effective and sustainable local level institutions for collective action or a regional scale. This paper aims to provide practical guidance to program planners on how to design communitybased NRM programs that can be scaled-up. Suggestions are provided on policy preconditions, program strategies, structure of program implementing agencies, and appropriate financing mechanisms. The paper is based on a review of community-based NRM programs that have achieved some degree of success in fostering effective local level institutions on a large scale. This paper focuses on design aspects specifically related to NRM activities that have productive attributes i.e. they have been shown to have positive cost-benefit ratios and result in increases in real incomes for beneficiaries. Within this category, the paper concentrates on those NRM activities that can be implemented at the level of a community (or village). It has been established.
t hat programs that function at this level of planning have a greater potential to be scaled-up since they do not have to struggle (at least in their initial stages) with intra-community and regional externalities. 1.1 OUTLINE OF PAPER.
The next chapter shows the relationship between NRM, collective action and decentralization. In the absence of a commonly agreed definition, the chapter starts by defining the term "natural resource management". It then proceeds to discuss the nature of goods delivered by NRM programs and provides a justification for public resources to be used for financing goods that result in both private, and social, benefits. The evidence for collective action to sustainably manage natural resources is then discussed. While analyzing the essential characteristics of long enduring local institutions for collective action, the paper posits that decentralization policies and programs are essential for the large-scale supply of such institutions. Chapter 0 briefly summarizes the essential macro-level policies and preconditions that are necessary in order to create the conditions for economically viable investments on private and common property. The following chapter discusses some generic socio-psychological and environmental factors influencing the propensity of resource appropriators to organize themselves for collective action. Chapter 0 provides an overview of the program strategies that can be used to stimulate the formation of local institutions and how these might be strengthened. Chapter 0 reviews the various avenues used by programs to facilitate scaling-up of geographical coverage and impact. Chapter 6 discuss the characteristics that external government agencies must have in order to catalyze the formation of local institutions and provide technical inputs. The final chapter provides an example of a tried and tested Bank lending instrument that can be adapted for financing small community-based NRM subprojects. 1.2.
METHODOLOGY.
This paper is based on a review of community-based NRM programs that have achieved some degree of success in scaling-up implementation to cover ample numbers of communities and villages. However, since there are few programs that have track records in actively attempting to form institutions for collective action, strict criteria based on scale of operations were not used to exclude programs from this investigation. In addition, programs that are not implementing community-based NRM were also studied. For example, the NRDP in Brazil and the Municipal Funds in Mexico, despite not being focused on productive NRM programs, were nevertheless investigated because of their innovative decentralized financing instruments that were used to fund community subprojects. An analytical framework is used to compare the attributes of different programs (see Annex 1). The analytical framework is based upon a review of secondary data, completed questionnaires, and also field visits to some of the programs. Due to resource constraints only three Bank supported programs were visited during the course of this investigation: PNGT in Burkina Faso, NRDP in Brazil and Municipal Funds in Mexico. Many South Asian cases are appraised in this paper on account of this author's 10 year association with the Aga Khan Rural Support Programs in India and Pakistan.
NRM, INSTITUTIONS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION, AND DECENTRALIZATION,.
In the absence of a commonly agreed definition, this section begins by explaining what is generally meant by the term "natural resource management". Following this, an analysis of the nature of natural resource goods concludes that NRM programs provide joint products wherein an activity gives rise to multiple outputs, some of which are private, purely public, and impurely public. The complex nature of natural resource goods, therefore, does not assist in determining whether the State has responsibility for their provision. However, empirical evidence from successful projects demonstrates that institutions for collective action are essential for sustainable NRM because they are able to solve the commitment and free-rider problems. These institutions can be considered to be public (or collective) entities. It is argued that the state has a responsibility for reducing environmental degradation which is a function of market failure and therefore, by default, it has a responsibility to create the enabling conditions for the supply of NRM institutions. An analysis of long enduring institutions for collective action, found that they are characterized by having considerable local authority and control over design of governance rules, decision-making and financial matters. Consequently, it is concluded that the supply of effective institutions for collective action requires state adoption of decentralized political, fiscal and institutional systems of governance. 2.1.
DEFINING NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.
Natural resource management (NRM) within the Bank refers to three basic types of lending operations: (i) those designed to promote sustainable agricultural, forestry and fisheries development and/or water resource use through environmentally sound resource management techniques; (ii) those intended to conserve or protect specific ecosystems and associated biodiversity, including the establishment or consolidation of national parks, wildlife reserves, etc.; (iii) those which seek to strengthen national and/or subnational institutional capacity for improved NRM as, for example, through the use of rural land cadastres, geographic information systems, and other natural resource and environmental planning tools. A recent review of the Bank's NRM portfolio notes that, in reality, many of the projects are "hybrids" in that they combine sustainable production, conservation and institution building objectives and components (World Bank, 1997a). Box 1 describes five types of NRM activities that fall within the first category of Bank lending operations. The review of the Bank's NRM portfolio (World Bank, 1997a) found that projects designed to promote sustainable agricultural production through improvements in on-farm soil and water management, such as social forestry, micro-watershed management, irrigation water management and soil conservation, had a greater likelihood of success. This is because they have considerable advantages over projects that are primarily concerned with biodiversity, forest, rangeland, or fisheries resource management and conservation. In particular, the former types of projects have two significant characteristics not always shared by the latter. These characteristics are related to the externalities affecting resource management viability:.
(a) The projects are "win-win" in that they directly combine economic and environmental benefits ­ i.e., on-farm technical improvements in NRM enhance or extend natural soil fertility and, hence, crop productivity, with a positive potential impact on beneficiary income, while at the same time reducing erosion, sedimentation and agricultural run-off. The externalities affecting economic viability are therefore primarily local. (b) The projects necessarily entail decentralized actions (at the municipal and micro-catchment levels) and require active beneficiary participation. Seeking commitment of resource appropriators at this micro-level through institutions for collective action is more viable than attempting to take decisions at a regional level because potential conflicts are localized. Externalities at regional levels do exist, but they do not affect the viability of local decision-making through local institutions. In contrast, projects involving forest, rangeland, and fisheries resource management require some restriction of access to natural resources. They also involve significant trade-offs and conflicts because the externalities affecting the viability of resource use are usually not only local, but also regional, national and international. Moreover, there is insufficient understanding of the underlying ecosystem services and constraints which makes project design, implementation, and potential success, even more difficult. Box 2 provides examples of institutional channels for decision-making by level and sector. This paper seeks to identify design characteristics of those NRM programs that lend themselves to local action by resource appropriators; the regional and national externalities therefore do not significantly impinge on the viability of local resource management interventions. Examples of these types of NRM programs are micro-watershed management, social forestry, irrigation water management, and soil conservation. These NRM projects are dependent, at least partially, upon on-farm technical improvements that result in on-farm income benefits. Obviously, there are also some regional, national and international externalities such as commodity prices, or use of common property (e.g. groundwater or common land), that do affect the viability of sustainable resource management practices. In general, however, these types of resource management activities, through micro-level planning and local action, provide greater opportunities for "winwin" outcomes as described above.
Different Types of NRM Activities for Sustainable Production There are essentially five kinds of NRM activities that are designed to promote sustainable agriculture, forestry and water resource use: · Forest management. This involves the utilization of tree and related plant and animal populations in ways that perpetuate the forest ecosystem. Forest products such as fuel and fodder are important inputs in agriculture and domestic non-farm economies. Social forestry is a term that has been introduced to distinguish a new approa