Participatory Development:.
Guidelines on Beneficiary Participation in Agricultural and Rural Development.
prepared by: Bernard van Heck FAO Consultant for the Rural Institutions and Participation Service, Rural Development Division Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome Italy September 2003 (2nd edition).
Preface These guidelines provide guidance for policy makers and practitioners how to incorporate group-based, participatory based approaches into large-scale investment projects. They include advice on a range of topics, including: strategies to promote participation, project formulation, group formation, financial arrangements, training, monitoring and evaluation, etc. They were based on experience gained in the design and implementation of FAO People's Participation Programme projects during the 1980s and prepared by FAO consultant, Bernard Van Heck, working under the technical guidance of Dr. Nikolaus Newiger, Group Leader of the FAO Cooperatives and Farmers Organizations Group and published in March 1990, long before the era of electronic publishing began. Since many who have used the guidelines in their work have reported that much remains valid and useful even today, we have decided to publish a 2nd edition of the publication, this time in electronic format for easy accessing over the Internet. The changes that made to the original printed publication have been mostly editorial. No significant new material has been added, except for references to new programmes that use similar group-based approaches and to a series of FAO resource books on farmer group and agricultural cooperative development, both of which have appeared since that date. Reader comments on the usefulness of these guidelines in helping to introduce more participatory, group-based approaches in larger-scale investment projects are most welcomed. John Rouse Senior Officer and Group Leader Cooperatives and Farmers' Organizations Group Rural Institutions and participation Service Rural Development Division Sustainable Development Department John.Rouse@fao.org.
STRATEGIES TO PROMOTE PARTICIPATION 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7.
IDENTIFICATION OF PROJECT AREAS, BENEFICIARIES AND THEIR NEEDS 5.1 5.2 5.3.
THE FORMATION OF RURAL POOR GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6.
GROUP AND INTER-GROUP ACTIVITIES 7.1 7.2.
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR BENEFICIARY PARTICIPATION 8.1 8.2.
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS 9.1 9.2 9.3 9.4 9.5 9.6 9.7.
PARTICIPATION AGENTS/GROUP PROMOTERS 10.1 10.2 10.3 10.4 10.5 Roles Selection Posting and Payment Expected Performance in Group Formation Career Prospects.
PARTICIPATORY TRAINING 11.1 11.2 11.3 11.4 11.5.
Objectives and Characteristics 42 Training Target Groups, Personnel and Committees 43 Beneficiary Training 43 Training of Participation Agents (Group Promoters), the Project Coordinator and Other Project Staff 44 Training of Government and NGO Staff as well as Local Leaders 45 46 46 46 47 47 47 49 50 50 50 51 51 52 54 54 55 56 58 58 59 59 62 Conventional and Participatory Action Research Objectives Surveys Participatory Monitoring Participatory Evaluation Cost-Effectiveness Benefits Costs Extra Costs Field Experience Continuation: Need for Process Approach Expansion and Multiplication The Planning of Project Expansion and Multiplication Need for Flexible Project Designs Reconnaissance Stage Identification Stage Project Preparation or Formulation Stage.
PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH 12.1 12.2 12.3.
PARTICIPATORY MONITORING AND ON-GOING EVALUATION (PMOE) 13.1 13.2.
ESTIMATED COSTS TO PROMOTE BENEFICIARY PARTICIPATION 14.1 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5.
PROJECT CONTINUATION. EXPANSION AND MULTIPLICATION 15.1 15.2 15.3.
HOW TO ENSURE BENEFICIARY PARTICIPATION IN THE PROJECT CYCLE 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4.
APPENDICES Appendix.
Participatory Development Programmes Supported by FAO Appendix.
1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) Selected References General Women in Development Forestry Fisheries Water Management Training Finance Asia 64 71 71 72 73 73 73 73 74 74.
Africa Overview Participatory Rural Development Approach Participatory Rural Development Project (Component) Phases Two Basic Strategies for Rural Development.
Appendix.
Figures:.
INTRODUCTION.
1.1 These Guidelines are an attempt to indicate how to incorporate effectively beneficiary participation in agricultural and rural development projects1 in particular those supported by FAO technical assistance. The Guidelines are meant as a tool for project planners and implementers, in particular for the experts involved in the identification and formulation of rural development projects. The latter can be large multi-component or smaller projects of any type: for example, those dealing with agricultural production, livestock, forestry, fishery, irrigation, land reform, inputs, extension, credit, marketing, research, training as well as those dealing with health, sanitation, nutrition, education and other social fields. The Guidelines are a first attempt to present a "manual" from which relevant pragmatic indications can be taken to render forthcoming and existing conventional projects (more) participatory. This means firstly that the projects are to the largest possible extent oriented towards the rural poor, and secondly that they include provisions for the formation of self-run beneficiary groups. As explained later, these two essential features do not substitute for but are expected to complement conventional development approaches and efforts. In more concrete terms: the comprehensive Guidelines hereunder hopefully enable planners of any rural development project to select from the text those issues and elements which are necessary to incorporate in the overall project design specific objectives and workable components or mechanisms for active and lasting beneficiary participation. This is not a luxury: the lack of feasible mechanisms to attain effective beneficiary participation is still a major deficiency in project designs among several other ones such as too tight schedule, under-estimated costs, production shortfalls, bad management and staff, poor engineering, procurement difficulties, wrong organization and structure, insufficient technical assistance, too many or unbalanced components, over-dimensioning, nonsustainabilit y, inequitable benefit distribution, slow adaptation, insufficient government commitment, and recurrent budget shortage2. 1.2 The Guidelines are based on a number of interesting consultations with experts in relevant FAO divisions and units who have experience with participatory projects and programmes. They are also based on scrutiny of relevant documents and reports on twelve FAO People's Participation Programme (PPP) and Small Farmer Development Programme (SFDP) projects as well as reports on other FAO participatory projects funded by UNDP, by FAO Government Cooperation Programme (GCP) extra-budgetary sources and/or under the FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP). In fact, these Guidelines evolved from a wealth of efforts and experiences gained in the field by UN (in particular FAO), government and voluntary (NGO) organizations. Since the mid1 2.
In the following, agricultural and rural development projects and programmes will be shortly indicated as development projects or projects. This list is taken from a recent publication which however does not explicitly deal with beneficiary participation: "Problems in Agricultural Project Design", an Investment Centre Study, FAO. Oct. 1988. Another interesting report is: "World Bank Experience with Rural Development, 1965-1987," Operations Evaluation Department World Bank. Oct. 1987; see e.g. Sections 6.32-6.39 on beneficiary participation.
sevent ies and particularly the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD), it was widely recognized that development efforts cannot be successful without the active participation of the people, particularly small and landless farmers, fishermen and other rural poor. Several of the above agencies launched therefore special programmes mostly on pilot basis. In order to test and develop participatory development approaches3 In this perspective FAO promoted:.
­ the programme "People's Participation in Agricultural and Rural Development through.
the Promotion of Self-Help Organizations" (PPP);.
­ Community Action for Disadvantaged Rural Women (CADRW); ­ Forestry for Local Community Development Programmes (FLCDP); and since 1987.
"The Forests, Trees and People Programme (FTPP)";.
­ Programme for Small-Scale and Artisanal Fishermen; ­ Support Programme for Farm Water Management; ­ Freedom from Hunger Campaign/Action for Development (FFHC/AD: started already.
in 1959); (For some basic data on these participatory programmes see Annex I.) 1.3 All of the above-indicated programmes promote group formation and action strategies designed to demonstrate to the disadvantaged people as well as to UN agencies and member governments the necessity and efficacy of adopting bottom-up or participatory rural development approaches as a complement to existing ones in order to reach the poor and guide them towards self-development efforts. And indeed the main outcome of these pilot programmes is that efforts of beneficiary participation in a project are most successful when the intended beneficiaries are systematically helped to organize themselves into small, selfrun groups formed from scratch or within larger organizations. Through such groups they can better meet their economic and social needs, the project and/or delivery system can provide services and facilities more easily and on a wider scale, and the poor can engage much more in poverty alleviating efforts (see Sections 5 and 6). 1.4 Popular participation and thus also beneficiary participation has become a fashionable, frequently used (and misused!) concept which is also often ambiguous, vague and abstract (see Section 2). It is presently applied in many projects in limited forms and manners. However, while considering also minor forms of participation as potentially valuable, it is tried in this guide to indicate how to design full beneficiary participation in larger projects which aim at reaching and involving mainly or exclusively the rural poor. This full participation can only be obtained by means of specific arrangements and/or mechanisms for grassroots institution-building in the form of group formation and action being the essence of participatory rural development. The latter approach aims at improving conventional, area-based, all farmer or all rural peopleoriented projects which lack specific participatory arrangements and consequently yield - as is well-known - mostly benefits to the better-off beneficiaries who have more assets, education.
See e.g. "People's Participation in Agricultural and Rural Development," FAO paper prepared for the tenth Session of the Committee of Agriculture, held in May 1989.
and better access to the delivery system. Thus, participatory rural development does not replace other UN, government or NGO development policies, programmes and projects and should not be considered an alternative or exclusive development approach. It is instead a complementary approach which is indispensable for effective poverty alleviation (see also the Figures 1 and 3 in Appendix 3). It should here however be stressed that participatory rural development should not only be regarded as a set of techniques but also as a mental outlook or state of mind favouring a development approach which starts from the people concerned and treat them as subjects and not as objects of development. 1.5 The term participation is debatable because inadequate from the long term perspective. In the initial stages of development and for the time being, the poor must be encouraged just to participate in the economic system of the non-poor and thus raise their standard of living from abject poverty up to at least a reasonable survival level. However, later on the disadvantaged people should engage in self-development efforts and thus gradually also help to contribute to a more equitable socio-economic system of the non-poor which in its present form intrinsically and evidently leads to the exclusion of most have-nots from integral human development. Another, often overlooked point is that a participatory development approach and project presupposes certain underlying basic values or value orientations such as sharing, cooperation, participation, coordination, mutual trust, delegation and concern, care for the disadvantaged people. For example, to be a valuable, active member of a small production group, of a supporting line agency or of a coordination committee, requires extra commitment and contributions of time, ideas, energy and other resources. A basic question is after all who and what could motivate the poor and also the supporting non-poor people to make these "sacrifices". The right motivations needed can apparently only come from certain attitudes moulded by a religious and/or ideological belief system, or borne out of considering well one's own interest and/or out of fear for negative reactions of the grassroot people. The latter may increasingly exert pressure on officials and the better-off to provide (more) means of production, services and facilities, in other words to divide the cake of relative welfare more justly. 1.6 As several successful UN, government and NGO programmes show, we have by now technically valid and well proven solutions to promote beneficiary participation but the main constraint to apply these solutions is indeed the political will in a country or project area to do so. Accordingly, the main problem is how to motivate in practice politicians, officials and elites to support or at least tolerate effective forms of participation of the rural disprivileged people in development. In fact in order to plan and implement participation in projects (as explained in this guide), a number of strategies are required at various levels to sensitize and convince politicians and policy makers, the staff of UN, government, NGO and donor agencies, the field staff of development projects and the rural e1ites (see Section 4: Strategies to Promote Participation). 1.7 This guide does not contain specific sections on the wide issue of the participation of women in development, but only certain vital references e.g. to the need for women groups and for female participation agents (group promoters).
As known, rural women have heavy, multiple and vital roles as wives, mothers, food producers and food providers. Particularly the poor women are nevertheless usually doubly discriminated, marginalized and exploited viz. as rural poor within their elite and maledominated society and also as women in their own household. They are in general also relatively disadvantaged in comparison with men in the development process. The main reasons are that they have more limited access to education, credit facilities and public life. Development efforts often target men - though not overtly but latently - as the recipients of projects. However, in general it would be inadequate and ineffective to treat women as a separate target group. Women cannot be separated from the family, just as children cannot. In most projects the disadvantaged nuclear or extended family should be taken as a target group. This approach implies, however, that each participatory project must firstly focus specifically on the identification of the conditions, needs, resources and capabilities of the various categories of disadvantaged women and secondly on the provision of training, extension and other facilities for viable individual and/or group activities of women. The latter should regard not only the conventional but still indispensable topics such as health, nutrition, childcare, home economics as well as workload reduction and small-scale income generation, but also as soon as possible full participation in local development planning, decision-making and efforts. In this way the women will raise their economic and social status and thus their standard and quality of living, not in the least by developing their qualities of leadership and equal participation in local self-development. Women's problems in the context of rural poverty are thus to be analysed and tackled carefully according to the different conditions of poor rural women in different regions, cultures and ecologies. However, in these Guidelines general statements related to disadvantaged women cannot address properly the complexity of their situation. 1.8 Project planners and experts have now-a-days at their disposal guidelines on various technical topics, some of which are prepared by FAO Divisions. They have however, notoriously time constraints to study and use these materials. It is therefore tried to formulate the present Guidelines as concise and operational as possible, although some basic issues are reiterated for clarity. Thus many items condensed in one or a few phrases, could not be elaborated more and also the necessary conceptual parts were kept at the bare minimum. For a short overview of the operational steps to be taken to plan beneficiary participation during the identification and preparation (or formulation) of a project, see the Sections 16.2, 16.3 and 16.4). The Guidelines are inevitably presented in rather general terms in view of the wide variety of economic and social situations and needs in developing countries and thus of the types of agricultural and rural development projects and programmes. In fact, in successive phases more elaborate and concrete additional Guidelines are highly desirable for major types of projects like agricultural production, credit, irrigation (land and water), forestry, fishery and so on. "The activities undertaken by PPP groups during the implementation have been extremely varied in subject matter and whilst no systematic inventory has been made of the.
achievements in different sectors, e.g. food processing, introduction of draught animal power, crop production systems, Livestock keeping, small-scale fishing, etc., there would appear to be a considerable resource of knowledge on a sector by sector basis. If this were collected together from all of the PPP projects and analysed by the FAO Rural Development Division and the appropriate technical departments, it could provide valuable information and a resource for the subject matter specialists who will be called upon to advise on mechanisms for incorporation of participation into large-scale development projects." (McKone: 1989). 1.9 Alongside these Guidelines a second basic paper entitled "FAO People's Participation Programme: The First Ten Years - Lessons Learned and Future Directions" was prepared by another FAO Consultant Mr. Colin E. McKone. This review document outlines the concepts and principles of PPP, describes its evolution over ten years, examines the constraints of the PPP approach and provides a range of conclusions and strategy options for future participatory development efforts. Both this Guide and the PPP Review Paper, which complement and enlighten each other, were discussed in-depth and revised during and after an International Workshop on Strategy and Methodology of People's Participation in Rural Development, held in September 1989 in Arusha, Tanzania. The participants in this Workshop included government and donor representatives, FAO and PPP project staff as well as various resource persons. 1.10 These Guidelines need to be improved continuously by all who like to use them. Various topics may require further elaboration after feedback from the field, while other issues may be de-emphasized and new ones be added according to the needs of practical application. For this purpose the active participation in improving these Guidelines by those involved in field projects, is very necessary and highly appreciated Finally, the author likes to thank very much the many persons in FAO and outside who were consulted and gave appreciable ideas, suggestions and materials for this consolidated paper.
BENEFICIARY PARTICIPATION IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
2.1 Around the mid-seventies there was a growing awareness that various approaches for rural development like community development, integrated rural development and basic needs did not result in substantial rural poverty alleviation. Even subsequent efforts made in some countries such as rural works, concessional credit, rural employment programmes did not improve the plight of the poor on a sustained basis. Economic growth was insufficiently combined with equity or just distribution of benefits. International, government and non-governmental agencies realized more and more that the main reason of many unsuccessful development projects was (and still is) the lack of active, effective and lasting participation of the intended beneficiaries. Consequently, several agencies started to promote the participation of people, in particular disadvantaged women and men, in development through various programmes, mostly on a pilot basis4. The efforts of FAO in this field are indicated in Annex 2.
An interesting draft paper highlighting participatory rural development and various programmes in this field is: "Participatory Rural Development beyond Micro-Scale", by Mr. K.P.G.M. Perera, for the Regional.
2.2 In these Guidelines the vast literature and considerable experience which by now exist regarding popular participation and participatory rural development in general cannot, of course be reviewed: only some key notes mainly on beneficiary participation in projects are given hereunder5 To start with, there is a wide range of definitions and interpretations of participation. For example, it means (1) sensitizing people to make them more responsive to development programmes and to encourage local initiatives and self-help; (2) involving people as much as possible actively in the decision-making process which regards their development; (3) organizing group action to give to hitherto excluded disadvantaged people control over resources, access to services and/or bargaining power; (4) promoting the involvement of people in the planning and implementation of development efforts as well as in the sharing of their benefits; and (5) in more general, descriptive terms; "the involvement of a significant number of persons in situations or actions which enhance their well-being, e.g. their income, security or self-esteem" (Uphoff: 1979). There is furthermore a wide range of approaches in development projects to bring participation into practice. Some major types of participation found in projects are the following: Type I: Induced involvement: the strategy, design and workplan of a project are predetermined and the intended beneficiaries are encouraged to participate in its activities and obtain certain benefits. In various projects people are invited to make contributions of labour and/or other resources which is also seen as a form of costsharing. Transitory mobilization for community development: the people participate in certain specific temporary tasks mainly for the development of their community, but there is no institutional base or structure (groups or organizations) for more sustained participation.
Type III: Group formation: the project has a specific objective to help create new or strengthen existing self-formed and self-run groups and organizations through which the rural poor gain access to resources, inputs and services and participate actively in the project, also by means of self-proposed actions. This latter type of full participation leads also to empowering of the poor: through their groups and organizations they obtain not only access to resources, but also decision-making and bargaining power as well as a base for sustained self-development efforts. Self-development and self-reliance should in fact be an outcome of participation. The latter term is actually debatable when it is taken in the narrow sense that the poor should just only obtain a share of the "cake" or participate in the socio-economic system of the non-poor as mostly implied or expressed in a top-down project. A better, wider meaning is that through participation the poor not only gradually practise self-development, but may also contribute to.
Review Meeting on Participatory Rural Development, organized by the UN Inter-Agency Committee on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific and held in Dhaka in July 1988. Various elements of this Chapter have been adapted from Chapter One of the FAO Publication: "The Monitoring and Evaluation of Participation in Rural Development", by Dr. Peter Oakley. FAO, Rome, 1988.
modify the existing system of the non-poor which left them out of development to varying extents. 2.3 In accordance with the statement of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) on this key issue and on the basis of the foregoing considerations, by participation in an agricultural or rural development project or programme is meant in these Guidelines that the intended beneficiaries, in particular the rural disadvantaged people, contribute to the planning of a project or programme, participate actively in its implementation and evaluation and share fully in its benefits. There is by now overwhelming evidence that such participation cannot effectively take place on an individual basis but needs a structure consisting of existing and/or new, self-created and self-managed groups or organizations. This implies of course the right of free association and also the full participation of women on an equal basis with men. 2.4 At present there is a widespread consensus chat effective beneficiary participation is practically indispensable to render a project successful. However, relatively few projects have an explicit design to attain effective participation. In fact, the existing development projects dealing with rural people can broadly be divided in two categories: Conventional projects: these include objectives and components for productive and other (supporting) activities such as training, extension, credit, irrigation and try to involve the intended beneficiaries in these activities in order to achieve the project objectives. The projects of this category have pre-designed project frameworks (objectives, action plans, inputs, outputs and time schedules) mainly based upon top-down planning. Many of them are large-scale, capital-intensive and heavily staffed. The projects are meant for all people in a certain area who are mostly not consulted beforehand on their needs and desires. As the projects focus moreover more on macro-economic than on social aspects and the poorer people's necessities, they yield mainly benefits to the better-off locals (see also Section 1.4). Participatory projects: these deliberately promote participation which consequently is explicitly incorporated in their objectives, approach and methodology. The distinction between these two types of projects results mainly from the fact that in practice participation is basically conceived either as a means or as an end and in some cases in both ways. Conventional projects which by and large still prevail are predominantly production-oriented and participation, when considered in the project design, is regarded as a means to achieve certain productive objectives which are pre-determined by an outside agency. In a number of less conventional projects there are graduations of a partial participatory approach: the rural poor may have been consulted on their needs, aspirations, potentials and willingness, and may also be involved somehow in project implementation. Basically, they are expected to participate, however, to varying extents in project benefits. These partial participatory approaches are certainly very useful and may help to avoid project failure; it may also lead to increased participation in the future. In truly participatory projects, participation is seen also as an end and thus taken up clearly in the objectives which however mostly include also productive goals. In fact, these projects.
have two legs: participation and production and practice shows that in the long term they "run" or "walk" better. Given the importance more and more placed on beneficiary participation, no wonder firstly that the number of participatory projects are increasing; they are supported by FAO, ILO, IFAD and other UN agencies, various progressive governments and furthermore to a great extent by NGOs. Secondly, that conventional projects, though easier to design and to manage, are regarded increasingly as out-dated and after all less feasible, cost-effective and prone to be successful. Finally, it should be stressed that the positive aspects of both conventional and participatory projects should be more and more merged. For example, the economic (feasibility, marketing, etc.) and technical (research, technology transfer, etc.) requirements for the development of certain (sub-) sectors (e.g. irrigation, crop production, livestock, extension, credit) must be fully taken into account also in participatory projects. Top-planning (e.g. by a national body or a district development committee) and grassroot (bottom-up) planning (e.g. by groups or federations which come out with small-scale production plans) must be matched, for example by a workable coordination committee. Indeed feasible forms of vertical integration of development efforts are indispensable (see Section 5.1 on the need for a receiving-cumdelivery system).
How is participation as an end in concrete expressed in the objectives of participatory projects? The common essential elements in the overall objectives are the following: to raise the family income and standards of living of low income rural people; to Identify and apply for this purpose a sub-village development approach for and with the intended beneficiaries by actively involving them in development through the promotion of economic and social need-fulfilling group activities. The common essential elements in the specific objectives are: 1) 2) to help identify, plan and implement employment ­ and income-generating and other group activities for small farmers, tenants, fishermen and/or labourers; to assist the beneficiaries to organize themselves into self-run groups and organizations (or to use existing ones) in such ways that firstly they have (increased) access to programmes of training, credit, inputs, marketing and processing as well as education, health and sanitation and, secondly, they can more and more satisfy their economic and social needs and become eventually self-reliant; to assist line departments and other agencies including banks and NGOs to increase their effectiveness to better serve the rural weak, to develop innovative farm and also off-farm income-raising activities, and to encourage self-development efforts; to develop a strategy for expanding the successful features of the project in the country.
2.6 The important elements found in the practice of participatory development projects are the following: 1) Process instead of project approach: Conventional projects are usually planned too much in detail ("pre-cooked") over a too short time span to obtain tangible results and spread effects. A participatory project can substantially contribute to solve these problems by replacing or at least complementing the standard project approach by the process.
approach and to conceive a project as the first phase of a longer process enacted and sustained by a rolling programme. The project design must accordingly be more flexible and such that It can be expanded and replicated in similar areas with minimal outside assistance and recurrent costs (see Sections 14, 15 and 16.1). 2) The target group is predominantly or exclusively formed by the rural disadvantaged people (see Sections 1 and 5.2). However, also non-poor or better-off rural people (local leaders, influentials, etc.) as well as government and NGO officials are to be actively involved in various project actions, in particular to improve the delivery of services and facilities to the target group and to learn from each other. Education for participation which is given in addition to the classic (teacher-student) types of training provided in conventional projects to transfer technical know-how. A major objective of the educational process is awareness creation or conscientization: the poor will gradually become critically aware of their economic and social conditions, the causes of their deprivation and dependency syndrome as well as their potentials to change their plight through joint e