FAO/FishCode Review No. 7.
FIP/FCR7(En).
Creating legal space for community-based fisheries and customary marine tenure in the Pacific: issues and opportunities.
Based on the work of: Blaise Kuem langan Legal Officer Development Law Service FAO Legal Office.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rom e , 2004.
The designati ons employ ed and the presentation of the m ater ial in this information product do not imply the ex pr ession of any opinion whats oever on the part of the F ood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the l egal status of any c ou ntr y, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerni ng the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights res er ved . Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information pr oduc t for educ atio nal or other non-commercial purpos es are authorized without any prior written permission fr om the c opyr igh t holders provi ded the sourc e is fully ack nowle dg ed. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purpos es is prohibited without written permission of the c opyr igh t holders. Applicati ons for s uch permission shoul d be addressed to the Chief, Publishing Management Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org.
FOREWORD This document reviews legal aspects of community-based fisheries management (CBFM) and the role of legislation in enhancing CBFM and customary marine tenure in the Pacific. It was prepared on the basis of a literature and legislative review and site visits to the Cook Islands, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu in 2003, undertaken by Blaise Kuemlangan (FAO Development Law Service). The visits were made immediately before and following the Secretariat of the Pacific Community Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management, which was held 17-21 March 2003 in Nadi, Fiji. Legal technical assistance in support of the meeting and preparation of this study was provided through the FAO FishCode Programme under component project GCP/INT/823/JPN, "Responsible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States." The FishCode Review series publishes results of studies, missions, consultations, workshops, meetings and other project activities undertaken through the Programme, in furtherance of its objective of facilitating implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and related international fisheries instruments and plans of action. Individual numbers in this series are distributed to appropriate governments, regional bodies, meeting participants and Programme partners. Further information on Programme background, publications and activities is available at www.fao.org/fi/fishcode. J. Eric Reynolds Programme Coordinator, FishCode Fisheries Department FAO/UN Rome, Italy www.fao.org/fi/fishcode.
FAO/FishCode Review No.7, Distribution: RAPI SAPA LEGN FI Divisions and Services FI Branch Library.
Interested Nations and International Organizations Interested Non-governmental Organizations.
Acknowledgements.
This study would not have been possible without the valuable assistance of many people in the countries visited by the author and at FAO Headquarters. Special thanks go to the following individuals and groups who facilitated the field visits to undertake research and collect material for the study and for their helpful insights on the subject of CBFM and CMT. In the Cook Islands: Barbara Munro and Nooroa Roi (Ministry of Marine Resources). In Fiji: Maciu Langibalavu (then Director, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries and Forestry); Peniasi Kunatuba; participants of the SPC Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management (Nadi, Fiji,17­21 March 2003, and particularly Semisi Fakahau (Commonwealth Secretariat), Kenneth Mackay (Canada-South Pacific Ocean Development Program), Michael King, Ueta Fa'asili and Aliti Vunisea (SPC), and those who gave overviews at the Nadi Meeting on CBFM in their countries ­ namely, Terry Keju (Marshall Islands), Alifereti Bogiva (FLMMA, Fiji), Sione Leolahi (Niue), Nooroa Roi (Cook Islands), Fatima Sauafea (American Samoa), Etuati Ropeti (Samoa), Kenneth Bulehite (Solomon Islands), Tevita Latu (Tonga), and Graham Nihomo (Vanuatu). In Papua New Guinea: Molean Chapau (Executive Director), Lamiller Pawut (Manager, Monitoring and Enforcement), Augustine Mobiha (Management Advisor), Leban Gisawa (Inshore Manager) and Phillip Polon (Sedentary Manager) of the National Fisheries Authority; Masio Nidung (Senior Legal Officer, Department of Justice and Attorney General); Matthew Wela (Secretary), Anton Benjamin and Twain Pambuai of the Department of Agriculture and Livestock; and Gai Kula (Country Director, Conservation International of Papua New Guinea). In Solomon Islands: Albert Wata (then Permanent Secretary) and Sylvester Diake of the Department of Fisheries and Marine Resources; Gabriel Suri (Lawyer and Chairman of Environment Conservation Action Network, Solomon Islands); and Feleti Teo (Director) and Joel Opnai (Fisheries Management Advisor) of the Forum Fisheries Agency. In Vanuatu: Dorosday Kenneth (Director of Department of Agriculture); Ernest Bani (Head of Environment Unit) and Naviti William (Senior Fisheries Resource Manager) of the Department of Fisheries; Francis Hickey (Vanuatu Cultural Center), and Wan Smolbag. The author is also grateful to: Masanami Izumi (FAO Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands) for facilitating field visits); Eric Reynolds (Programme Coordinator, FishCode) for his consistent effort and encouragement in finalizing the study; Henning Teigene (FAO Development Law Service) for his technical contribution; and to Alacoque Martin for editing the final manuscript. Any errors in this document, however, are solely those of the author.
Kuemlangan, B. Creating legal space for community-based fisheries and customary marine tenure in the Pacific: issues and opportunities. FishCode Review. No. 7(En). Rome, FAO. 2004. 65p. ABSTRACT The legal environment within which community-based fisheries management (CBFM) will function should be examined to determine whether it supports or will need necessary enhancement to support the implementation of CBFM. The question as to whether CBFM is legally sustainable must be asked with regard to the whole legal framework of the State ­ from fundamental laws, such as the constitution, to subsidiary legislation. Amendments to existing legislation or new legislation may be necessary to implement CBFM. There is no blueprint for a CBFM legal framework what number of rights with respect to fish resources should be accorded and what should be the level of participation by the local community. It is important, however, to ensure that the constitutionality of all these aspects is ascertained, and to ensure that enabling legislation for CBFM consider the following issues: security, exclusivity and permanence of rights vested; flexibility of its provisions so as to allow states to exercise choices that reflect their unique needs, conditions and aspirations for CBFM; and the way CBFM harmonizes with the overall fisheries management legal framework. Attaining the right balance in the CBFM legal framework, however, is difficult and depends largely on local circumstances. There is much interest in using customary marine tenure (CMT) as a basis for CBFM in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs). The laws of PICs lend general support to the use of CMT or tradition in fisheries management. Still, only modest efforts in the use of CMT-based community fisheries management in the PICs are observed. Further legislative action can enhance CMT use in community fisheries management. Broad lessons can be drawn from the experiences of some PICs in legislating on CMT or certain of its aspects to enhance CMT use. Government commitment to CBFM generally, and for the role of CMT in the CBFM context with support from interested entities and stakeholders including communities, will complement efforts for promoting sustainable utilization of fisheries resources and improved livelihoods in the PICs. Keywords: community-based fisheries management, customary marine tenure, fisheries legislation, legal frameworks, Pacific Island Countries.
Abbreviations and Acronyms.
CBFM CBNRM CCA CMT FAO FCP FLMMA FSM FSP IAS-USP IMA ITQ LMMA MCS PIC MMR MPA MRAG NGO PNG SIDS SMA SPC SPREP WWF Community-based Fisheries Management Community-based Natural Resources Management Community Conservation Area Customary Marine Tenure Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Fiji Country Programme Fiji Locally Managed Marine Areas Network Federated States of Micronesia Foundations of the Peoples of the South Pacific Institute of Applied Science Programme of the University of South Pacific International Marine Alliance Individual transferable quotas Locally Managed Marine Areas Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Pacific Island Countries Ministry of Marine Resources Marine Protected Area Marine Resources Assessment Group (MRAG Ltd) Non-governmental Organization Papua New Guinea Small Island Developing States Special Management Areas Secretariat of the Pacific Community South Pacific Regional Environment Programme World Wide Fund for Nature.
INT RO DUCTIO N There is increased interest in innovative approaches to fisheries management including the use of limited access regimes and increased stakeholder participation in fisheries management. Limited access regimes include property or rights-based regimes (FAO 2002). The collective property regime may involve the communal management of resources whereby a community collectively enjoys the rights to access and extraction of the resources. Creation and assignment of rights to communities create economic concerns w hic h in turn stimulate an interest in sustaining and protecting these rights w ith the view to achieving, inter alia, sustainable resource use. The institutionalization of a collective property rights regime or increased stakeholder participation, such as in community-based fisheries management (CBFM see Box 1) in any jurisdiction, raises legal issues that should be addressed (Kuemlangan and Teigene 2003). There has been much discussion of community- or village-based management of fisheries in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs) 1 for comparatively the same amount of time, if not more, as there has been discussion on CBFM w or ld-w ide. Of particular significance in the Pacific context is the documented existence of customary marine tenure (CMT) or traditional management of the resources in the marine areas, in most if not all PICs. Indeed, the existing body of literature trumpets the potential role of customary marine tenure in PICs, or generally recommend that traditional practices form the basis of management approaches in the Pacific, particularly in coastal fisheries. Yet other reports herald the success of use of CMT in a number of these countries. Generally, it can be said that CMT or traditional management practices as found in the PICs w ould be relevant and should play a pivotal role in fisheries management. The push for use of CMT in contemporary fisheries management in the Pacific is consistent w ith global trends in CBFM. This is a brief study that primarily looks at the legal aspects of CBFM and the role of legislation in enhancing CBFM and CMT. It w as prepared on the basis of a literature and legislative review and site visits to the Cook Islands, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu in 2003. The visits w er e made immediately before and follow ing the SPC Regional Policy Meeting on Coastal Fisheries Management, w hic h was held 17-21 March 2003 in Nadi, Fiji. Legal technical assistance in support of the meeting and preparation of this study was provided through the FAO FishCode Programme under component project GCP/INT/823/JPN, " Res pons ible Fisheries for Small Island Developing States." The study is presented in three main parts, together w ith an Introduction and Conclusion. Part A discusses the broader subject of CBFM and the significance of considering associated legal aspects. It is a synopsis of the findings by Kuemlangan and Teigene (2003), ho elaborate the argument that it is important to ensure that CBFM is legally grounded or w ill otherw is e need legislative support in implementation. 2 At this general level of discussion, legal aspects of resource governance in PICs are draw n on, w her e appropriate, to demonstrate how consideration of these issues could be dealt w ith at the country level.
PICs here refers to the dev eloping countries members of the Forum Fisheries Agency viz the Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Marshall Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuv alu, and Vanuatu.
2 The f irs t section of this study, from the introduction to the discussion of the legal aspects of CBFM, is an adapted v ers ion of the paper entitled, "An ov erv iew of legal issues and broad legislativ e considerations for community based f is heries management" by Kuemlangan and Teigene (2003) presented at the Second Large Riv er Symposium (LARS2).
FAO/FishCode Review No.7.
Part B briefly review s the status and progress in pursuing CMT-based community fisheries management in selected PICs. The review is carried out in the context of brief legislative history and the current fisheries management framew or k. It provides a synopsis of the policy, legal and physical environments w ithin w hic h CMT regimes are established and operate and analyses how the recognition and application of CMTs are adapted to the unique situations of each country. Part C of the study identifies possible strategies for enhancing the use of CMTs. Proposals are also submitted in respect of the role of legislation in facilitating the desired progress in enhancing use of CMT in contemporary fisheries management.
Community-based fisheries management.
For the purposes of this study, community-based fisheries management is used to refer to the com an a gem e nt arrangement whereby villages or other communal groupings are the primary partners and principal initiators of management action for the inshore fisheries in a specified locality. Com an a gem e nt is a generic term covering a variety of management arrangements that involve resource users or owners in the management process. Such arrangements will have varying degrees of intervention by the government. These arrangements may include: the control of decision-making at the local level by government; management authority is delegated or transferred to resources users; resource owners exercise management authority with technical advice or assistance of government. The form of partnership depends on the desired long-term objectives. Benefits normally associated with participatory approaches to management include: (a) greater reliability and accuracy of data and information; (b) more suitable and effective regulations; (c) enhanced acceptability of and compliance with management measures; (d) reduction in enforcement costs; (e) reduction in conflicts; and (f) strengthened commitment to and participation by stakeholders (FAO 1997).3.
Section 3.3 of FAO Fisheries Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries on Fisheries Management, No. 4, Rome, 1997. See also def init ion of co-management by Abdullah, Kuperan and Pomeroy, Transaction Costs and Fisheries Co-Management, Fisheries Co-Management - A Worldwide Collaborativ e Research Project: http://www.co-management.org/ and Fikret Berkes, Robin Mahon, Patrick McConney, Richard Pollnac, and Robert Pomeroy, Managing Small-Scale Fisheries ­ Alternative Directions and Methods.
PART A. OVERVIEW OF L EGAL ISSUES AND L EGISLATIV E CONSIDERATIONS FOR CBFM.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CONSIDERING L EGAL ASPECTS OF CBFM.
The implementation of any community-based natural resource management (CBNRM), including CBFM, requires that the legal environment w ithin w hic h CBNRM functions be examined to deter mi ne w hether such legal environment supports or w ill need enhancement to support the implementation of CBNRM. It is best that such examination take place before or w hen CBNRM is being considered for utilization or trial (Lindsay 2001, Kuemlangan and Teigene 2003). 4 The need to have prior examination of legal issues is supported by findings indicating the follow ing. · · Effective implementation of CBFM systems depends on supporting legislative framew or k (Berkes 1994, Ruddle 1994); CBFM systems are successful in jurisdictions like The Philippines and Japan w her e a favourable legal environment exists (Alcala and Vande Vusse 1994, Ruddle 1994). In respect of traditional community-based marine resource management systems, the functional systems recorded exist in jurisdictions that accord them legal recognition and are protected by government (Karlsen 2001, Pomeroy et al 2001, Ruddle 1998). Prior examination can pre-empt and avoid legal challenges that could have adverse consequences.5 Constitutional Basis for CBFM.
A principal consideration in implementing CBFM is to ascertain w hether there is legal basis for CBFM in the fundamental law s of the land, (e.g. the Constitution or organic law). If the fundamental law s stipulate that CBFM in general, or certain prerequisites of CBFM are not possible, then CBFM in its fullest sense cannot be established legally. The question of constitutionality particularly relates to certain aspects of CBFM such as, for example, w hat number of rights, access or powers and responsibilities w ith respect to management of the fish resources (i.e. level of participation) should be accorded to the local community. One of the principal considerations of such review is whether the fundamental law s allow for the allocation of property and use rights. The answ er is often found in national Constitutions, either addressed directly or indirectly. Where a Constitution neither states explicitly the validity of allocating property or use rights nor prohibits such allocation, it can be safely deduced that property and use rights may be allocated under subsidiary legislation for as long as these legislation are gauged in ter ms that are not inconsistent w ith the Constitution.
See also The World Bank. 1999. Report from the International CBNRM Workshop, Washington D.C., 10-14 May 1998. URL: http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/conatrem, which discusses considerations f or establishing community bas ed natural resource management (CBNRM). The report underscores the legalising of institutions as a basic requirement for establishing CBNRM. For example, in Iceland the ITQ-based fisheries management system introduced by the 1984 Fisheries Act was f ound to be unconstitutional. This may be an extreme example and one that relates more to the issue of indiv idual transf erable quotas. Howev er, it holds a valuable lesson for policy- and decision-makers that innov at iv e approaches to management, including rights-based management, are rev iewed f rom all perspectives and that they are f ound to be legally functional in the national context before they are comprehensiv ely applied.
On the other hand, it w ould naturally be problematic to allocate property rights or other use rights ow ing to constitutional constraints. Where the Constitution or fundamental laws stand in the way of the allocation of such rights the political w ill to amend these law s must be mustered. The task w ould be less onerous if it were to be already decided as government policy that CBFM be established. The question of w hether Pacific Island Constitutions support CBFM, or the broader issue of whether w ider public participation is encouraged by Pacific Constitutions, w ill generally receive a positive answ er . As w ill be demonstrated later, a majority of Pacific Constitutions expressly allow some form of CBFM, or otherw is e do not expressly prohibit CBFM systems to be established. A1.2 The Fundam ent al Legal Basis and Decentralization.
CBFM could be implemented through a decentralization framew or k. Decentralization is normally sanctioned by fundamental law s such as the Constitution. Where such law s exist, it should be ascertained as to how CBFM is facilitated through the decentralization structures in place. In the Pacific Islands region, countries like Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands and Vanuatu that have a decentralized form of government w ould need to consider how their Constitution and laws relating to decentralization distribute pow ers for resource management, and how CBFM could fit into these legal structures. The same can be said of countries w ith federal government systems, such as the Federated Stated of Micronesia (FSM), Marshall Islands and Palau, particularly w her e the state governments rather than the central (federal) government have jurisdiction over coastal fisheries areas where CBFM is most likely to be utilized. A1.3 The Need for Enabling National Legislation: Principal Considerations.
Enabling legislation or enhancement of existing legislative framew or k is vital to implementation of CBFM if there are no provisions that clearly provide for the operational implementation of CBFM. As is noted above, such legislation or enhanced legislative framew or k should be consistent w ith fundamental law s and should elaborate basic constitutional principles relating to CBFM. The legislation must ensure security and enforceability of a right and provide for site-specific delegation of some management responsibility, either on an indefinite basis or for a finite period. 6 The CBFM legislative framew or k should set out the rules by w hic h local institutions can interact w ith an outsider. CBFM must naturally exist inside its larger legal environment and be linked w ith sovereign authority, w hic h is the State, and thus needs a legal status w ith which outsiders can recognize and interact. CBFM legislation should provide protection for local institutions from trespass and the criminal behaviour of outsiders. The CBFM gives legal recognition to community-based rules, and commands conformity by the public to those rules.
A balance is normally sought through this mechanism f or ensuring that the State-lev el concerns f or efficiency in f is heries management and the local-level concerns f or self -gov ernanc e, self-regulation and active participation are realised while defining the extent of their mandates.
Community rules, w hic h are hierarchically low er , can not define the limits of State pow er . Such a role w ill have to be performed by national CBFM legislation. The extent to w hic h the State w ill respect local autonomy, and w her e and under w hat conditions it w ill retain the pow er to intervene, should be spelled out in CBFM legislation. 7 CBFM law must also provide protection for individuals against the abuse of local power. It should provide basic guidelines for protection of wider social interests, such as environmental protection. Where a broad spectrum of rights are allocated to the local community, this question surfaces strongly. In a nutshell, specific legislative issues relating to CBFM include the need to ensure that the legal framew or k clearly states: (a) security and enforceability of a right; (b) the creation of ability and opportunity for rights-holders to seek redress for violation of security and interests in the rights allocated; (c) the nature and extent of recognition of locally promulgated rules; (d) rules for interaction w ith other stakeholders; (e) rules for interaction w ith the State which includes the limits and conditions for State intervention; (f) protection of individuals against abuse of "local" power; and (g) protection of wider interests, e.g. environment. These issues need to be addressed to ensure that the required features of a legal framew or k for a rights-based management regime, namely security, exclusivity and permanence of rights, are incorporated (Box 2).
Main features of CBFM legislation Security is the ability for the holder of rights to withstand challenges to such rights. It involves: the nature of rights allocated, which cannot be alienated or changed unilaterally and unfairly; the enforceability of rights against the State, including local government institutions; the boundaries of the resources to which the rights apply; who is entitled to claim membership in a CBFM group; and recognition of the holder of the rights. Exclusivity is the ability to hold and manage the right without unlawful interference, which can also occur through regulations, license conditions, gear, area and time restrictions etc; Permanence is the time span of rights allocated. The term for holding the rights allocated could be perpetual but if the right is not held in perpetuity, the duration of rights should be clearly spelled out and is sufficient for the benefits of participation to be fully realized.
Security, exclusivity and permanence features of CBFM legislation are briefly described as follows.
An optimal legislative framew or k for CBFM should be flexible. Legislations must enable community-based managers to exercise choice that reflects their unique needs, conditions and aspirations. Regulators must be able to decide and review management objectives in CBFM and the rules used to achieve those objectives, the manner in handling recognition of local groups, the definition of CBFM units and areas of jurisdiction. Ultimately, a flexible CBFM legislative framew or k must allow for the reflection of change in policy and is preferably a framew or k law which allow s ease of amendment or detailed mechanisms to be set out in regulations. Finally, the legislative framew or k must integrate CBFM in the general fisheries management legal framew or k. This sets out, inter alia, the clear status, relationship and role of CBFM in the overarching policy framew or k and decision- mak ing process, management planning, the decision rules for total fishing effort (e.g. national and local total allow able catch), regulatory pow ers and structure of the management author ity , and local monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) pow ers in the context of national MCS programmes.
7 From a property rights regime perspectiv e, this touches upon the f undam ent al question of who owns the natural resources. Most fishing nations that implement a rights-based regime retain the power to allocate, and withdraw rights and change the regulations governing their administration. If the rules gov erning a rights-based regime are explicit in the form of legislation, it is less problematic in administering them and def lec t ing legal challenges.
Summ ar y of Legal Issues and Im plicat ions of CBFM.
The prevailing lesson here is that it is best that all implications of CBFM, including policy, technical, institutional and legal aspects are review ed before CBFM is implemented. Plans, trials and the results of the trials in the application of CBFM are site-specific. Given this, any law that is enacted for establishing CBFM should preferably be a "framew or k" law . The framew or k law must primarily enable the use of CBFM through its provisions that ensure security, exclusivity and permanence for any rights that may be allocated. How ev er , the legal framew or k should also, as a minimum, ensure that pow ers are vested or entities are designated to invoke CBFM w hen the need arises. The provisions of the framew or k law that provide for these must allow : · the designation of communities that w ill be involved in CBFM and that such communities may be allocated rights and responsibilities in fishing and fisheries management; choices in the manner in w hic h designation of communities w ill be effected; choice in demarcation of areas for CBFM; and choices in the institutional or organizational framew or k for CBFM.
Above all, the legal framew or k for CBFM must be practical and flexible in effect to respond to changing needs and priorities. Ultimately, it is a question of balance. Attaining that required balance how ev er is difficult and depends largely on local circumstances (also see Box 3). It is advisable that the implementation of CBFM is undertaken through a multidisciplinary approach. Such approach implies that projects for the introduction of CBFM should entail, inter alia, sound planning, trials and review s of the results of the trials, plans and objectives which w ill need a generous time period for project implementation. The CBFM initiative w ill also require the commitment of adequate financial and other resources for its activities.
The process and result of legislating CBFM: The Tonga case (Kuemlangan 2000).
The review of the Tonga fisheries legislation in 2000 incorporated a framework for CBFM. The legislative review and drafting process took into account, inter alia, the following facts and considerations: · · The Constitution was silent on the issue of CBFM but it did not expressly prohibit the establishment or implementation of CBFM. Lack or absence of authoritative literature or documentation on customary marine tenure (CMT). These was a study done on traditional shell collection practices which was of limited relevance only to guide the potential use of CMT in fisheries management. Lack of comprehensive programmes or strategies for implementation of CBFM. One trial project only on CBFM had been carried out in a region of Tonga implemented by the government authorities responsible for environment. Strong support for CBFM was noted but there were no clear instructions on the institutional or operational aspects of for implementing CBFM. There was also no clear understanding of what the CBFM concept was in the Tongan context. No capacity and resources to initiate and manage CBFM within the Ministry of Fisheries. Existing local-level governments in the form of Town and District Officers (who were an extension of central authority) governed by the Town Officers Act and the District Officers Act, respectively. Town and District Officers had powers to make by-laws at town and district level. The issue was whether to formulate a new institutional arrangement or use/involve the existing local-level institutions.
The legislative provisions in the principal Act (the Fisheries Management Act 2002) merely vest powers to establish CBFM and facilitate future detailed regulation. The provisions concerning CBFM are as follows: Section 4 (l) - Principle of practicable, broad and accountable participation (conducive to CBFM) to be taken into account in the exercise of management powers under the Fisheries Management Act. Section 7 - Consultation with "coastal communities" in preparation and review of fisheries management plans. Section 13 ­ Creation of Special Management Areas (SMA). An SMA or part thereof can be allocated to be under the management responsibility of coastal communities. Section 14 - Designation of coastal communities ("coastal community" is not defined so as to allow use of existing community organizations, inclusion of non-coastal communities or a change to a prevailing definition of "coastal community"). Consultation is also required in the designation of coastal communities. Section 15 - Regulations can be made for management of a specific SMA or part thereof which is allocated and which is designated to a coastal community. Section 16 ­ Any authorization (e.g. licence) for fishing in a SMA which has been designated to a coastal community is issued only after prior consultation with the coastal community concerned. Section 101 (b) - Regulations for administering CBFM (i.e. that relates to the general administration of coastal communities etc.) can be promulgated in the future.
PART B. CUST OM ARY MARINE T ENURE AS T HE BASIS FOR CBFM IN T HE PACIFIC Many prominent scientists and w r iter s have testified on the prevailing existence of customary marine tenure (CMT ­ see Box 4) in the PICs. They have noted its co-existence with formal fisheries management regimes and its relative success in areas w her e formal fisheries management regimes often fail, ow ing to shortcomings of these conventional top-dow n management approaches.
Customary marine tenure.
In the context of this study, "customary marine tenure" has the meaning given to it by Ruddle, K. Hviding, E. & Johannes, R.E. (1992), where: "customary" refers to a system that emerges from firmly traditional roots and has continuous and meaningful links with the past as it adapts to handling contemporary issues; "marine" refers to the system as dealing with coral reefs, lagoon, coast an