Draft. Not for quotation without permission.
MESO-ECONOMIC FILTERS ALONG THE POLICY CHAIN:.
Understanding the Links between Policy Reforms and Rural Poverty in Latin America.
Alberto Zezza (FAO Consultant) and Luis Llambí (IVIC).
Rome and Caracas, May 2001.
Paper prepared for the Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division (ESA) of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Comments welcome. Please address comments to alberto.zezza@fao.org and/or to lllambi@ivic.ivic.ve . We would like to thank Ben Davis, Kostas Stamoulis, Rubén Echeverría, Tom Walker, Steve Wiggins and Wladimir Zanoni for their comments and suggestions, and in particular Leslie Lipper for comments on a previous draft. The authors remain responsible for the views expressed.
Abstract The policy reforms introduced in Latin America in the 1980s and 1990s have induced profound and beneficial changes in the overall productive structure of most Latin American countries, and particularly concerning the increased competitiveness and profitability of some agro-export activities. Yet, even if a relatively stable macroeconomic environment has been achieved, agricultural price distortions have been removed, and inefficient governmental agencies serving the sector have been dismantled, high levels of rural poverty remain in the region. What went wrong? How have the intended impacts of the reforms been transmitted to the rural sector, and how have farmers responded to the newly created incentive structure, and how has this influenced the observed poverty outcomes? Despite several attempts to introduce new dimensions to policy analysis, a consistent theoretical framework is still lacking capable of accounting for the various sources of policy and market failures leading to such unsatisfactory policy outcomes. The objective of this paper is to propose a framework aimed at developing a better understanding of the reasons of the failures of the past to inform the current policy debate. The proposed framework takes the moves from the theoretical debate on the importance of considering transaction costs and institutions in policy design and implementation. It develops a synthesis of macro-, meso- and micro-economic perspectives, that focuses on the roles of the structural and institutional factors mediating the effects of policy reforms as they "trickle down" to rural households. Such synthesis is realised through a conceptualisation in three levels of filters intervening at various level of the "policy chain", and by developing a model linking those to the household decision-making level. The paper is organised into four parts. Part one provides stylised background information about policy reforms and rural poverty outcomes in Latin America. In the second part two main bodies of literature are reviewed: a) the "meso-economy" level of market mechanisms, institutional arrangements, and the administrative procedures mediating the "public" provision of goods and services; and b) the "micro-economy" level of rural farm household models. In the third part, the insights provided by these two bodies of literature are used to develop an analytical framework integrating the macro-economy to agricultural household models, as mediated by the mesoeconomy links. Finally, in the fourth part some policy implications are drawn and research guidelines proposed.
Introduction During the 1980s and 1990s market-led and outward-oriented policy reforms were adopted by all Latin American countries, putting an end to four decades of state-led, inward-oriented growth strategy. In 1974 Chile had been a precursor of the reform wave, having undertaken a radical macroeconomic adjustment programme. In 1985, as a result of the debt crisis Mexico and Bolivia started structural adjustment programmes (SAPs), sponsored by the IMF and the World Bank. During the 1989-1993 period most other countries embarked in similar macroeconomic stabilisation and structural adjustment programmes. Priority was given to eliminating budgetary deficits, restoring macroeconomic stability and international financial flows, and opening the national economies to global market forces. While countries such as Bolivia, Argentina, Brazil, Nicaragua, and Peru had four to five digit inflation rates at the beginning of the 1990s, these same countries now exhibit one or two digit inflation rates, and hyperinflation has disappeared completely from the region. Economic growth has been restored. The region grew more than twice as fast during the 1990s than in the 1980s. In the early 1990s, as reforms began, foreign capital returned to the region in pursuit of anticipated growth. This exceeded 5 percent in 1994, a boom enjoyed by all but a handful of countries. However, financial crises hit the continent again at the end of the 1990s with Mexico's peso crisis, Brazil's real crisis and the dollarisation debacle in Ecuador. Despite a relatively healthy world economy the growth rate in Latin America fell to 2 percent in 1998 and to zero in 1999. In 1998 the poverty rate was higher than in 1986 (Londoño and Székely 1997; ECLAC 2000). During the late 1980s and early 1990s the objectives of policy reform widened to include measures designed to influence microeconomic efficiency. Domestic market liberalisation, and privatisation of public enterprises were supposed to add to the more stable macroeconomic environment and economic opening to stimulate economic adjustment in line with the redefined structure of incentives. The first round of reforms had already driven out most of the biases against the agricultural sector created during the previous inward-oriented development strategy. Reductions in the taxes on the main agricultural exports, the abolition of import subsidies for food and agricultural raw materials, together with a real depreciation of the domestic currency were all supposed to benefit relative agricultural prices since most farm products are considered tradable. In any case, the effects of these policies were expected to more than compensate the negative impacts of the discontinuation of protectionist policies for the sector, the elimination of subsidies for farm inputs and credits, and the reduction in budgetary allocations for rural investments and services. The assumptions underpinning policy reforms in agriculture were that: i) the removal of policy biases against farm products would increase agricultural growth and reduce poverty; ii) that following privatisation and budgetary cuts, the private sector would rapidly step in to provide the goods and services that were previously supplied by state agencies or marketed by parastatals; and iii) that most farmers would rapidly respond to price incentives. Since the mid-1990s, however, despite some economic growth, persistent poverty and rising inequality led to a fundamental shift in the policy agenda1. Pro-poor growth and poverty.
Londoño and Székely (1997) argued that not only does Latin America have the highest inequality level in absolute terms, but also that in 1995 the Latin American and Caribbean region registered a Gini coefficient that is 25 percent 2.
alleviation programmes became the overarching goal for national governments and multilateral agencies, as growth was now seen as a necessary but not sufficient condition for poverty reduction. It is beyond doubt that policy reforms have induced profound and beneficial changes in the overall productive structure of most Latin American countries, and particularly on the increased competitiveness and profitability of some agro-export activities. Yet, with the exception of Brazil where rural poverty has been reduced drastically mainly as a result of rural-urban migration, in the rest of Latin America the incidence of rural poverty has been constant or rising, and the number of rural poor increasing. Despite urbanisation, the incidence of rural poverty is considerably higher than the incidence of urban poverty, and rural poverty is considerably deeper than urban poverty (de Janvry and Sadoulet 2000). In sum, the 1990s have been a decade of recovery and relative economic stability in the region as a whole but, particularly in the rural sector, poverty and inequality have not declined significantly (Londoño and Székely 1997).
If a relatively stable macroeconomic environment has been achieved, agricultural price distortions have been removed, and inefficient governmental agencies serving the sector have been dismantled, why do so high levels of rural poverty remain in the region? What went wrong? How have the intended impacts of the reforms been transmitted to the rural sector, and how have farmers responded to the newly created incentive structure? First, it is necessary to unravel the reasons why some farmers show apparently weak supply responses to the allegedly favourable incentives induced by the reforms. Second, it is necessary to grasp the long-term effects which have trapped many poor farmers into vicious circles of poverty. Why --given the same policy scenario-- are some rural households able to increase their wealth, while others are mired to do so? Is it because product and factor market imperfections encroach their capacity to respond to policies which were expected to be favourable for all? Or, is it because they lack access to the assets required to respond? Or else, is it because the reforms were not fully implemented by the government? Worse, is it because some policy reforms have been ill-designed from the beginning or ill-implemented thereafter? If these structural and institutional constrains could be well identified and weighed up, the reform policies could be redesigned so short-term supply responses could be enhanced and long-term poverty traps avoided. A consensus has emerged in the academic literature, and among national policymakers and multilateral agencies, that structural adjustment particularly during the 1980s, was not structural enough, as it failed to focus on some critical links between policy measures, intended objectives, and their actual outcomes. In Latin America, by focusing almost exclusively on price reforms ("getting prices right") and macro-economic variables, policy reforms tended to ignore important structural and institutional traits that have hindered the achievement of the alleged goals of economic growth and increased human welfare. The negative social effects of the reforms, for instance, have only recently been recognised by policymakers and started to be addressed through the design of safety nets for the newly unemployed and the newly poor. Despite several attempts to introduce new dimensions to policy analysis, a consistent theoretical framework is still lacking capable of accounting for the various sources of policy and market failures. The objective of this paper is therefore to propose a framework aimed at developing a.
higher than what one would expect given its GDP per capita. Besides, Latin America has the world's most unequal farm-land distribution, and hence much more poverty than would be predicted from income per person (IFAD 2001) 2 See tables 1 and 2 in the Annex for poverty data according to World Bank and ECLAC sources. 3.
better understanding of the reasons of the failures of the past to inform the current policy debate. The framework is written having the Latin American experience in mind, but can easily be applied to other developing regions. The framework takes the moves from the theoretical debate on the importance of considering transaction costs and institutions, in policy design and implementation. It develops a synthesis of macro-, meso- and micro-economic perspectives, that focuses on the roles of the structural and institutional factors mediating the effects of policy reforms as they 'trickle down' to rural households. Such synthesis is realised through a conceptualisation in three levels of filters intervening at various level of the `policy chain', and by developing a model linking those to the household decision-making level. The framework, thus, specifies the mechanisms through which public policy reforms affect the access of low-income rural households to product and factor markets, as well a to publicly provided goods and services. The ultimate goal is to apply this framework to empirical case studies, so as to generate research results capable of assisting policy-makers in designing more finely-tuned reform programmes to address the structural causes of rural poverty. To accomplish this task the framework needs to respond to some characteristics. First, it has to be policy-oriented. Therefore, it has to provide specific clues for the design and implementation of policies tackling the causes of rural poverty. Second, it has to be flexible so it may be adapted to a diversity of country- and locally-specific scenarios. In the framework we propose, as a result of policy (and other exogenous) changes, the incentive structures microeconomic agents face may be altered by the transaction costs created by illdesigned policies, or by the informational problems created in implementing them via private market mechanisms and public administration procedures. We conceptualise these two policy implementation channels as the mesoeconomy level, i.e. a link between the macro-economy of aggregated variables and policy decisions on the one hand, and the microeconomy of disaggregated production, consumption and investment decision making and their effects, on the other. Policies, in turn, are filtered three times: a) at the "policy delivery" level (i.e. before they help determine household incentives); b) at the "incentive transmission" level (i.e. before incentives reach the household; and c) at the household "decision" level. We hypothesise that, if neglected, these policy-cum-market failures may elicit unintended and undesired responses by microeconomic agents, leading to suboptimal production and welfare outcomes at the microeconomic level and undesired distributional and allocational problems at the aggregate level. The paper is organised into four parts. Part one provides stylised background information about policy reforms and rural poverty outcomes in Latin America. In the second part two main bodies of literature are reviewed: a) the "meso-economy" level of market mechanisms, institutional arrangements, and the administrative procedures mediating the "public" provision of goods and services; and b) the "micro-economy" level of rural farm household models. In the third part, the insights provided by these two bodies of literature are used to develop an analytical framework integrating the macro-economy to agricultural household models, as mediated by the mesoeconomy links. Finally, in the fourth part some policy implications are drawn and research guidelines proposed.
I. Policy Reform and Rural Poverty in Latin America Since 1982, when the debt crisis started, different economic reform programmes have been experimented in Latin America.
SAPs are one (big) part of the reform story, but not all. Furthermore, SAPs have not been uniform across countries, and within countries they have evolved over time. Analysing the reform process, even at the aggregate country level, is therefore a complex task, that is beyond the scope of this paper. What this part of the paper aims at is simply to provide some stylised facts about the changes intervened in the Latin American agricultural sector during the policy reform process, with particular emphasis on rural poverty trends. Commonalities among SAPs in different countries are the result of conditionality to the IMF and other multilateral agencies. Differences have been the result of domestic political processes (resulting in different degrees of freedom of public decision-makers in relation to their domestic constituencies), the weight of external indebtedness (providing financial degrees of freedom of national decision-makers vis-à-vis multilateral agencies and the international financial community), and even geopolitical interests. Thus, in each country economic reforms were the result of the mediation of endogenous socio-political processes with the emerging global rules. Ideology also played a role. Some reforms were "socially exclusive", thus increasing poverty and inequality. But others, such as the reforms in Chile after 1990, with the return to democracy, have been stressing poverty alleviation policies, including different types of safety nets. In Chile reforms started as early as 1973, and in the first stage, until 1983 the reforms were applied to all sectors without any restraint. Argentina and Uruguay also had short lived experiments in the mid-1970s. Only in the 1980s the reforms spread to the whole continent, first to Bolivia, Costa Rica, and Mexico, later in Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela. Brazil can be considered a late reformer having started to open up and privatise the economy only in the 1990s (Reinhardt and Peres, 2000). After the crisis, from 1984 onward, Chilean policies turned to be less orthodox: the state rescued the private financial system of the risk of bankruptcy, international market price volatility was smoothed through price bands, buyers' organisations, and minimum tariffs. Non-traditional exports and on-farm irrigation schemes are subsidised. From 1990, while maintaining the essential traits of the "new economic model", equity considerations have been given priority in the development strategies. Sectoral agricultural policies increasingly gave priority to the farms' rural context, and recognised the heterogeneity of rural households' income-generation strategies, therefore increasingly developing a multi-sectoral perspective. Economic opening was focused on establishing trade agreements, and price stabilisation instruments were continued. Productivity growth was sustained intensifying irrigation and fertiliser subsidies. The policy toward smallholder agriculture explicitly mentioned the need to promote its insertion in markets via promoting farmers organisation (Portilla 2000:7). The impact of reforms on agriculture Policy reforms have meant profound changes in the productive structure, the productivity, competitiveness, and profitability of all economic activities, and structural changes appear to have been particularly deep within the agricultural sector (David et al., 2000). Yet, these changes have been uneven between countries, within regions, between different agricultural sub-sectors, and between the different strata of the rural population.
Chile is an exception, since the reforms started in 1974 after the military coup of Augusto Pinochet. 5.
Agricultural growth in general has been high in a restricted number of countries: Argentina, Chile and Uruguay4. The growth recorded in each of the most dynamic sub-sectors has generally been concentrated in a few countries: soybeans in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay; oil palm in Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica; fruits and vegetables in Mexico, Chile, Argentina, Costa Rica and Brazil. In timber products, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Honduras led growth. Livestock production has increased in Brazil, Mexico and Chile, mainly due to an expansion of the land frontier (ECLAC, 2000). Growth rates have also differed markedly across subsectors, while the average growth rate of the region's agricultural sector has remained almost unchanged within the last three decades: 3.5 percent in the 1970s, 2.1 percent during the 1980s, and 2.6 percent from 1990 to 1998. Subsectors such as fruits, vegetables, oilseeds and poultry have grown considerably, following the trends in global demand. On the other hand, the region's traditional export crops such as coffee, sugar, cotton, banana and wheat have experienced a decline. Domestic-oriented products such as root and tubers have also stagnated. While this pattern of growth certainly reveals a move toward a production structure that resembles more closely the region's comparative advantages, it also generates a polarisation between dynamic and stagnating areas and producers that cannot be overlooked by policymakers. Most dynamic products are in fact being produced by relatively large scale modern farms, while the least dynamic products are usually produced mainly by smallholders (David et al., 2000). In Chile, to make just one example, the irrigated central valley regions concentrate most fruit, horticultural, and oilseed firms, while the Lake District is the region where most potato production takes place within diversified plots (chacras). Around 70 percent of the less dynamic and less competitive crops (e.g. cereals and livestock) are concentrated in the Southern and Araucania regions (Portilla 2000:65-67). Policy reforms and rural poverty While reforms certainly went some way in shaping the restructuring of the economy, they achieved much less in another of their stated objectives, i.e. alleviating poverty. This sub-section sketches very briefly the main trends in poverty during the reform period, focusing in particular on rural poverty. Table 1 in the Annex reports recent data on percentages and number of persons living in poverty and absolute poverty, disaggregated between urban and rural areas. According to these data the percentage of poor people increased significantly between 1980 and 1994, with most of this increase taking place in urban areas. It should be noted, however, that more than one every two rural dwellers remain poor, and that an increasing number of these are in absolute poverty. The other striking observation is that the number of poor more than doubled during the period, with most of the increase happening in urban areas5. In the 1990s, for the first time in the region's history, the number of urban poor surpassed the poor in the rural areas. However, in 1997, 54 percent of the rural households was classified as.
The high agricultural growth rates of Nicaragua and Peru are mainly related to the extremely low initial situation during the 1980s, when both countries were experiencing severe political crises. 5 It should be noted that there is increasing evidence from around the world that urban poverty depends inter alia on the performance of the rural sector, so to attempt to alleviate urban poverty by focusing on urban economic activities alone would be myopic. 6.
poor vis-à-vis 30 percent in urban areas. Besides, 31 percent of households in the rural areas were considered "extremely poor" vis-à-vis 10 percent in the urban areas. The problem of poverty in Latin America is deeply interlinked with that of the unequal distribution of income and assets. The rural sector is no exception to that. Rural poverty is highly correlated with land distribution. The land concentration Gini coefficients for the 17 countries for which there are enough data show that the situation is highly uneven between countries. Chile, Mexico and Paraguay exhibit indices over 0.90, followed by Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela which exhibit indices between 0.70 and 0.806 (ECLAC, 2000). Latin America as a whole has the highest levels of income inequality in the world. There is an increasing consensus that economic growth alone cannot be effective in reducing poverty if the current levels of inequality persist.
Londoño and Székely (1997) calculated that with levels of income inequality comparable to those found in Africa, poverty in Latin America would be at half its current levels. The reduction would be even more dramatic with an income distribution comparable to that of Southeast Asia or OECD countries. Furthermore, evidence shows that while inequality and poverty had decreased during the growth period of the 1970s, they both increased sharply in the slow growth period after 1982, and that not much of this decline was reversed with the resumption of economic growth in the 1990s (Londoño and Székely, 1997; see also Lustig and Deutsch, 1998). These persisting high levels of inequality seriously hamper attempts to reduce poverty. De Janvry and Sadoulet (1998) argue that income growth did reduce inequality over the 1970-94 period and that "frequently made assertions that growth has been inequalising in Latin America are thus globally incorrect". They also stress that "estimation of a negative overall relation between income and inequality (...) that does not distinguish between growth and recession, is misleading: the policy implication is not that income growth reduces inequality, but that recession is devastating on inequality, and growth ineffective in reducing it. (...) contrary to frequent statements, we certainly do not find that income growth increases inequality. However, growth (...) cannot be relied upon as an equalising force". The associations between these trends do not say much in themselves about the causal relationship between reforms and inequality. Existing studies that have investigated the relationship came to sometimes differing conclusions. Morley (1999) reviews some of these studies concluding, on the basis of new analysis, that "reforms taken together are mildly regressive", with sharp increases in the early reform years in Argentina, Chile and Mexico, and reduced inequality in Jamaica, Peru, and Bolivia. Policy, poverty and agricultural performance: Are there missing links? Two main facts emerge by looking at the broad picture sketched in this section. First, that policy reform did bring a good deal of much needed adjustment to many economies in Latin America, and in particular to their agricultural sectors, but also that this process had losers as well as winners and that the losers are in many cases those at the lower tail of the income distribution. For the rural sector this is seen both by looking at what have been the sub-sectors more responsive to the reforms, and by the fact that the proportion of extremely poor in the total.
The Gini index varies between 0 and.
The most proximate to 1, the most unevenly distributed is the variable, whereas the most closer to 0 means that the closest we are in relation to a perfectly equitable distribution. 7 This is an increasingly recognised fact in the poverty literature at large: see Timmer (1997). 7.
number of poor has increased in the period. Second, that since the inception of the reforms, Latin America as a whole has not made substantial progress in reducing neither poverty nor inequality. The challenge is therefore to understand if and where did the reform effort fail to take into account relevant policy options that would have resulted in better results in terms of welfare of the rural poor. The starting hypothesis of this paper is that policy design focussed too much on (necessary) macroeconomic adjustment, while failing to look at the meso-level conditions that ultimately determine how the macro-policies translate into incentives faced by poor households. This position is not new. It is now generally acknowledged (even in Washington), that the reforms inspired by the so-called Washington Consensus failed to recognise the importance of institutions and institutional change (Burki and Perry, 1998). What is lacking in the development literature is a closer look at how in practice, in the frame of the reformed macroeconomic policies, the incentives and opportunities for the rural poor have evolved in some specific cases, how households responded to these changes, and how these responses translated into welfare/poverty outcomes. II. A Review of the Meso-Economic and Agricultural Household Model Literatures.
The Meso Level In this section we introduce the concept of the "meso-level" as an integrated view of the main two channels (market mechanisms and administrative procedures) through which policy decisions in general, and macro-economic policy variables in particular, trickle down to the micro level, modifying the incentive structure faced by microeconomic agents when they take production, consumption and investment decisions. Such a concept is instrumental in developing a consistent analytical framework to explain how policy and market failures occur, resulting in unintended and undesired responses by microeconomic agents. We first review previous attempts to make use of similar conceptualisations. We start by critically reviewing the contributions made by the policy-oriented literature in which the mesoeconomy concept was initially considered. Secondly, we proceed to an abridged review of the insights provided by the New Institutional Economics literature in analysing market and policy failures, particularly focusing on how transaction costs arise as result of these failures, and on the various institutional arrangements which typically emerge to minimise these costs within the rural sector of less-developed countries. Third, we briefly review the empirically oriented literature in which both the meso-economy level and neo-institutionalist concepts have been applied, in an attempt to devise solutions to the heuristic problems encountered in field work research. The meso-economy in the policy-oriented literature The mesoeconomy level concept is framed within the traditional macro and micro dichotomy in the economic literature. The concept is just another attempt to bridge the gap between both sorts of analyses. Since the 1960s serious doubts have been raised about the logical consistency of the division of the discipline into two separate fields. In many ways, however, the distinction has been blurred lately. Microeconomic theory has being transformed by an increasing awareness of informational problems, whereas macroeconomics has increasingly acquired formal microfoundations. In a perfect world of frictionless markets and perfect governments there is no need for a distinct meso-economy analysis. The competitive equilibrium theory, which began with Walras and.
culminated with Arrow and Debreu, is based on the assumption of no waste or dissipation of resources. Microeconomic agents are price takers in all markets and are perfectly informed of transaction conditions. All markets are competitive, and factors of production move freely without any hindrance. Capital and labour shift without any friction, and land is allocated according to its optimal use. This is, thus, a world of no risks and zero transaction costs. If we add to this, the Bergson-Samuelson welfare function, a perfect world scenario is completely set. Assuming this perfectly competitive market and perfect government scenario by default has been the discipline's heuristic strategy for a long time. The design and implementation of policy, as well as the practice of policy analysis, were mostly seen as technical problems. The BergsonSamuelson model, expressing social welfare as an aggregate function of individual utilities, provided the theoretical rationale for recommending standard policy choices, or far-reaching policy reforms to governments. The second theorem of welfare economics, assuming, at the microeconomic level, firm and consumer optimisation choices based only on resource and technology constraints; and, at the aggregate level, a complete set of competitive and complete markets, underpinned first-best policy proposals. According to this view of economic policy, thus, the role of government is to correct market failures when missing and "thin" markets are encountered, or to correct externalities when they emerge, mostly using budgetary instruments (i.e. taxes or subsidies), the provision of public goods when needed, with the ultimate goals of achieving economic growth and an acceptable distribution of resources (Dixit 1996). It was Ronald Coase (1960) in his seminal paper entitled "The Problem of Social Cost", who for the first time made the crucial connection between institutions, transaction costs, and neoclassical theory. Coase's approach was to retain the basic tools of microeconomic analysis, while introducing profound changes in the whole neo-classical theoretical framework. To make his argument clear, Coase depicts an economy in which the allocative functions of the markets are achieved with no transaction costs. In this "ideal" economic scenario, resources find their highest valued use as a result of competitive market mechanisms. Coase's goal, however, was not to elaborate on the Walrasian framework, but to emphasise that transaction costs are not zero, thus calling for the need to explain the emergence and evolution of different types of institutional arrangements (e.g. impersonal markets mechanisms, hierarchical organisations such as firms and state bureaucracies, as well as personalised market surrogate institutional arrangements) to deal with transaction costs. Coase theorem is, thus, 