Gender, Networks and Mexico-U.S. Migration.
Benjamin Davis, Economist Food and Agricultural Organization and Paul Winters, Lecturer Graduate School of Agricultural & Resource Economics School of Economics University of New England.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank Guy Stecklov, Kristin Espinosa and participants in the gender and migration session at the 2000 Population Association of America annual meetings for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. Content is exclusively the responsibility of the authors, and not the FAO or the authors' respective institutions. This paper has been published in the Journal of Development Studies 38(2), December, 2001 Article length: 8168 words.
Summary In this paper, we examine whether the causes and patterns of Mexican rural female migration differ significantly from rural male migration. A number of hypotheses are discussed to explain why female migration may differ from male migration, with a particular emphasis on the role of migrant networks. Using data from a national survey of rural Mexican households in the ejido sector, significant differences between the determinants of male and female migration are found. While evidence suggests that networks play an important role in female migration, we find that, contrary to case study evidence, female networks are not more influential than male networks in female migration. In fact, female and male networks are found to be substitutes, suggesting they serve similar functions in female migration. Although female migrant networks do not play a special role in the female migration decision, the destination of female migrants is strongly influenced by the location of female network migrants.
Introduction The stereotype of a Mexican migrant to the United States is that of an undocumented, young male. However, considerable evidence exists from community-level studies and a variety of data sources indicating that women participate actively in national and international migration [Goldring, 1996; Mummert, 1991; Kossoudji and Ranney, 1984; and Hondagneu-Sotelo, 1994]. In the Durand and Massey 1992 review of migration literature, the authors find that while women and children made up a considerable share of Mexican migration to the United States in the early part of this century, the massive deportations of the 1930s, combined with the implementation of the Bracero program (1940-65), led to primarily male migration. This again changed after 1965, as women and children increasingly migrated to the United States. Houston, et al [1984] find that since 1940 the majority of legal immigrants to the United States are women and children. While Mexican migration to the United States in the 1970s was still mostly male (though just barely), female migrants from Mexico constituted the single largest nationality among women. Similarly, 43% of the amnesty applications under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 were made by women suggesting they form a significant portion of undocumented workers [Miller, 1996]. 1 In this paper, we examine whether the causes and patterns of rural female migration from Mexico to the United States differ significantly from rural male migration. The results provide insights into the genderspecific effects of migration policy on both sides of the border, as well as implications for agricultural policy in Mexico.
Even if women actively participate in migration, this does not necessarily imply that female migration requires separate analysis from male migration. For example, if female.
migration is a response to perceived income differentials between the origin and destination, and thus unlikely to differ from male migration, then a separate analysis is unnecessary [Thadani and Todaro, 1995]. Gender differences in the economic determinants of migration become relevant if the causes and patterns of female migration are significantly different from male migration. Not considering gender, as is done in the vast majority of migration studies, assumes that this is not the case. What is required, as Boyd [1989] argues, is a "conceptual approach (that) asks if existing models can be enriched or extended by explicit analyses of women in network and family migration research." proposition. In this paper, we examine this.
The paper is divided into six sections. Section 2 provides the conceptual approach for examining how gender may influence the migration decision. This section also proposes some testable hypotheses. Section 3 provides an overview of the data used in this study and a general comparison of male and female migrants. Section 4 uses a logit model to compare the role of individual, household, community and network characteristics on male and female migration. Section 5 looks at the importance of gender-centred networks on the destination and occupation of migrants. Section 6 draws general conclusions.
Conceptual approach and gender implications.
Examining the role of gender in the migration decision requires first understanding the migration decision in general. To do this, we briefly examine three micro-level models of migration ­ the neoclassical model of migration, the "new economics of migration" and the network, or social capital, theory of migration. We then consider how gender fits into these models.
2.1 Models of migration Neoclassical models explain the migration decision as a cost-benefit calculation where potential migrants consider the expected net income at the destination with the expected net income at the origin [Sjaastad, 1962; Todaro 1969, 1976]. Given their skill levels and.
financial resources, potential migrants determine the location at which they will be most productive. The expected time required to obtain employment at each location, as well as the cost of reaching a destination and the cost of maintenance while searching for work are also estimated. For international migrants, government regulations at the potential destination must also be factored into the decision [Borjas, 1990]. For illegal international migrants, the probability of apprehension and deportation is also considered. Based on these various.
estimates of the flow of costs and benefits over time, the discounted net return to each location is calculated and the decision to migrate is made if the net return to migration is greater than the net return to remaining at the point of origin.
The new economics of migration expands on the neoclassical model by focusing on migration as a household decision rather than an individual decision [Stark, 1991]. Households are the appropriate unit of analysis if the individual migration decision is made jointly with household members and if the costs and returns are shared by some explicit or implicit sharing rule. Evidence of migration as a household decision is found in the fact migrants often send remittances to family members. 2 While improving expected income may be one motivation for sending migrants, the household may use migration as a mechanism for diversifying risk and gaining access to capital in the presence of insurance and credit market imperfections or failures.
The network theory of migration stresses the value of direct relationships in the migration decision [Boyd, 1989]. Immigration within a region or community is initiated based on individual or household reasons. These early migrants may assist family members or friends in migration by providing information on job possibilities or providing direct assistance such as housing, food, and transportation. For example, Menjivar [1995] notes that it is not uncommon for newly arrived migrants to stay with kin, borrow money from them and seek their assistance in emergencies. "Kin terms" were also extended to members of their hometown. Additionally, the majority of interviewees mentioned a friend or relative "who took them to, recommended them for, or informed them about a job." As migration flows from a community increase, a migrant network develops of former migrants, current migrants and non-migrants within the community. Network connections are a form of social capital that can be drawn upon by non-migrants with access to the network [Massey, et al 1993]. Information and direct assistance provided through migrant networks lower the costs, enhance the benefits and limit the uncertainty of migration thus increasing the net benefits of migrating.
While the implications of each of these models at the macro-level may differ, at the micro-level the network theory of migration can be viewed as enhancing the neoclassical model and the new economics of migration rather than as an alternative [Winters, de Janvry and Sadoulet, 1999]. In this view, returns to migration are based on the information the potential migrant has about migration, the benefits the migrant can obtain, and the costs associated with migration. Networks serve as a conduit for information on the expected returns and variance of returns to migration. Network members provide direct assistance in obtaining benefits and reducing costs. The migration decision is still based on expected.
income differentials and the relative uncertainty of migration, but these factors are migrantspecific and a function of network access.
The purpose of this paper is not to judge the validity of these models or even the "most correct" model. Instead, we accept each of these models as providing insight into the migration decision and wish to examine the implications of the models. From the.
neoclassical model, we find that individual characteristics factor into the migration decision in a number of ways. First, characteristics, such as education, experience, gender and age, may influence the income and employment opportunities at each location. Secondly, individual characteristics as well as social conditions and technologies may influence the cost of migration [Massey, et al, 1993]. Finally, preferences of individuals may differ. Empirical evaluation of the neoclassical model requires controlling for these factors. 3.
From the new economics of migration, we find that migration may be part of a household strategy to cope with market failure. Household characteristics such as assets, land holdings, and demographic composition, which reflect the household's exposure to risk and the household's ability to respond to risk, are relevant considerations in evaluating the migration decision.
From the network theory of migration, the importance of networks in conveying information and in providing assistance are noted. Both weak and strong networks may play a role in migration with the distinction being the former is between close friends and kin and the latter involving relationships between acquaintances [Boyd, 1989; Wilson, 1998]. However, analysis that includes community networks runs the risk of spurious correlation between network variables and migration. That is, community networks may be found to.
significantly influence migration not because they serve a function in the migration decision, but because they represent common unobservable community characteristics such as community development or organisation [Durand and Massey, 1992]. To control for this, community characteristics, such as location, infrastructure and organisation, are necessarily included in any analysis.
As providers of information and assistance to potential migrants, networks influence migration in other ways than simply increasing the probability of migration. Direct assistance is only possible if migrants go, at least initially, to a destination in which the network is established. Information is likely to also be specific to certain locations. However, this does not imply migration to a single destination in the United States from a given community. This may be true for some communities but the more common pattern is for multiple migration destinations, or nodes, for a given network [Cornelius, 1991; Wilson, 1994; Massey, et al, 1987]. The diffusion of migrants to multiple destinations is the result of 1] initial migrants going to distinct locations; and 2] migrants within the United States hearing of other opportunities and migrating directly to those locations or going there on subsequent migrations. These nodes form the basis of the network. As with location, the occupational niche of migrants within the network may influence the pattern of migration. Whether the occupations are agriculturally or urban based, the skills required for the occupation and whether the occupations are gender specific will influence the pattern of migration.
2.2 Migration and gender The above discussion runs upon the assumption that gender does not play a role in migration. While gender may be considered one of a number of relevant characteristics that influence the migration decision, this is not equivalent to arguing that female migration differs from male.
migration. For this to be the case, either the models of migration for each gender or the parameters of the models must be different. In this paper, we consider the latter view. Female migration, while governed by the same models of migration (neoclassical, new economics of migration and network theory), differs from male migration in that explanatory variables influence the decision to migrate differently. Below we list a number of theoretical and empirical reasons that support this view.
Females are more risk averse, or households (particularly male-dominated households) are more risk averse on their behalf. Women may be less likely to migrate if.
uncertainty remains high, suggesting they will only migrate if risk can be averted or will wait until a network is more established before migrating.
A higher level of risk aversion suggests that females will be more likely to migrate when uncertainty is diminished or if they, or their families, have mechanisms for coping with risk. Risk may be coped with by a variety of household strategies including the use of household assets. Thus, when a household is better able to cope with risk (ie., it has more liquid assets) more female migration might occur. Migrant networks also play a role in diminishing risk exposure by providing information on job prospects, circumventing the border, etc. that enhance the net benefits of migration. Case studies demonstrate that women face additional dangers in illegal migration compared to men, particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse by coyotes, Border Patrol agents, or other males taking advantage of the migrants' defenceless position [for example, Massey, et al, 1987]. Having a network with established migration routes may be more important for women due to these additional risks.
Females who migrate have different (observable and unobservable) characteristics than male migrants, since different characteristics may be beneficial to male and female migrants and societal norms may hinder female migration.
Within the United States certain characteristics of male and female migrants may be more desirable to potential employers. Thus, a characteristic, such as education, that may be desirable in a male migrant may not be in a female migrant or vice versa. This may be largely dependent on the occupational niche of males and females within the network. Additionally, gender roles at the point of origin, particularly the way in which labour is allocated by gender within ejido farms, may differentiate male and female migrants. Finally, case studies have shown that social norms regarding gender roles play an important role in promoting or hindering migration by females and males [Hondagneu-Sotelo, 1994; Massey et al, 1987]. The patriarchal family system accepts and foments male migration, but hinders female migration. Fathers are more likely to resist the migration of daughters, and husbands the accompaniment of their wives and children, even years after first leaving home. 4 On the other hand, Hondagneu-Sotelo [1994] points out that one characteristic of single women that migrated to the United States was that they hailed from "weakly bounded families that provided little economic support and lacked patriarchal rules of authority." In this situation, women may have similar unobservable characteristics as male migrants, and instead it is the particular household characteristics that permits their migration. While economic crisis and the redefinition of gender roles brought on by the same migration processes have opened options for women, especially in rural areas, Mexico remains a patriarchal society.
Women may not benefit equally from male-dominated networks and instead may be more dependent on gender-specific networks.
Case studies have emphasised that women, particularly single women, may not benefit in the same fashion as men from migration networks. Women may depend more on women to women networks, as well as their own kin networks (which may include men), than men [see Hondagneu-Sotelo, 1994 and Kossoudji and Ranney, 1984]. These female networks may offer advice and job descriptions, directly motivate migration, provide encouragement and contacts, lend money and accompany first timers. Hondagneu-Sotelo contends that these networks allow women to circumvent or contest domestic patriarchal authority. The fact that women tend to be more reliant on networks, particularly female-centred networks, for information and assistance suggest that 1] they are more likely to choose migrant destinations where networks are more firmly established, particularly where female migrants are established; and 2] they are more likely to choose occupations where the network has already established a niche, particularly where female migrants are established.
Women are more constrained from doing certain types of work (because of labour requirements or societal constraints) and thus have more limited employment options. This lowers expected returns and increases the value of specific information.
Kossoudji and Ranney [1984] find, for example, that recent migrant women in the United States are more limited than men in terms of the employment opportunities available to them. These women face a dichotomous wage scale; they either earn a salary far below the minimum wage, almost exclusively as live in maids, or a salary roughly at the minimum wage. Long term migrants and/or married women, however, tend to occupy better paid positions. 5 Massey and Durand [1992], on the other hand, find that women tend to enter agricultural jobs, while men have greater access to urban employment--the latter of which.
tend to be higher paying. 6 Given the lower wage opportunities, the network again is likely to play a more important role in migration for females rather than for males.
The implications of the discussion presented in this section can be summarised into the following testable hypotheses:.
The individual and household characteristics that influence migration, such as education, age, household asset position, etc, influence the female migration decision differently than the male migration decision.
The female migration decision is more influenced by the existence of migrant networks than the male migration decision.
Females are more likely to migrate if the migrant network includes a significant number of women.
Communities that have long histories of migration send a larger proportion of female migrants than communities with shorter histories.
The locations of network nodes are more likely to influence female migration than male migration.
The destination decisions of female migrants are more influence by the location of female network migrants than male network migrants.
Female migrants are more likely than male migrants to take jobs that are part of the network occupational structure.
The occupation decisions of female migrants are more influence by the occupation of female network migrants than male network migrants.
The analysis is based on data taken from a nationally representative sample of ejido households. 7 The ejido is the land reform mechanism utilised by successive Mexican governments from the early 1930s to 1992. Land and water resources were granted by the government not individually but to a community or group of producers, or ejido. Each ejidatario, or comunero, was given usufruct rights over a parcel, as well as access to common lands. The 1992 reform of Article 27 of the constitution formally ended the distribution of land in Mexico. This reform established a legal process, called Procede, by which land rights are delineated within the ejido and land titles provided, and by which ejidos, if authorised by the assembly, can then privatise individual parcels and eventually rent or sell their land. 8 As of 1996, over 29,000 legally constituted ejidos and agrarian communities were in existence [INDA, 1996], governing more than half of the nation's irrigated and rainfed land, and over 70 percent of forest cover. The land reform sector includes more than 3 million ejidatarios, representing more then 75 percent of all agricultural producers in the country, with over 15 million people directly depending on ejido lands for part of their livelihood [de Janvry, et al, 1995]. The data set is thus national in scope, but representative only of ejido households. Given the characteristics of this sector, one can interpret the data as providing insight on most small and medium size producers, ejido or private, in Mexico. Our results may thus differ from studies including non-landed households, an issue we discuss later in the paper.
Panel data were collected from 1287 households, covering 261 ejidos, at two points in time, the Spring and Summer of 1994 and 1997. 9 The survey covers a wide array of household assets including land, livestock, machinery, education, and migration, as well as household demographics, land and labour market participation, migration, agricultural and.
livestock production, and participation in organisations. Community level data was also collected on characteristics and organisation of the ejido. The surveys were carried out by the Secretariat of Agrarian Reform and the World Bank with assistance from the University of California, Berkeley.
The ejido panel data show a significant increase in temporary migration to the United States during the 1994 to 1997 period. While in 1994 only 3 percent of panel households had family members with recent migration to the US, by 1997 this figure had reached 8 percent. 1 0 While this figure is small, it covers only those households with current migration to the United States. Overall, as seen in Table 1, 44 percent of all 1997 households had some connection to the United States, whether historical migration, or children or siblings living in the United States. This share was significantly higher for households with more than 5 hectares of land.
The increase in the incidence of migration by ejidatarios between 1994 and 1997 can be attributed to a number of factors. First, Hanson and Spilimbergo [1999] in their study of illegal migration between 1968 and 1996, find that after controlling for enforcement levels and other factors, variations in real wages in Mexico are a critical determinant of the number of border apprehensions, a measure of illegal migration. These effects are rapid, generally within a month or two of changes in wages, and large, with elasticities of 0.64 to 0.86. Mexican real wages have suffered two serious shocks in the last thirty years, the first taking place in 1982 and the second in 1995-1996 with the peso crisis, when real wages fell 24 percent. The peso crisis resulted in a 120 percent devaluation of the peso between December, 1994 and March, 1995, greatly increasing the purchasing power of dollars remitted to Mexico [Banco de México, 1999; INEGI, 1999]. 1 1 However, during this same period, the INS.
stiffened control over the border with Mexico [as measured in enforcement hours, reported by Hanson and Spilimbergo] resulting in an increase in monthly apprehensions. The greater difficultly of entry in the United States is likely to have put a brake, to a certain extent, on northward migration. Given our arguments above, it is likely that this mitigating effect on migration is stronger among women then men.
Data on Mexican-U.S. migration for the entire sample and by gender is presented in Table.
Migrants are defined as those individuals that migrated to the U.S. during the period of 1994 to 1997, whether temporarily or permanently. Of the 5310 individuals in the survey, 282 (5.3%) migrated to the U.S. during this period. Substantially less women than men migrated during this period with only 2.1% of women migrating and 8.1% of men. To examine the characteristics of migrants in general and by gender, the relevant variables have been divided into individual, household, migrant network, community and regional variables. Tests of significance of differences between migrants and non-migrants in all cases are performed using t-tests and chi-squared tests as appropriate.
3.1 Individual and household variables The data on individual migrant characteristics suggest little difference between male and female migrants. Migrants of both genders tend to be about 10 years younger, more educated and are less likely to be indigenous than non-migrants. Among the household variables, which are taken from the 1994 survey to avoid problems with endogeneity, there are similarly few clear differences between male and female migrants. Both tend to come from households with a larger number of males age 15 to 34. Both also tend to come from families with more female members between the ages of 35 and 59. This factor appears to be stronger for female migrants. In terms of asset ownership, migrants tend to have less irrigated land (1.0 versus.
0.7 ­ although this is only significant for male migrants), more rainfed land (6.6 versus 10.2) and more heads of cattle (6.1 versus 8.8). Access to formal credit, prior to current migration, does not seem to differ by migration which is somewhat surprising since credit access is often seen as one motivation for migration [Stark, 1991]. Finally, migrants are found to come from households that are less likely to belong to organisations.
3.2 Migrant network variables The size of a family migrant network is simply the number of family members, including both immediate family members and relatives of the head of household and spouse, who migrated to the United States prior to 1994 either on a temporary or permanent basis ­ that is, any family member with migration experience. This is then broken down by gender. Figure 1 shows the distribution of male-centred and female-centred family networks within the sample. Nearly 40% of individuals have at least one male family member with migration experience and nearly 30% have at least one female family member with migration experience.
From Table 1, both male- and female-centred networks are found to be significantly larger for migrants in general and for female and male migrants in particular. The average size of the family migrant networks is slightly larger for female migrants (female=2.09 and male=3.16) than for male migrants (female=1.47 and male=2.18). 1 2.
For reasons of sample size the community is defined as the municipio, which includes one or more ejidos that are in relatively close proximity. This assumes that there is significant interaction across ejidos within the same municipio. Within each community sample, the number of individuals found to be part of a family network are added up and divided by the total individuals within that community. For example, to determine the female community.
migrant network the total number of female family migrants is divided by the total number of females within that community. This gives the per capita number of female network migrants and a measure of the density of migrant networks. Figure 2 shows the distribution of malecentred and female-centred community networks. Only 16% of individuals have no malecentred community network and only 23% have no female-centred community network. From Table 2, as with family migrant networks, the data shows that community networks are greater for migrants than non-migrants and particularly for female migrants.
From the data on the date of initial migration of individuals, we calculated the years since the initiation of migration to the United States for each community. On average, migration began 24 years ago. Figure 3 shows a distribution of the years since migration was initiated (with 1994 being the base year). Over 20% of migration was initiated within.
communities in the last 10 years. However, over 40% of communities initiated migration over 30 years prior to 1994 (that is before 1965).
3.3 Community and regional variables Community characteristics and regional variables are included in the analysis to control for factors that may cause migration other than migrant networks. That is, migration "streams" from a particular community may not be due to the presence of networks but due to community characteristics that "push" people towards migration. A number of ejido.
characteristics are incorporated in the analysis including communal property, infrastructure (paved roads), degree of isolation (time to urban centre), indigenous population (percent of non-Spanish speakers), community organisation (ejido campesino organisation) and the stage of community participation in the ejido reform process. In Table 2, male migrants are found to have less access to community property than male non-migrants. In general, migrants are.
found to come from communities with less infrastructure (paved roads) and fewer nonSpanish speakers. Finally, communities in the midst of the Procede process have fewer male migrants.
Gender and the migration decision.
The conceptual framework presented in Section 2 suggested testable hypothesis about the influence of gender on the decision to migrate to the U.S. In this section, we examine the first four hypotheses. The individual migration decision is a discrete decision (migrating to the U.S. versus remaining at the point of origin) and thus may be evaluated using a discrete regression model.
Since the focus of this analysis is migration over a limited period of time (1994-1997), the number of temporary migrants to the US in the sample is relatively small (5.3%). With such a skewed distribution of migrants and non-migrants the ability of a discrete regression model to accurately predict migration is limited. For this reason, 30% of the non-migrants were randomly selected for inclusion in the regression analysis while all of the migrants where included. 1 3 This type of non-proportionate sampling has potential to lead to biased coefficients. However, for the logit model all coefficients are unbiased except for the.
constant term, which may be corrected using a simple transformation [Maddala, 1983]. 1 4 In the results presented below, the constant term has been adjusted appropriately.
Table 3 presents the results of the logit model for each gender. In addition to the estimated coefficient, marginal effects, calculated using the sample average of individual marginal effects, are presented to allow for easier interpretation of the results. Since marginal.
effects are not appropriate for dummy variables, a calculation comparing the change in probability as the dummy goes from zero to one is presented.
4.1 Individual and household variables The age of both male and female migrants is found to negatively influence migration. The effect is stronger for male migrants with each year reducing the probability of migration by 0.5%. Education is only found to influence male migration with each year of education increasing the probability of migrating by 0.4%. Among the household variables, the number of males aged 15-34 is found to positively influence both male and female migration. The marginal effect is greater for male migrants than female migrants. This suggests that the more young adult males in the household the greater the likelihood of migration. Female migrants are found to be positively influenced by the number of female family members aged 35-59. This suggests that female migration is more likely if there is already a mature aged female in the household. Access to formal credit and household membership in a registered organisation are not found to influence female or male migration.
Different asset variables have significant affects on male and female migration. The amount of irrigated land owned by the household appears to have a negative influence on male migration while the amount of rainfed land and heads of cattle owned by the household have, respectively, a positive and negative affect o