Overview of Smallholder Contract Farming in Developing Countries.
Phil Simmons Graduate School of Agricultural and Resource Economics University of New England, Armidale, Australia, 2351.
Abstract An agribusiness firm's choice to expand activities through contract farming rather than plantations, buying directly from open markets or other means reflects differences in transaction costs found in different types of procurement systems. Smallholders may enter contracts to reduce transaction costs of accessing new markets, borrowing, managing risk, acquiring information or increasing employment opportunities. The success of contracts reflects both the contracting environment and management practices. The contracting environment includes the strength of markets for contracted output, government macro policies, technical sophistication in production and attenuation of land ownership while important management elements are farm groups, selection of participants for contracts, managing contract default and conflict resolution. Direct benefits from contracting accrue to smallholders from improved access to markets, improved technology, better management of risk and opportunities for employment of family members. Indirect benefits occur from empowerment of women and increased commercial acumen on the part of smallholders. Contract farming has the potential to improve the welfare of smallholders however it is not a sufficient condition for such improvement. Smaller farmers can be excluded from contracts because of selection bias by agribusiness firms awarding contracts to larger farms, be adversely affected by the second-round effects of contracts on incomes and prices and suffer from narrowing of markets that lie outside of contracts. Institutional developments that might ameliorate this type of exclusion are anti-trust legislation, policies to directly improve the contracting environment, policies to address specific problems smallholders face in entering contracts and participation by NGOs in contract facilitation.
Introduction.
Over the last two decades market liberalisation has profoundly influenced agriculture in both developed and developing parts of the world. Market liberalisation, driven by the WTO and earlier GATT Rounds, has resulted in the deregulation of domestic food markets and the opening and expansion of international markets. Ponte (2000) examines the economic and social impacts on African agriculture of liberalisation and associated microeconomic reform with less government credit, less parastatal production in food markets and removal of price supports and input subsidies. Marsh and Runsten (1995) report microeconomic reforms in Mexico such as the 1989 deregulation of trucking and exports. Goodman and Watts (1997) provide a broader picture of effects of international trade expansion in food products on the economic and social environments in developing countries. These studies show market liberalisation is changing patterns of agricultural production in terms of on-farm crop and livestock mixes, increasing total production in physical and value terms and changing the types of food products entering international markets. The studies also show traditional values and habits in agriculture are being replaced by transactions that increasingly reflect a `cash culture'. Two major effects of market liberalisation are increases in the level of High Value Food (HVF) production and trade and changes in developing country food policy. International trade in HVF such as seed, horticultural products, spices and certain vegetables has increased dramatically in the last two decades. Jaffee (1994) examined growth in HVF production since 1980 and attributes it to market liberalisation, technical breakthroughs and development of contract farming. Such adjustment has occurred particularly in Latin America and Asia and to a lesser extent in Africa. This is described in Goodman and Watts (1997) as the emergence of `New Agricultural Countries', (NACs), where exports of traditional crops such as cereals, sugar and tropical beverages are declining while exports such as Brazilian citrus, Mexican `nontraditionals', exotics such as Kenyan off-seasonal vegetables and Chinese shrimp from Argentina are becoming an increasing proportion of both total and export agricultural income. Food security policy, especially for cereals such as rice, has also changed as a result of market liberalisation and led to a shift away from traditional production and trade, greater specialisation and greater interest in HVF production (Pingali, Hossain & Gerpacio, 1997). This is reflected in the dismantling of restrictive marketing arrangements such as BULOG in Indonesia (Simmons & Daryanto, 1999) and other microeconomic reform in Asian, South American and African agricultural sectors. These reforms have been accompanied by policies to increase incentives for agricultural exports from developing countries. Market liberalisation raises a number of issues from a poverty alleviation standpoint. It is clear that changes in patterns of agricultural production are occurring on a global basis in terms of the composition of production. However, it is not clear who will benefit from these changes. There is a risk that smallholders in developing countries are becoming more marginalised and being left out of the increases in wealth arising from liberalisation of domestic and international markets. Contract farming, which is the focus of this paper, can bring potential benefits to smallholders by providing access to new markets and by providing opportunities for employing underutilised resources, particularly labour. However, such benefits may bypass smaller farmers as contracts 2.
flow to larger farmers and, as well, there may be undesirable second-round effects from such contracting through impacts in local markets for food and farm inputs. In this paper an attempt is made to understand how contract farming may alleviate poverty amongst smallholders.
Why Does Contract Farming Occur?.
New types of agricultural production and marketing can occur under many different types of institutional arrangements. These can include plantations or state farms, nuclear-plasma combinations of plantation and small-holdings, various land and labour sharing arrangements as well as traditional smallholder family farm operations. The most common arrangement in both developed and developing countries is where land-owning farmers sell to local or city spot markets receiving prices that reflect purchasers' valuation of produce on the day based on quality and quantity. There are no overlapping contracts such as the purchaser providing credit and no forward pricing arrangements. However, there are alternatives to spot markets and these arrangements can be complex. Forward integration can occur where a group of farmers own or control a marketplace or backward integration occurs where large processing and marketing firms either own farms or become directly involved in supporting and controlling production through contracts. The latter type of arrangement is called `contract farming' and usually involves a large agribusiness firm integrating backwards by forming alliances with groups of smallholders and, through written or verbal contracts, providing farm inputs such as credit and extension in return for guaranteed delivery of produce of specified quality often at a pre-determined price. Such contracting arrangements may also involve horizontal integration where firms not only provide direct inputs into farm-level decision making but also encourage integration of various activities across a population of smallholders through farm groups. These groups may coordinate planting and harvest as well as facilitate or manage storage and transport arrangements. There are probably as many types of contracts as there are contracted smallholders. However there are common elements that distinguish `contract farming' from alternatives such as plantation farming, share farming and selling through local markets. Contract farming impacts on marketing of produce and usually at least one of the other three stages that comprise an agricultural micro-system: input supply, production and processing. The simplest contracts are usually restricted to some type of forward selling. For example, Mangosteen producers in Bali receive an early season payment in return for assurances they will deliver the harvest to particular exporters who pay them the balance of the prevailing market price at delivery time. Other contracts are more complex. East Javanese seed corn producers contract with a multi-national seed firm using contracts that include quality and quantity clauses, provision of credit and require meetings of the farmers' group with firm extension officers to learn about seed crop management. These smallholders are tightly controlled in their use of fertilisers and pesticides and other management decisions such as planting density and timing of planting and harvest and the types of companion crops that are allowed. 2.1 Contract Farming Versus Spot Markets and Plantations.
Contract farming is an attempt by usually large agribusiness firms to expand their operations to improve profitability or manage risk by diversifying their sources of agricultural products. To understand why expansion may involve contracting with smallholders rather than, say, by.
accessing spot markets more aggressively or by developing private plantations, `transaction costs' encountered by large firms wishing to expand their operations need to be considered. Williamson (1979) states `economic institutions evolve to minimise the costs of resource allocation'. This means that of the plethora of structures a firm might take the firm eventually adopts a structure that minimises the (transaction) costs of assembling the resources necessary to meet demands emanating from markets. Three factors contribute to transaction costs: bounded rationality, opportunism and asset specificity (Williamson, 1979). In the absence of these factors, contract farming would not occur since agribusiness firms could buy all their produce in spot markets which would be instantly and perfectly responsive to their demands. Bounded rationality describes differences in information between contracting parties. For example, the firm may have an excellent knowledge of markets while the smallholder may have little knowledge of them hence may benefit from a contract. Opportunism may occur when there are opportunities for taking advantage of situations to the detriment of the other party in an agreement. For example, smallholders may be concerned the firm could, by virtue of its market domination, offer a very low price in the spot market or, alternatively, the firm may worry that sellers could collude to drive up prices. Writing contracts clearly spelling out obligations may reduce these types of concerns. Asset specificity is the third factor contributing to transaction costs. It reflects risks associated with protecting `sunk costs' in processing plants, logistical systems or market development or, for smallholders, costs of protecting investments in specialised machinery and knowledge. Both firm and smallholders may protect these investments through contracting (Dorwood, 2001). The major alternative for the agribusiness firm seeking to expand its activities is to source from the open market. This is the usual arrangement with staples such as cereals and standard livestock products. However, this arrangement is less likely when HVF products are involved. High transaction costs associated with the open market arise from uncertain quality and supply and price risk. Food processors usually face tight quality requirements that may be difficult to meet in open markets. These requirements reflect technical aspects of preserving, packaging, freezing and transporting HVF products and, also, meeting consumer requirements. Consumers expect almost perfect product uniformity for food products. This is particularly so in the United States market where labelling ensures quality and consumers view product uniformity as a quality indicator for both eating experience and safety (Goodman & Watts, 1997). Open markets such as that for rice are high volume and therefore are unlikely to have uncertain supply and quality issues can be dealt with cheaply through grading. Also, forward and futures markets exist for shifting price risk (Pingali, Hossain & Gerpacio, 1997). Hence, these markets function well on an open basis. However, HVF crops are usually produced in much lower volumes and sold to a relatively small number of purchasers who possess processing capacity to meet demands from consumers. This type of market structure, with a high concentration of intermediate buyers, is not conducive to open market selling since farmers can be `at the mercy' of a few opportunistic agribusiness firms. If farmers avoid these types of crops, agribusiness firms may find spot markets thinly traded and unreliable as sources of supply. Contracts with individual smallholders are needed to encourage them to undertake production. Finally, thinly traded markets that have periodic shortages usually also have volatile prices. The latter can be.
costly for processors if they are servicing large downstream contracts written in advance of a season. Another procurement option for agribusiness firms is for firms to operate their own plantations. This type of sourcing also incurs a number of transaction costs. One of the most important is the cost of supervision which, because of the likelihood of `shirking', can be high for some types of crops or livestock enterprises (Hayami & Otsuka, 1993). Shirking problems, also referred to as `moral hazard' or `principal agency' problems, reflect the high costs of monitoring labour effort when there is uncertainty about yield. Uncertainty over crop yield means the firm cannot distinguish between production lost through lack of work effort and production lost to weather and uncontrollable biological factors (Stiglitz, 1974; Binswanger & Rosenzweig, 1984). In principle, even a very slack work team may, in a good season, produce a crop with a good yield. This type of transaction cost is related to the type of crop technology used and increases with its complexity. For example, large plantations work well for tropical beverage crops where management tasks are clearly defined, usually uniform and do not require judgement or much initiative on the part of workers. Alternatively, HVF crops, such as vegetables for export, are unlikely to be successful in a plantation environment since they are technically more sophisticated and require worker initiative to achieve satisfactory yields and meet quality requirements (Hayami & Otsuka, 1993). Other high transaction costs in plantation production include costs associated with land and skill acquisition. Land acquisition costs may be reduced through leasing or through subsidised land acquisition from government land reform policies. However, even under these circumstances, sunk costs are incurred in establishment of infrastructure and `setting up'. Plantations also depend on a relatively skilled supervisory and management team requiring substantial investment in human capital. These workers are employed on a permanent basis and are costly. Transaction costs on plantations may also result from unionisation or politicisation of workers resulting in opportunistic behaviour (Coulter et al., 1999). Also, governments or individuals with political power may see the relatively illiquid investments associated with plantations as opportunities for either ad hoc taxation or as soft targets for extortion. Despite potentially high transaction costs from plantations, an agribusiness firm may face some distinct advantages from a vertically integrated operation involving firm-owned plantation production and processing and marketing operations. Supply may be more predictable, which is important if the agribusiness firm needs predictable throughput to achieve scale economies in processing or has forward obligations to service large downstream contracts. Also, while opportunistic behaviour by plantation workers may be costly, other types of opportunistic behaviour that occur in out-sourced or contracted production may be avoided. For example, costs of contract default where credit or other inputs provided to contracted smallholders are lost due to diversion of production to other buyers can be avoided. Costs of resolving conflict may be lower for plantations than for contract farming. Management can use its power to resolve disputes and, because information sharing occurs more easily in integrated firm structures, issues arising from differences in information held are less likely to occur (Dietrich, 1994).
Transaction Costs and Contract Farming.
Contract farming may have high transaction costs however still represent the `best bet' for expansion of the firm when compared to alternatives. Transaction costs incurred by agribusiness firms engaged in contract farming fall broadly into four areas (Deitrich, 1994): 2.2.1 Costs of Drafting, Negotiating and Enforcing Contracts.
The initial costs of drafting contracts are increased by the necessity of having first season contracts work well. Glover and Kusterer (1990) report that farm contracts have a `honeymoon' period in their first season where smallholders show high levels of goodwill towards the contracting firm. However, smallholders' experience of the first season flows into later seasons when, with contract maturity, contract provisions tighten and smallholder attitudes harden as a more business-like attitude develops. Hence, getting the contract `right' in the first season should be a priority for the agribusiness firm and likely to be costly. Upfront costs in negotiating and managing contracts include: · · Costs of gathering agricultural, social and economic information about an area or region. Costs of contacting and establishing relationships with individual smallholders, farm groups and village committees or headmen. This may involve both political action and purchase of goodwill at the community level. Costs of gathering information on individuals to select smallholders suitable, from the firm's perspective, as partners in contracts. Costs of negotiating with individuals including possibly farm and family visits and establishment of personal relationships between smallholders and firm representatives. Costs of writing contracts and, where literacy is limited, legitimisation of contracts through a village committee or headman. Costs of enforcement of contracts. Maladaption Costs When Contract Specifications Are Not Met.
A pervasive theme in the literature on contract farming is quality specification of contracted production (Glover 1990; Glover & Kusterer, 1990; Marsh & Runsten, 1995; Eaton & Shepherd, 2001). Smallholders may face difficulties in meeting quality requirements regarding fruit or vegetable size, colour, blemishes and ripeness or seed grain moisture and purity requirements and, increasingly, food safety requirements related to chemical use. The reasons for smallholders apparently having more difficulty than developed country farmers in meeting quality specifications are not well understood. Glover and Kusterer (1990) point to economies to scale in quality management and the relatively small scale of production that most smallholder contractors actually achieve. Key and Runsten (1999) argue that quality control for HVF crops requires more capital intensive production than for other crops and hence the problem is essentially one of smallholders not being able to afford appropriate technology. Also, quality problems may arise for cultural reasons. The stringent requirements of consumers in developed 6.
country markets may require a production mindset that is simply alien to nth generation traditional smallholders used to servicing markets where branding and product uniformity are not so important. 2.2.3 Set-up and Running Costs Associated With Governance.
The governance of contracts requires a management team to support personal contact with smallholders in the village or region where the agribusiness firm is operating. Management personnel are likely to be involved in dealing with contractual problems such as payment issues and monitoring activities such as farm visits. This management effort may need to be integrated with extension services offered at either individual smallholder or farm group level or these may be run separately with extension services outsourced by the firm. 2.2.4 Bonding Costs of Effecting Secure Commitments.
The agribusiness firm has an interest in `bonding' the smallholder to the contract by subsidising various types of capital acquisition. As the number of successfully completed contracts increases, smallholders gain specialised knowledge about the contracted crop and may invest in sheds, plant or field equipment to expand production or make it more efficient. This build up of capital should cause a bonding process making contract renewal more likely and leading to a long term relationship between smallholder and firm. Some frozen vegetable contracts in Mexico have operated over many years and apparently reflect very long-term expectations on the part of smallholders (Runsten, 1992). In conclusion, the decision by an agribusiness firm to undertake expansion through contract farming reflects the costs of contracting compared to alternatives such as open market operations or plantations. Both of these latter structures have the potential for relatively high transaction costs and contract farming, under the right circumstances, may be the least cost growth option for firms.
Reasons Why Smallholders Participate in Contracts.
Contracts are initiated by those who write them and, as discussed above, agribusiness firms write contracts to either increase profits by expanding operations or reduce profit variability by diversifying supplies. However, if contracts are to work, they must be attractive to potential contractors. Hence, contracts struck with smallholders need to increase farm profits or reduce risk exposure. 3.1 Adoption of New Enterprises.
A farmer considers three factors prior to undertaking a new enterprise or substantially changing the way an existing enterprise is pursued. These are revenue implications, cost implications and any additional exposure to risk that might arise from the new activity. In principle, a contract does not need to improve revenues to be attractive if revenue losses are more than fully offset by cost savings. However, researchers have yet to report examples of.
contract farming involving expected reductions in revenue and increasing revenue is likely to be important. Two types of farm costs are relevant to adoption: opportunity costs and input costs. Opportunity costs occur with a new activity because other on-farm or off-farm activities may need to be curtailed. In essence, new enterprises `crowd out' existing activities resulting in lost income (or its equivalent in utility) from these sources. Hence opportunity costs reflect how resources such as labour, land, buildings and machinery are used in existing on-farm and off-farm enterprise or in leisure or community activities. Labour may be used to generate income or diverted to leisure or community activities. Land is likely to be used for other cropping or livestock purposes or rented out, sheds may be used for on-farm activities such as grading, processing and storage or for industrial piece-work and machinery can be used either on the farm or rented out. Two considerations are relevant to evaluating opportunity costs. First, it is important whether the input is constrained in the sense that more of it cannot be purchased or obtained through negotiation with third parties. For example, if land can be rented in then the opportunity cost of land used in a new contractual enterprise equals its rental value. In contrast, if extra land is not available and the smallholder is `land constrained', then the opportunity cost of land in a new contract equals the gross margin of the existing on-farm activity that is curtailed to accommodate the contract. Smallholders may be constrained with other inputs. Hiring in of additional labour may be impossible because it is unavailable and credit may be unavailable because the smallholder has no collateral. The second consideration in evaluating opportunity costs concerns farm inputs that have zero or very low value for the smallholder. De Janvry, Fafchamps and Sadoulet (1991) extend the theory of `shadow pricing' to farm input markets where inputs such as land and labour cannot be used because of high transaction costs. An example is where a farm family has surplus labour because it cannot rent in more land to provide employment for family members and things like travel costs, availability of work, social factors or cultural beliefs prevent off-farm work. In this situation, even though the village day rate for labour may be Rp.100,000 the shadow price for the family's labour is zero or very low reflecting only subjective valuation of leisure time or participation in village activities. In this sense, the family has a reservation price for its labour, say Rp.50,000 per day, that is never met by the market after transaction costs are subtracted and hence family labour is under-utilised. Relatively low shadow prices can occur in more subtle ways with land where social factors prevent certain types of activities. An example of social transaction costs in land use is wealthy land owners in Pakistan producing livestock, never crops. Clearly, if a farm contract can provide employment for resources that have very low shadow prices then it will be attractive to the smallholder. The second type of cost is expenses incurred in purchasing farm inputs. Such expenses include hired labour, machinery, seed, chemicals, storage, marketing and rented land. A new enterprise must increase total farm income if it is to be a candidate for adoption by the smallholder. Increasing total farm income requires expected revenues to be greater than purchased input costs plus opportunity costs. Adoption also requires farm risk remain at acceptable levels hence the effect of the new enterprise on stability of income is important. How farmers respond to uncertainty is contentious.
however elements of the problem are captured in safety-first theory, where smallholders will not expose themselves to the risk of their income falling below some minimum threshold level (Anderson, Dillon & Hardaker, 1992). Farm bankruptcy is relatively common in developed countries where its consequences are serious though not necessarily dire. In developing countries losing land can be dire and empirical evidence shows developing country farmers generally take more conservative account of uncertainty than developed country farmers. 3.2 Reasons Smallholders Enter Contracts.
Agribusiness firms are likely to have four areas of strategic advantage that allow cost savings to be conferred on smallholders through contracting: · · · · 3.2.1 They may have access to product markets where high transactions costs effectively prevent smallholder access. They may have access to relatively inexpensive credit where, for a range of reasons, smallholders face high interest rates or have no access. They may provide services for managing on-farm risk. They may provide information on extension, logistics and marketing at relatively low cost. Access to Markets.
Recent expansion of contract farming is often viewed as part of the broader globalisation phenomenon whereby removal of trade restrictions has led to increased flows of agricultural products, especially from developing to developed countries (Jaffee, 1994). Runsten (1992) documents a range of contracts since 1989 for HVF crops including strawberries, melons and frozen vegetables processed in Mexico then exported to the United States by both domestic and multi-national agribusiness firms. Goodman and Watts (1997) document the development of contracts, alongside other multi-national activity, for pineapples and bananas from Central American countries for export to the United States and Europe. Glover and Kusterer (1990) document similar activity in Central American countries and Porter and Phillips-Howard (1997) examine a range of new types of contractual arrangements involving international trade from Africa. Agribusiness firms are instrumental in `opening' markets for smallholders in all of these studies. These firms have advantages over smallholders in market knowledge and experience, information links, legal expertise, economies to size in processing and transport and have the financial muscle necessary for sustaining international trade relationships. From a smallholder perspective, in the absence of contracts these markets are `missing' in the sense that transaction costs of accessing them on a small scale are effectively infinity. 3.2.2 Access to Credit.
Non-traditional or HVF crops are more costly to produce than traditional crops and cash requirements for farm inputs are usually relatively high (Goodman &Watts, 1997; Key & 9.
Runsten, 1999). This is because HVF crops often require specialty inputs and have more exacting quality requirements requiring sophisticated technology and flexible use of labour and chemicals. Hence, smallholders need access to credit to undertake production. Many smallholders are credit constrained in the sense they have no access to credit at all (Glover & Kusterer, 1990; Hayami & Otsuka, 1993). Alternatively, if access is available they face high interest rates, often three to four times the bank rate, from local moneylenders or excessive transaction costs if they use bank credit. High interest rates reflect relatively high costs faced by local moneylenders in sourcing funds and servicing borrowers who do not have collateral. Titles to land may be traditional rather than legal and court processes slow, expensive or ineffective so that small loans are not worth pursuing legally. In this situation, a moneylender is limited to collateralising the smallholder's desire for future loans and, since they are often part of the same community, may face social pressure to be benevolent when repayments are delayed by bad seasons or exigencies such weddings and funerals. These high costs are passed on to borrowers by moneylenders in the form of high interest rates. When smallholders seek credit from agricultural banks or micro-lenders, transaction costs are high. On even small loans they may face forced purchases, loan delay costs, travel costs, application fees, legal service costs and collateral titling costs (Key and Runsten, 1999). There are several areas of potential savings for agribusiness firms in providing credit. If the firm is large and well established it is likely to obtain funds at normal business rates. A large firm may also have advantages over moneylenders in management of risk because of the size and diversity of its loan portfolio. That is, investing in a large number of small cash advances allows diversification of lending risk either across participants in a particular contract or across participants in a number of different commodity contracts or activities. The agribusiness firm also has lending advantages by virtue of its contract. A contract allows monitoring of input use, a degree of control over crop management decisions that might jeopardise repayment and can specify how cash advances are to be repaid. Also, contracts require delivery to the firm hence cash advances can be deducted from post-harvest cash settlements (Key & Runsten, 1999). Other loan protection devices include making future contracts depend on meeting repayment clauses in current contracts and making loans in the form of specialised agricultural inputs rather than cash. Finally, there may be no other local market for the contracted commodity than the agribusiness firm thus ensuring diversion of collateralised farm output cannot occur. These factors reduce the need for collateral and mean that agribusiness firms are likely to incur lower costs than moneylenders which can be passed on to smallholders through contracting. 3.2.3 Managing Risk.
Farmers in developed countries have three basic approaches to the management of risk. First, they can diversify over both on-farm and off-farm enterprises offsetting losses in one activity against gains from other activities. Second, they can smooth income over time by adjusting savings and borrowings to offset low and high income years. Third, they can us