The Economics of Agricultural Biotechnology Research.
Carl E. Pray and Anwar Naseem.
ESA Working Paper No. 03-07.
Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
Department of Agricultural, Food and Resource Economics Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, USA e-mail: pray@AESOP.RUTGERS.EDU.
This paper examines the economic determinants and impacts of agricultural research, particularly biotechnology research, with a view to understanding the potential of agricultural biotechnology to address the needs of the poor in developing countries. It surveys public and private agricultural research in developed and developing countries since the green revolution and discusses the public goods nature of much agricultural research. Unlike the research that launched the green revolution, agricultural biotechnology research is primarily being conducted by private firms in industrialized countries to address problems of temperate-zone commercial agriculture. These differences have important implications for the development and diffusion of new technologies to meet the needs of the poor. This paper was prepared as background material for the 2003 issue of The State of Food and Agriculture, which has the theme "Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the Poor?" Several companion papers are also available in the ESA Working Paper series.
Key Words: Agricultural Research, Technological Change, Economic Development,.
Biotechnology.
JEL: H41, O13, Q16.
* Content and errors are exclusively the responsibility of the authors and not the FAO or the authors' institution. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
1 INTRODUCTION Agricultural research and technological innovation can create dramatic gains in agricultural production and productivity while stimulating broader economic growth that can lift millions of people out of poverty. The role of agricultural research in increasing agricultural productivity and production is well documented. Cereal production more than doubled between 1961 and 2001 for the world as a whole and almost tripled for developing countries (FAOSTAT). Almost all of the increase in cereal production during the green revolution came through higher yields rather than area expansion. Agricultural research ­ which led to the adoption of high yielding crop varieties and complementary inputs ­ was the driving force behind these gains (Lipton 2001). Agricultural research also plays a critical role in breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and food insecurity. It does so in several ways but primarily through enabling poor farmers to increase their productivity and on-farm food production. Higher farm production ­ especially higher food staple production ­ in turn creates a ripple effect throughout the economy by lowering food prices for poor consumers, which raises real incomes not only for the urban poor but also for the food deficit farmers and rural labourers who constitute most of the poor in the developing world. Higher real incomes among the poor allow them to consume more and better food as well as a range of other goods and services ­ housing, education, healthcare ­ with immediate gains for their well-being and concomitant stimulus for non-farm growth (Lipton, 2001). Higher incomes empower the poor providing them with greater opportunities for collective action (Garrity, 2002). Finally, given that food staples are the main source of nutrients in the diets of the rural poor, agriculture research, by increasing output and incomes, improves their health through greater consumption. Numerous studies have shown that the economic returns to agricultural research investment tend to be very high. Despite these high rates of return, public investment in agricultural research slowed in most countries in the 1990s, with a few key exceptions in the developing world. In contrast with slowing public sector agricultural research, private sector investment has grown rapidly, especially in Europe and North America. Rapid advances in basic biology, driven by billions of dollars of medical and agricultural research, have led to the research tools that we call biotechnology. These tools allow scientists to develop crop and animal technologies that would not have been possible through conventional methods, and they can also greatly increase the productivity of plant breeding, pest management, veterinary science and animal husbandry research. The promise of biotechnology has led some governments in both the industrialized and developing countries to view biotech as the next major engine of economic growth. This has led to major government investments in basic biology research, medical biotech research, and agricultural biotech research in the United States, Europe, China, India, Brazil, South Africa, and elsewhere. But the governments of some developing countries are questioning whether agricultural biotechnology is a good investment, given the high costs of research and regulation, concerns about patents and the roles of multinational corporations, and the escalating debate about food safety and environmental impacts. This paper examines the basic economics of agricultural research: Why do governments invest taxpayers' money in research? Why do private firms invest in research? What are the economic payoffs from agricultural research? We then look at the current patterns of public and private agricultural biotechnology research and ask whether they are consistent with what.
these economic models would lead us to expect. Since the major advances in biotechnology, which are actually in use by farmers, are primarily in the plant area and because of the dominant role of plant agriculture as a source of food and employment for the poor, this chapter focuses on plant biotechnology. A companion paper (Pray and Naseem, 2003) considers the emergence of a few large companies as the leaders in the commercialization of biotechnology and a number of concerns about who really benefits from biotech research. 2 THE ECONOMICS OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH The role of research as an engine of growth for the agricultural sector and the economy as a whole is now widely accepted by economists and a growing number of policy makers. How does this work? Simply put, research generates new technology that allows farmers to reduce their costs of production. Farmers adopt new technology if it increases their profits or welfare. As more farmers adopt the technology they start to push down prices of the product, and the benefits of lower prices are passed along to consumers. The industrial sector grows because there is more demand from the rural sector for agricultural inputs and consumer products. Industrial costs are held down because food is less expensive and labour is released from food production and moves into the industrial sector. This process can have profound benefits for the poor:.
The effect of agricultural research on improving the purchasing power of the poor-- both by raising their incomes and by lowering the prices of staple food products--is probably the major source of nutritional gains associated with agricultural research. Only the poor go hungry. Because a relatively high proportion of any income gains made by the poor is spent on food, the income effects of research-induced supply shifts can have major nutritional implications, particularly if those shifts result from technologies aimed at the poorest producers (Alston et al. 1995:85).
If this story is a good model of the role of research, governments should be investing a lot of money in research and creating incentives for private firms to do the same. But agricultural research is an expensive, time consuming and risky investment. It requires scientists, labs, chemicals, electricity, experimental fields, and agricultural inputs. It takes time and patience to identify what farmers and consumers need, to develop the appropriate technology and to test the new technology to make sure it is effective, safe, and marketable. Private firms invest in agricultural research and offer new technology to farmers in the hope of making money, while governments invest in research to improve the welfare of farmers and other citizens. For private firms, research must promise to be profitable, while politicians need results that yield substantial and obvious social benefits while they are still around to claim the political credit. 2.1 Public Research.
The basic justification for government expenditure on agricultural research is that in the absence of public intervention, private firms will under invest in research when the output of that research has the characteristics of a public good:.
New information or knowledge resulting from research is typically endowed with the attributes of a public good characterized by nonrivalness or jointness in supply and use and nonexcludability or external economies. The first attribute implies that the good is equally available to all. The second implies that it is impossible for private producers to appropriate through market pricing the full social benefits arising directly from the production (and consumption) of the good ­ it is difficult to exclude from the use of the good those who do not pay for it. A socially optimal level of supply of such a good cannot be expected if its supply is left to private firms.
Because present institutional arrangements are such that much information resulting from basic research is nonexcludable, it has been necessary to establish nonprofit institutions to advance basic scientific knowledge (Ruttan 2001).
Much of the output of biotech research has one or both of these characteristics. For example, the knowledge about the structure of the rice genome can be used by any scientist without reducing the amount of knowledge available to other scientists, and once that knowledge is published in an academic journal or on the web, it is difficult to exclude other people from using it. The development of a new rice variety through marker aided selection or genetic engineering, in contrast, is not a pure public good although it retains some public good elements. The genetic characteristics of the new variety are embodied in a seed that can be used up and is thus not available to all, and it is sometimes possible to exclude people from using the seed. However, farmers may be able to harvest the seed of the new rice variety and save it for planting the following year. Other seed companies may also reproduce the seed and sell it in competition with the inventor of the variety unless it is effectively protected by some type of legal intellectual property rights. Because it is difficult to exclude farmers and other seed companies from reproducing the seed, the inventor cannot charge prices that will capture all of the economic benefits that arise from the new technology, therefore much of the benefit from research is captured by farmers and rival companies. The inventor may not be able to charge enough for the seed to make the research profitable, and therefore will invest far less than is socially optimal in biotech research to develop improved plant varieties. Because research to develop new rice varieties has some of the characteristics of a public good ­ it is difficult to exclude unauthorized use ­ the private sector will greatly under invest in research and there is a need for public investment in research.
2.1.1 Social Returns to Public Research.
Public investment in research is not justified simply because there are social benefits; many public investments will have social benefits, but research is only justified if the social rate of return is higher than for other ways in which the money might be used. The benefits to society from research are primarily measured as the reduction in the costs of agricultural production due to technology that improves productivity and saves inputs. The annual benefits can be calculated by estimating how much the supply of the product shifts outward due to the new technology and then measuring the gains that accrue to consumers, producers and society. In technical terms these gains are known as consumer surplus, producer surplus and net social welfare. The benefits from research can also be calculated from econometric estimates of the impact of research on agricultural productivity, agricultural costs, or agricultural profits. The benefits are then compared to the cost of research to calculate an internal rate of return to public investments in research. Agricultural economists have conducted a large number of studies to measure the costs and benefits of government investments in agricultural research. These studies clearly illustrate that public investments in research are a very good government investment. Several recent studies have reviewed the available information accumulated and analyzed the data from 375 studies that have calculated the social rates of return to investments in agricultural research. Although these studies were carried out using a variety of different methods, they showed considerable consistency (Evenson 2001; Alston et al., 2000). As Table 1 shows, the average rate of return to investments in research calculated using the consumer and producer surplus evaluation methods was about 40 percent while the studies using econometric methods had a average return of about 50 percent. Considering that private companies and governments.
usually can obtain credit at interest rates below 10 percent and the rates of return on other types of government investments are considerably lower than 40 percent, these rates of return to research are very high and suggest that there is considerable underinvestment in agricultural research in both the industrialized and developing world. Recent studies of the returns to investment in research by the International Agricultural Research Centres (IARCs) of the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) find that these investments contributed directly to agricultural productivity through the provision of improved germplasm for use by farmers or as parent stock for commercial varieties (Evenson 2001). The international crop research centres achieved very high rates of return to research (115 percent in Asia, 68 percent in Africa, and 38 percent in Latin America) which is considerably more than the average returns to investments by the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) in Asia and Africa. Although some economists are sceptical of these high levels of returns, they still conclude that public sector research was a very good investment (Alston et al., 2000). These economists have also found that the investments in IARCs are beneficial not only to developing countries but that some benefits spill over to farmers and consumers in industrialized countries as well (Pardey et al., 1996).
2.1.2 Determinants of public research expenditure.
Policy makers who determine the level of public investment in agricultural research respond to many of the same forces that influence the amount and direction of private research (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985). Public agricultural research increases when there are discoveries in basic science that increase the ease or reduce the costs of developing useful technological innovations. In private sector research models this is referred to as an increase in technological opportunity. The green revolution was made possible by the discovery of dwarfing genes in rice and wheat. These discoveries created the opportunity for plant breeders around the world to develop new varieties that would produce more grain in response to higher doses of fertilizer and good water conditions. These technological opportunities led to major increases in public sector plant breeding research around the world. Likewise, the tools of biotechnology have created a major shift outward in the innovation possibility frontier for plant breeding research and some governments have again responded by increasing their investments in research. It has also been shown that changes in the demand for technology by farmers and consumers induces research to develop a particular type of technology (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985). For example, in Asia, population growth pushing against limited land increased land prices. This led farmers to demand and government scientists to develop technology in the form of high yielding varieties that allowed farmers to substitute biological technology and inexpensive fertilizer for land. Private firms did not attempt research to fulfil this demand because they could not make profit selling new rice varieties to pay for the research. Public scientists in Japan did attempt this research because consumers in Japan put pressure on the Japanese government to provide cheaper food and Japanese farmers had run out of land for expansion. The government put money into research that eventually delivered fertilizer responsive rice varieties. In the case of biotechnology some of the key factors driving research have been the demand for ways to protect plants against pests and disease for which no genetic resistance seemed to exist; for more efficient and labour saving ways of controlling pests; for ways to reduce the cost of pesticide use, and methods to improve the quality fruits, vegetables and edible oils.
2.1.3 Levels and Trends in Public Research Expenditure.
Worldwide public sector agricultural research expenditure almost doubled between 1976 and 1995 increasing from $12 billion to $22 billion (Table 2). Most of this growth came in the developing countries, which now accounts for about half of the public research worldwide. Growth in public research virtually ceased after 1990 in developed countries, and slowed down in most developing countries. Latin America and China were the exceptions, with public research investment accelerating in the 1990s. Public agricultural research expenditures in Africa grew much more slowly than in other developing country regions throughout the period 1976-95 and actually shrank after 1990. The IARCs have been hit hard in recent years by waning donor interest in agricultural research. Figure 1a shows the growth and decline of funding for the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) centres for agricultural research. Some of the traditional crop centres such as the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), which have been some of the most productive in terms of the benefits of their technologies to farmers and consumers, have been particularly hard hit with their funding being cut almost 50 percent since 1991 (Figure 1b).
2.1.4 Chronic Underinvestment in Public Research in Developing Countries.
In some countries such as China, Brazil, and South Africa, the biotech revolution has created new opportunities for technological innovation in agriculture and stimulated new growth in public spending on research (Table 2). The very high rates of return to public research discussed above suggest, however, that there is a serious problem of underinvestment in public agricultural research, including biotechnology. The stagnant or slow growth rates for agricultural research in Africa ­ where research is most desperately needed ­ and the declining funding of the CGIAR are particularly worrying. Even in Latin America, which has seen some growth in public research in the 1990s, a recent assessment of the Latin American public agricultural system described the situation as one of chronic underinvestment (Trigo et al., 2002). The aggregate data conceals the very high concentration of investments in a small number of countries. In Latin America, Brazil and Argentina account for almost 75 percent of total investments; and, if Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela are included, the figure grows to over 85 percent. On average, over 85 percent of the budgets go to researchers' salaries and makes it difficult to undertake an effective research program. The public research in much of Africa is of particular concern. In many countries public research is almost non-existent, and sub-Saharan Africa as a whole is the one place where public research is declining. Only Kenya and South Africa have major research establishments which spend more than $100 million annually, have substantial research capacity and are making substantial investments. Nigeria is making investments but is starting from scratch. Only five or six universities in sub-Saharan Africa have sufficient biotech research capacity to be in a Rockefeller Foundation's African research network (Thomson, 2002). Another indicator of underinvestment in public research is research intensity: the ratio of research expenditure to the size of agricultural GDP (Table 3). The size of a country's agricultural GDP is an indicator of the importance of agricultural in its economy and hence of the potential economic benefits it could reap from successful investment in research. It is also.
an indicator of a country's ability to pay for research. Typically wealthier countries invest a higher proportion of their agricultural GDP on research than poorer countries although they arguably need it less because of agriculture's relatively small size in their economies. Overall developing countries invest about 0.6 percent of their agricultural GDP on public research. Research intensities in Africa are similar to those in Latin America, at about 1 percent. Despite having much stronger growth in research expenditures, Asian public research intensities are much lower than Latin America and Africa. Developed countries have public research intensities of 2.6 percent. If you add on private sector research expenditure, which exceeds public research in industrialized countries, the advantage of the industrialized countries is even greater: about 5.2 percent for industrialized countries compared with 0.8 percent for developing countries. 2.2 Private Research.
Studies have shown that private firms cannot capture all of the benefits of their research through higher prices; rather farmers and consumers capture some of the benefits and thus there is a social gain to society as a whole from private research. Studies on rates of return to agricultural research, as in Table 1, show that the social return to private research is about 48 percent, which is similar to that for public research. This suggests that there is room for governments to improve social welfare with policy changes and investments that encourage private research. In this section we examine the determinants of private research and the level and trends of private agricultural research in developing countries.
2.2.1 Determinants of Private Research.
Returns to Research Private firms invest in agricultural research in the hope that it will increase their profits. If it does not, they will not continue to invest in research for very long. The profitability of agricultural R&D investments is determined by the costs and returns to the research activity, which are in turn influenced by several factors. The returns to private research improve in the presence of: · · · Sizable expected demand for the products of research, Favourable business environment that permits efficient operations, and Availability of exclusion mechanisms that enable firms to appropriate part the benefits from the new product or process.
Potential demand for inputs and consumer products developed through research, and thus market size, varies among regions depending on the size of the population, the purchasing power of the prospective buyers, local agro-climatic conditions, and sectoral and macroeconomic policies that influence input and output prices. Local agro-climatic conditions set the bounds on the type of technologies that could be adopted and thus shape the nature of local demand. For example, maize varieties are sensitive to changes in day length, moisture and pests, which makes local breeding necessary although the parent germplasm may be imported. Changes in the incentive environment affect the demand for research services and the speed at which countries can adopt new agricultural innovations. Macroeconomic and sectoral policies alter the relative profitability of agricultural activities that in turn affects the expected profitability of adopting different agricultural innovations, as well as the capacity of different segments of the farm community to acquire the new technologies. The effectiveness of.
agricultural support services delivery (public and private), in particular agricultural extension, and rural infrastructure (roads, markets, irrigation) will also have a major influence on the types and range of technologies introduced and the speed of adoption by farmers. Finally, bilateral and multilateral trade agreements reshape trading rules and influence market access and thus potential market size. Government policies that affect the local business environment directly influence the returns to private research. Government marketing of inputs reduces the market share of private firms, while licensing and investment regulations such as the reservation of some agribusiness activities (like seed sales for small firms in India) can limit private investment in R&D (Pray and Ramaswami, 2001). Appropriability is an important precondition for private for-profit participation in agricultural research. If firms can not capture (appropriate) some of the social benefits of their research, they can not make profits on their research investments and will stop investing. To capture some of the benefits from the innovation the innovating firm must be able to keep people who do not pay them royalties from using the innovation. The ability to do this is a function of the characteristics of the technology, the laws on intellectual property and their enforcement, the structure of the industry which is producing the technology and the industry that is using it. The legal means of protection against unauthorized use includes patents, plant breeder's rights, and trademarks (Table 4). They also control their use by keeping inventions or key parts of their inventions secret, which in some countries is protected by trade secrecy law. These legal means only give limited protection in developing countries as will be shown below. Inventors can protect their inventions by biological means such as putting new characteristics into hybrid cultivars or including other technical means to prevent copying (i.e. genetic use restriction techniques (GURTs)). These techniques increase the size of the market for the new cultivar because farmers can not reproduce the seed on their own farm and use it the next year. In the case of hybrids the seeds will grow but the crop will yield 15 to 20 percent less. This is usually sufficient incentive for farmers to purchase new seeds each year. In the case of GURTs, some of the proposed techniques (none are in commercial use) would produce sterile seed. This would mean that farmers could not reproduce the seed for replanting at all. Some variations of these techniques would allow the seed to be fertile so farmers could reproduce the seed, but the farmers' seed would not have the new patented technology such as insect resistance unless the seed was treated with a chemical. The type of GURT that leads to sterile seed has caused considerable controversy because poor farmers in developing countries tend to save much of their seed. The companies are accused of trying to exploit poor farmers by forcing them to purchase seed every year. The degree of appropriability achieved is a function of the strength of intellectual property laws, the degree to which government agencies can enforce the laws, other institutions such as biosafety regulations and the structure of industry that reduce the cost of enforcing IPRs, and the technical capacity of firms to protect their varieties through the use of hybrids or GURTs. Costs of research Private research investments are also determined by the potential costs of the agricultural research program and the associated risks (Pray and Echeverría, 1991). The cost of research is the combination of quantity and price of research inputs, the number of years that these inputs will have to be employed to develop a new technology, and the stock of knowledge in this area of science. Such costs decrease with the:.
Supply of research inputs, Available human capital for conducting research activity, Stock of existing knowledge and technology, and Presence of a favourable business environment.
The supply of research inputs and thus their price depends on the availability and accessibility of research tools and knowledge, many of which are produced by the public sector, both government institutes and universities, or international programs like the international institutes of the CGIAR. For example, improved populations of crop germplasm developed by public research programs may be used as parent material by private breeders to add desirable traits to new private varieties. The advances in biotechnology knowledge have led to a significant increase in private investment in agricultural research in the United States and Europe over the past two decades. This should reduce the marginal cost of applied agricultural research throughout the world. Foreign direct investment policies, because they influence incentives for foreign firms to import externally developed technologies into a host country, also affect the availability of research inputs. Foreign seed firms import foreign germplasm which local firms can eventually use in their breeding programs. Foreign chemical firms import new methods of conducting and managing research. The domestic supply and quality of human capital, a key input to the research activity, influences the level of research investments. In the Philippines, the availability and low cost of hiring local research personnel encouraged some multinational firms to transfer their research programs to teams of Filipino scientists (Pray, 1987). The domestic supply of skilled personnel is heavily dependent on the level and composition of public and private expenditures on education. Several aspects of the business environment affect research costs and the productivity of research costs. Industrial policy can influence the degree of market concentration, the intensity of competition, and the prices of research inputs and outputs. Various government incentive programs, such as government contracts for new products and processes, grants and concessional loans, technical information services, and tax incentives, reduce research costs. Indirectly, the development of capital markets makes it easier for firms to raise funds for research (e.g., venture capital). Bilateral and multilateral agreements also improve trade opportunities by facilitating access to intermediate technologies. Excessive product testing requirements and seed certification procedures can greatly increase the costs of commercializing research output. Regulations are essential to ensure that products developed using biotechnology are environmentally benign and safe for human consumption and to gain consumer acceptance, but they have greatly increased the cost of developing and releasing transgenic plant varieties. For example, seed companies have spent several million U.S. dollars over many years in India to bring Bt cotton varieties to market. This is more than the annual research budgets of most Indian seed companies. As a result, only the largest companies can afford to attempt to commercialize genetically modified crops.
2.2.2 Levels and Trends in Private Agricultural Research.
Levels and trends in private sector agricultural research present a different pattern than public research. In both developed and developing countries there has been rapid growth in private research but in developing countries private research started from a very small base and.
remains a small share of total research. Private research expenditure over time is available only for a limited number of countries. It is estimated that private firms spend about US$ 10.8 billion worldwide on research with $0.8 billion spent in the developing world (Pardey and Beintema, 2001). In the industrialized countries, however, investment in private research has grown twice as rapidly a