Armed Conflicts and Food Security.
Slobodanka B. Teodosijevi.
ESA Working Paper No. 03-11.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
ESA Working paper No. 03-11.
Agriculture and Economic Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization Italy e-mail: Slobodanka.teodosijevic@fao.org.
Despite the end of the Cold War conflicts are still very frequent and most of them occur in developing countries. However, the nature of conflicts has changed and the proportion of civilian fatalities has increased markedly. The causes and consequences of conflicts are often a complex mix of inter-linked economic, environmental, political, cultural and religious factors. The human, social and economic costs of armed conflict are massive. Thousands of men, women and children die each year as a direct and indirect consequence of war. About 25 million people were displaced by the end of 2001. GDP per-capita is estimated to decline by about 2.2 % per year during conflict, with sectors which have high transaction costs hit more severely. Although the agricultural sector is typically less affected than industry per-capita agricultural production falls by about 1.5 % per year in periods of conflict. Food production is usually reduced, and in some cases collapses, leading to hunger and starvation and forcing large numbers of people to migrate. Food aid buffers food-intake levels to some extent but calorie availability per-capita-per-day does fall by an average of about 7 percent as a result of conflict. Food itself frequently becomes a weapon during conflict. The destruction of rural infrastructure, the loss of livestock, deforestation, the widespread use of land-mines as well as the population movements lead to long-term food security problems, particularly when these factors interact with natural disasters. Subsistence farming, crop diversification, divestment and migration are some of the survival strategies that people resort to. Agricultural sector recovery depends on successful demobilization of soldiers, land de-mining and the reconstruction of rural infrastructure, in particular roads and irrigation.
Key Words: Conflict, Human and Economic Development, Food Security, Food Aid,.
Military Expenditure.
Floribert Ngaruko provided much initial input for this paper and Andre Croppenstedt commented extensively on an earlier draft and provided the material for box.
Their contributions are gratefully acknowledged. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Content and errors are exclusively the responsibility of the author.
Contents I. II. Introduction Causes and consequences of armed conflicts: An overview.
The causes of present-day armed conflict Does hunger cause war?.
Consequences of armed conflicts a. The human and social consequences b. Effect on economic development and government finances Effects of war on food security and hunger.
The use of hunger as a weapon a. Food war in the 1980s and 1990s b. A typology of attacks on food security during war.
Food security and hunger in war-prone countries: A long-run perspective a. Factors jeopardizing food production in the long-run b. Systematic effects of war on food security Survival strategies and hunger mitigating policies.
Survival strategies during war and famine a. Urban versus rural coping strategies during war b. Austerity and reduced consumption during famine c. Divestment survival strategies during famine.
Food aid through external interventions a. The role of food aid during conflict b. Food aid during reconstruction.
Reducing war-induced hunger through policy a. When does internal policy matter for war-related hunger mitigation? b. Mitigating the risk of war occurrence through policy c. The recovery of agriculture and the question of the peace dividend. Conclusion References Boxes Military expenditure Armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Consequences for farm animal resources The impact of conflict on agricultural and food production A look at the work of an NGO: KULIMA in Mozambique Tables 1 B 1.1 B 1.2 B 3.1 B 3.2 B 3.3 2 Number of armed conflicts by region: 1990-2001 The ten African countries with the highest military expenditure to GDP ration in 1992-2000 World and regional military expenditure estimates: 1992-2000 Level and growth of agriculture and food production indices before, during and after conflict Simulated food production indices for CONFLICT and PEACE The impact of conflict on the daily energy supply Countries were hunger has been used to weaken opponents Figures 1 Food production recovery in the aftermath of war.
V. VI. 1 2 3 4.
I. INTRODUCTION1.
During the forty-year period of the Cold War2 there were 120 wars involving many developing countries. Five of these involved more than one million casualties each, and a further six claimed more than 200,000 lives (de Soysa et al, 1999). Between 1950 and 1990, some fifteen million deaths were caused directly or indirectly by wars of all types - including international conflicts, civil war, and government violence against citizens (Steward and Fitzgerald, 2001). The end of the Cold War saw a transition towards peace in many areas in which conflict had been fuelled by East-West antagonism. But as this antagonism declined new wars broke out and in the period 1990-2001 there were 57 different major armed conflicts in 45 locations around the world (SIPRI, 2002). Most of these locations were in developing countries and more than half of the least developed countries3 have experienced major armed conflicts during the past twenty years (Fitzgerald, 2000). Most of these conflicts occurred in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. These post-Cold War conflicts were very different from those by proxy or the anti-colonial and national liberation struggles which had characterized developing countries' wars during the Cold War era. Tensions which had been suppressed by the superpowers' confrontation over several decades resurfaced, often exacerbated by ethnic and religious tensions, and by poverty. Civilian fatalities climbed from 5 percent of war-related deaths at the beginning of the century to more than 90 percent in the wars of the 1990s. Indeed, recent conflicts have tended to be much more violent, and have witnessed new weapons and patterns of conflict, including the indiscriminate use of land-mines and antipersonnel cluster bombs, as well as the proliferation of light weapons. As a result many of the victims have been civilians, mainly women and children, causing massive harm to the human development in these countries (UNDP, 1998). Conflicts destroy years of progress in building social structure, establishing functioning government institutions, fostering community-level solidarity and social cohesion and promoting economic development. Very often these conflicts are sustained through the pillage of natural resources, illicit trade, labor exploitation, land grabbing and mafia-style criminal activities. The conflicts in Liberia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Angola and Sierra Leone fall into this category (IFPRI, 2001).
In this paper a "major armed conflict" is defined as: the use of armed force between the military forces of two or more governments, or of one government and at least one organized armed group, resulting in the battle-related deaths of at least 1000 people in any single year and in which the incompatibility concerns control of government and/or territory. This definition is that used by SIPRI ( Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, http://www.sipri.org) 2 The Cold War began shortly after World War II and lasted until the early 1990s. This period of East-West global nuclear confrontation resulted in nearly half a century of war by proxy, with the two major powers supporting opposing groups in developing countries, with finance, arms and sometimes even manpower. 3 Using the UN classification.
Year 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Europe 0 1 3 5 4 3 1 0 1 2 1 1 Middle East 4 6 5 6 6 6 6 4 4 3 4 4.
Region Asia 13 11 12 10 10 11 10 9 9 9 9 9.
Africa 11 11 7 7 6 5 3 4 11 11 9 7.
Americas 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 3.
Source: SIPRI, 2002, table 1A.2.
Most frequently conflicts during this period have been internal conflicts over government (civil wars) and/or to a lesser degree, over territory, i.e. state formation (Mohammed, 1999). While some regions of the developing world registered a drop in conflicts in the 1990s the opposite was true for Africa. Most of the new conflicts between 1998 and 2001 took place in Africa and Asia (SIPRI, 2002). The line between internal and international wars is often blurry. Foreign countries often take a major role in a country's internal conflicts, as for example in Korea, Vietnam, and Mozambique. On the other hand internal conflicts often spill across into neighboring territory. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) involved no less than six foreign countries in 1997 - Angola, Burundi, Namibia, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe. Most of the problems underlying present internal wars pivot around four main factors: 1) Territory, and thus the process of state formation and nation building (Mohammed, 1999); 2) the rise or return of ethnic tensions and nationalism;5 3) socio-economic factors; 4) and the armament-conflict nexus (Jung, et al, 1999). Taken together, these characteristics explain why internal conflicts, being more prevalent among poor countries in recent years, tend to have different effects, often more disruptive for the economic and social system, than purely international conflicts. Between 1970 and 1995 eight of the 25 most important conflicts resulted in the death of more than 7 percent of their respective 1995 populations and created millions of internally displaced people and refugees (Steward et al, 2001). Many, probably, most of these people suffer serious food insecurity and armed conflicts have come to be one of the major dimensions of famine, hunger and malnutrition and vice versa. In modern international conflicts, hunger is generally collateral, in part due to the efforts of.
Reproduced with permission from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). Please contact SIPRI reprinting any SIPRI data used in this paper, (http://www.sipri.org ). 5 While some authors argue that ethnic hatred motivates the engagement in armed conflict, others support the view that ethnicity, and by extension, religious confessions and other cultural differences are politicized in order to mobilize larger groups in conflicts over distribution of resources.
the international community to institute drastic measures that prevent warfare from harming civilians. These instruments are not effective in civil wars. In such conflicts, hunger is often deliberately used, among other war crimes, as a weapon targeting not only combatants but also civilians (Messer, 1998). As a result, in 1994 people of at least 32 countries suffered malnutrition, poverty-related limitations in their access to food, and acute food shortages as a result of armed conflicts. Hunger is a particularly pernicious weapon since its effects continue to kill even when the conflict has ended. It is estimated that at least 10 countries faced persistent hunger in the aftermath of war or as a result of conflict-related sanctions by the mid-1990s (Messer, 1990). The purpose of this study is to provide a view of the relationship between armed conflicts and food security.
II. CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF ARMED CONFLICTS: AN OVERVIEW.
The causes of present-day armed conflicts Intrastate civil wars may be caused by complex inter-linkages between economic, environmental, social, political, cultural and religious factors. Civil wars may be rooted in greed as opposing interests for resource wealth, or ethnic hatreds that manifest themselves in terms of nationalism, separatism, or a fight for an ethnic identity (Collier, 2000 and Collier and Hoeffler, 1998 and 2000). The causes of civil wars can be divided into two categories, direct and indirect causes. The most direct causes of an armed conflict can be viewed as the events that spark hostilities between two (or more) parties. Though helpful to understand the start of civil wars, such direct causes provide limited explanation of the rationale for the conflict. For instance, the assassination of the democratically elected president Ndadaye, a Hutu, in 1993 would be considered as the direct cause of Burundi's current civil war. However, while the assassination marked the start of the civil war, the reasons for conflict lie in the greed and grievances underpinning the long history of ethnic confrontation in Burundi (Nkurunziza, 2002). The more fundamental, indirect causes create the economic, political, social and environmental conditions which lead to war. The lack of power sharing, centralization of political administration, coups d'états, corruption of the ruling regimes, failure to promulgate permanent constitutions, and a lack of respect for human rights and democratic rules are some political characteristics of this environment (Mohammed, 1999).
Box 1 Military Expenditure In general, the extent to which military expenditure (milex)6 can predict or explain the outbreak of armed conflict appears to be limited (Omitoogun, 2001). However, some authors argue that a direct causal linkage between milex and armed conflict does exist (Mohammed, 1999). Given the limited government budget, increases of milex will be met at the expense of other government services, particularly social spending, rural development and maintenance work. Low spending on these crucial sectors creates a feeling of frustration and can lead to conflict. It also aggravates crime and violence in the country and consequently leads to increases in security spending and a further reduction in social spending. Once conflict is underway the relationship between milex and conflict is very strong as a great amount of the state's resources are diverted to the war effort. Also, military expenditure (see tables B 1.1 and B 1.2) is a massive burden on a country's development. Milex affects economic growth and development directly and indirectly. In the short term the direct effects may be inflationary or lead to an increased capacity utilization in countries with no shortages of production inputs, foreign exchange rigidities, etc. The indirect effects of Milex work through investment and resource allocation decisions which typically will negatively impact on investment, human resource development and the balance of payment. Table B 1.1 The ten African countries with the highest military expenditure to GDP ratio in 1992-2000.
Year Countries Algeria Angola Botswana Burundi Djibouti Eritrea Ethiopia Morocco Rwanda Zimbabwe 1992 2.2 12.0 4.3 3.6 6.1 .. 2.7 4.3 4.4 3.7 1993 2.6 12.5 4.5 3.7 5.6 21.4 2.9 4.4 4.6 3.4 1994 3.1 19.8 3.9 3.9 5.4 13 2.4 4.9 3.4 3.3 1995 2.9 17.6 3.5 4.2 5.1 19.9 2.0 4.7 3.9 3.6 1996 3.1 19.5 2.9 5.8 4.2 22.8 1.9 4.0 5.3 3.2 1997 3.7 22.3 3.1 6.0 4.5 13.5 3.4 3.9 4.1 3.4 1998 4.0 11.4 3.9 6.5 4.4 29.0 5.1 3.7 4.4 2.6 1999 3.8 21.2 3.7 6.2 .. 22.9 9.4 4.1 4.6 3.4 2000 3.5 .. 3.7 5.4 .. .. .. 4.2 3.0 4.8.
Military expenditures, i.e. the cost of maintaining a military establishment in war and peace, are almost always regarded as an official secret. Data are difficult to obtain and, when available, are often unreliable due to deficient accounting systems and/or the deliberate manipulation of figures. According to Brzoska (1995) there is no authoritative source on worldwide statistics of Milex but rather a number of interested institutions providing data on military expenditure. SPRI provides some data on Milex and their definition is based mainly on that of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. For the SIPRI data and the NATO definitions see http://projects.sipri.org/milex/mex_sources.html. and http://www.nato.int/docu/pr/2001/p01-156e.htm.
Source: The SIPRI Military Expenditure database http://projects.sipri.org/milex/mex_data_index.html.
Military expenditure increased in all regions between 1998 and 2001, especially in Africa where such expenditure increased by over 31 percent in real terms between 1998 and 2001. This is the result of large increases in the military budgets of countries involved in wars and in those contiguous to conflict countries. During the same period, South Asian military expenditure, largely due to the India-Pakistan conflict in Kashmir, increased by 26 percent in real terms (SIPRI, 2002). Table B 1.2 World and regional military expenditure estimates: 1992-2001 (Figures are in US $ billion at constant 1998 prices and exchange rates. Figures in italics are in percentage terms.).
Note: Sub-regional totals are presented only when based on country data accounting for at least 90% of the subregional total. a For country coverage of the regions, see http://projects.sipri.se/milex/mex_regions.html. Some countries are excluded because of lack of consistent time-series data. Africa excludes Angola, Benin, Congo (Republic of), Congo (Democratic Republic of, DRC), Libya and Somalia; Asia excludes Afghanistan; Europe excludes Yugoslavia; and the Middle East excludes Iraq. World totals exclude all these countries. b Change over the period 1992-2000. Source: SIPRI, 2002.
Economic conditions are among the most crucial factors behind armed conflicts in developing countries. Sluggish economic growth, high levels of poverty, an unequal income distribution, lack of basic infrastructure and social services, wide regional differences, lack of access to agricultural land, and depletion of natural resources are the notable economic factors responsible for the emergence of civil wars.7 As regards environmental factors Homer-Dixon (1994) contends that degradation of renewable resources, especially soil erosion, deforestation and overuse of water supply, can also contribute to the likelihood of violent conflict. Changing environmental conditions lead to: a decrease in economic output; a change in agricultural production; population displacement, and; disruption of institutions and patterns of social behavior. These effects in turn lead to three types of conflict: frustration, group identity and structural conflicts. Food and economic insecurity and natural resource scarcities - real and perceived - can also be major sources of conflict. When politically dominant groups seize land and food resources, deny access to food to other culturally or economically marginalized groups, and cause hunger and scarcities, violence often flares. In Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Sudan, food crises resulting from drought and mismanagement of agriculture and relief and development aid led to rebellion and government collapse, followed by even greater food shortfalls in ensuing years of conflict. Denial of the right to food has been linked to uprisings and civil war in Central America and Mexico. Food insecurity is also integral to civil conflicts in Asia. Competition for resources has generated cycles of hunger and hopelessness that have bred violence in Sri Lanka as well as Rwanda (Messer et al, 1988). Countries heavily dependent on the import of primary commodities, such as fuel or food, are especially vulnerable to disruptions in international trade caused by conflicts. According to Collier (2000) the countries which have a substantial share of their GDP coming from the export of unprocessed commodities face a much higher likelihood of civil war than countries with more diversified economies. A country with a level of primary commodity dependence of 26% of GDP has a risk of conflict of 23%. The same country, but without primary commodity exports, would have a risk of conflict of 0.5%. Without exports of primary commodities such as gemstones and coffee, ordinary countries are much less likely to experience internal conflict. As the author argues, the rationale for this is that loot-able primary commodities incite to predatory policies on the part of the government, and to rebellion on the part of the opposition. Other factors of risk outlined in Collier (2000) include education, demography and growth. While the average country in Collier's study has 45 percent of its young males in secondary education, a country that has 10 percentage points more of its youths in school cuts its risk of conflict from 14 percent to around 10 percent. Each percentage point on the rate of population growth raises the risk of conflict by around 2.5 percentage points. As regards economic growth, each percentage point off the growth of per capita GDP is found to raise the risk of conflict by around one percentage point. The interaction between economic factors and geography and history are also found to impact significantly on the risk of war: the more the dispersion of the population over the national territory, the greater the difficulty for the government to control rebel groups, the greater the risk of war occurring (Collier, 2000). As regards history, it matters from at least two.
However, the lack of access to land is not a necessary condition for conflict to emerge, since policies aiming at the extraction of wealth from rural areas via biased taxation systems and lopsided pricing policies render unnecessary to dispossess land by force to acquire wealth emanating from it. See: Fairhead, J. (2000) and Duffield (1994. On the way illegitimate though legal public policies transfer forcibly assets from politically weak to strong individuals or groups, see Nafziger and Auvinen (2000) and Ngaruko and Nkurunziza (2000).
perspectives. First, if a country has recently had a civil war its risk of further war is much higher. Immediately after the end of hostilities, the risk of renewal of war amounts to 40 percent, and this risk falls by only one percentage point for each additional year of peace. Second, countries with large diasporas face higher risk of conflict. For a country that saw the end of civil war five years ago and which has a large Diaspora the risk of renewed conflict stands at 36 percent. However, for countries with a very small Diaspora the chances of conflict are only 6 percent. Diasporas often have a rather romanticized attachment to their country of origin and may nurse resentments towards the present dominant political power. They are typically much richer than the people in their country of origin and they can afford to finance their grievances. But most of all, they do not have to suffer any of the dramatic consequences of renewed conflict because they do not live in the country. Often they also have power of pressure for secession. For example, the (peaceful) secession of Slovakia from the then Czechoslovakia was initiated not in Czechoslovakia itself, but in the Czechoslovak Diaspora organizations in North America (Collier, 2000). Also the ethnic and religious composition of the country matters. If there is one dominant ethnic group constituting between 45 percent and 90 percent of the population, the risk of conflict doubles. As Collier (2000) argues, the rationale for this is that a share between 45 percent and 90 percent is enough to give control but is not enough to make discrimination against a minority pointless. However, while ethnic dominance is a problem, ethnic and religious diversity surprisingly makes the society rather safer. In fact, ethnic polarization is found to increase the risk of civil conflict in authoritarian and totalitarian political regimes, while political liberalization is found to be a higher priority than economic development, or economic liberalization, to reduce this risk (Elbadawi and Sambanis, 2001). Does hunger cause war? Though hunger is not explicitly included in the set of independent variables tested for their potential effect on civil war, some of its characteristics point to the weakness of its impact (Collier, and Hoeffler, 1998). In its extensive definition, an armed conflict is assumed to meet four conditions: (i) the conflict aims to overthrow the government or to secede from it; (ii) the government in power at the time of the breakout of hostilities is a primary actor either through direct repression or through direct engagement of rebel fighters; (iii) both sides of the conflict have the ability to inflict death upon each other, with the stronger forces sustaining more than 5 percent of the number of fatalities suffered by the weaker forces; (iv) military action takes place with more than 1,000 battle related deaths per annum. While condition (ii) might be easily met by most of armed conflicts referred to by the literature, it is unlikely for hungry people to undertake actions intended to overthrow the government, as the case of Iraq illustrates. The doctrine underlying the embargo imposed after the 1991 war rested on the assumption that it would help lead to the overthrow of the government responsible for the war. This embargo has led to a rise in chronic malnutrition but has not significantly increased the risk for the government to be overthrown. While hunger is unlikely to initiate war, it might prolong its duration. In many parts of Africa, the prospect of starvation may have been a non-negligible impediment to the demobilization and disarmament of fighters as measures to end armed conflicts. In Mozambique, for instance, hunger has led impoverished government soldiers to maintain a climate of violence, as they frequently undertook raids to appropriate relief food supplies. Once these soldiers had diverted substantial quantities of food aid, the raiding operations decreased notably (Keen and Wilson, 1994). Yet, hunger alleviation has also been suspected of prolonging war's duration. In 7.
1989, Operation Life Line was criticized as prolonging the war effort in Sudan by providing recognition and legitimacy to insurgents and giving everyone time for a respite that encouraged them to fight on (Messer, 1998).
Consequences of armed conflicts Accounting for the cost of war and its aftermath is an area that is still insufficiently studied. To a large extend this is due to the difficulty to collect data suitable for micro level analytic studies in war-torn areas (Mohammed, 1999). Below we consider: a) the human and social consequences, and b) the economic consequences. a. The human and social consequences The human costs of conflict are not only the result of direct violence - casualties from fighting between combatants, the undisciplined behaviour of troops, deliberate terrorising of civilians and the sowing of landmines - but also arise from hunger, forced migration and the collapse of public services stemming from the wider effects of prolonged conflict on the economic and administrative structure of the country as a whole. The indirect consequences of conflict - including deaths from hunger and disease - generally far outweigh the direct destruction and battle deaths (Steward and Fitzgerald, 2000). Estimates on conflict-driven internally displaced people in 48 countries suggest that at least 25 million people were displaced by the end of 2001 (Norwegian Refugee Council, 2002). This figure greatly outnumbers conventional refugees which, as of January 2001, were estimated at 12 million (UNHCR, 2001 and 2002). Afghans constitute the largest single refugee population in the world with an estimated 3.6 million people or 30 percent of the global refugee population. Civilians from Burundi are the second largest group with 568 thousand refugees living mainly in Tanzania. At the end of 2000, Asia hosted the largest refugee population (almost 45 percent), followed by Africa (30 percent) and Europe (19 percent). In at least 32 countries people suffered from malnutrition, poverty-related limitations in access to food, and acute food shortages as a result of armed conflict. At the same time, at least 10 more countries experienced persistent hunger in the aftermath of war, or as a result of conflictrelated sanctions (Messer, 1998). The human consequences of war are multidimensional. They include not only the death toll, but also disruptions to the health service infrastructure and human capital formation. In this regard, Sudan is a case in point (Mohammed, 1997). Apart from the 1.5 million deaths, about 325 thousand persons took refuge outside Sudan during the 1983-1993 episode of civil war. In addition, about 3 million were displaced internally between 1983-1990, and over one year, 1989, about 10,000 children were recruited as soldiers. The destruction of infrastructure included the destruction and closure of schools and hospitals. Immunization, preventive medicine and malaria eradication services stopped completely in the South, while malnutrition affected most of the children in the region. Conflicts take a heavy toll on the health of the affected population, with between a third and half of those affected suffering from mental distress. The most frequent diagnosis made is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), often along with depressive or anxiety disorders (WHO, 2001). For instance, it is reported that during the Sudanese civil war the number of cases of.
schizophrenia, depression and alcoholic addiction in many young people increased significantly (WHO, 2001). Sexual violence and abuse are commonly used to humiliate and degrade, instil terror, and promote social division. This phenomenon can also be found in Mozambique, Yugoslavia, and in other countries. Cairns (1997) estimates that some 80 thousand women and girls were raped in former Yugoslavia. Mass rape was practiced in Rwanda as well as in many other countries. b. Effect on economic development and government finances Armed conflicts directly reduce production in areas of combat and may cause it to stop altogether. Economic establishments are often direct targets of military attacks, which aim to reduce the opponent's economic capability and to paralyze its ability to finance the war. These attacks reach all economic sectors but its main effects are felt drastically in sectors with high transaction cost. The destruction of transportation networks leaves most of the industries ineffective. In addition, civil wars also reduce labor supply in affected areas.
Box 2 Armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Consequences for farm animal resources Until 1991 Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) - a small mountainous almost completely land locked Mediterranean country - was one of the six republics of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In December 1995 the Dayton Peace Accord ended the war among various ethnic groups which had erupted following the declaration of independence (March 1992). The country is divided into two entities: Federation of BiH (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS). The war destroyed much of the infrastructure and devastated the economy. It is estimated that 2.3 million people (out of a total population of 4.5 million) left their homes and 329 thousand were killed. In 2001 the total current GDP of BiH's was only US$ 4.8 billion, 45 percent of its 1990 level of US $ 10.6 billion. In per-capita terms it dropped from US $ 2,690 to 1,210. Industrial production dropped to only 10% of its pre-war level. Total war damages are estimated at around US$ 100 billion, of which direct damages to agriculture were over US $ 4.5 billion while the indirect costs have not been defined. De-mining of the land will cost more than US $ 7.5 billion. In 1991 in Bosnia and Herzegovina there were 853 thousand cattle, 1,317 thousand sheep, 617 thousand pigs, 95 thousand goats, 96 thousand horses and 6.7 million poultry. Small farmers kept the major part of animals, mainly in extensive production systems with an average of 2.28 cattle or 13 sheep per farm. Available estimates suggest that during the war the total number of farm animals halved. Between 1991 and 1995 the number of cattle, sheep, pigs, horses and poultry declined by 60, 75, 90, 65 and 68 percent respectively. In the Republika Srpska some 50 percent of cows and heifers were lost during the war. The animal production sector has also been affected by the reduction in the area cropped (55 percent in FBiH and 75 percent in RS). Data on animal performance have been lost. During the war a nucleus herd of the endangered local cattle, Busa, was destroyed together with relevant documentation. The breeding and 9.
conservation program for the Bosnian Mountain Horse