Linkages and Rural Non-Farm Employment Creation: Changing Challenges and Policies in Indonesia.
Stein Kristiansen.
ESA Working Paper No. 03-22.
December 2003.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
December 2003 Stein Kristiansen.
Department of Economics School of Management Agder University College, Norway e-mail: Stein.Kristiansen@hia.no.
Increasing problems of rural unemployment in Indonesia are at the core of this report. Numbers of unemployed increased dramatically after the 1997 economic crisis and millions of people searched to be reabsorbed in rural labour markets. Agricultural land is scarce, however, and entry barriers are often high in non-farm businesses. Access to capital and information is limited for the rural poor and uneducated people. During successful periods of economic growth in Indonesia, various linkages in factor and commodity markets were created. Any return to the state-dominated economy and substantial government interventions in markets is unrealistic, but linkages may nevertheless be manipulated for political ends like employment creation. Policy instruments may still be applicable for reducing market failures and to facilitate commercial transactions in an economy characterised by disintegration and sectoral and geographical disconnection. This paper aims to assess experiences from former linkage strategies for rural non-farm employment creation and to point at new policies suitable in various and changing economic, political and cultural contexts of Indonesia. A conclusion is that linkages and rural employment creation strategies should aim towards mobilising the variety of local natural and cultural resources and encourage horizontal communication and economic transactions between regions and peoples.
Key Words: unemployment, linkages, entry barriers, Indonesia JEL: O13; O18; Q18 Acknowledgements:.
This report is based on research funded by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and NORAD and based on an institutional collaboration with Gadjah Mada University in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. Writing of the report is rendered possible by a visiting scholar assignment with the ESAE service at FAO in Rome. The author would like to thank Anis Khairinnisa and the Centre for Population and Policy Studies at Gadjah Mada University for important contributions in the data collection and policy discussions. I am also indebted to the two referees for their valuable comments to draft versions of the publication. Finally, I would like to thank the ESA division of FAO and especially Kostas Stamoulis for giving me the opportunity for concentrated work in a stimulating milieu.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
List of content:.
Abstract Acknowledgements.
Introduction.
Indonesia from growth to crisis and social unrest.
The new context of free markets and regional autonomy.
Rural non-farm business.
Theories and strategies on linkages in rural development.
Experiences of linkage strategies in Indonesia.
Discussion: New policy instruments for changing contexts.
Conclusion References Appendix 1: Current Indonesian central government programmes for linkages and rural employment creation Appendix 2: List of abbreviations.
Introduction Problems of unemployment in Indonesia increased dramatically after the 1997 economic crisis. Millions of people searched to be reabsorbed in rural labour markets. Agricultural land is limited in the most populous parts of the country and non-farm rural employment has gained renewed importance and academic and political interest. Entry barriers are often high, however, and access to capital and information is limited for rural poor and uneducated people. Unemployment has triggered criminality, violence and social conflicts, which again contribute to increase transaction costs in rural businesses. The central government has lost much power and credibility, and older policy instruments are not pertinent in the new environment of free markets and regional autonomy. Recently, increasing awareness is raised towards market failures and the limited success of economic liberalisation in lagging areas of poor countries. Economic actors do not behave the way they are expected to, poor people get poorer and social and regional differences increase. From various parts of the developing world we see that especially the rural population show weak supply responses to allegedly favourable market incentives. Deregulation policies tend to increase levels of inequality in society and poverty of smallholders in poor areas (Reardon and Barrett 2000, Obare et al. 2003). In Latin America, rural poverty is found to affect more people in many countries and to be considerably deeper than urban poverty (de Janvry and Sadoulet 2000). Sahn and Stifel (2003) reported from Africa that development results are particularly sobering for rural areas, where living standards are universally lower, and where rates of progress lag behind urban areas. Similar findings are also made in Asia (Warr 2000). During successful periods of economic growth in Indonesia, various linkages in factor and commodity markets were created by subsidies, price manipulations and enforced contracts. Any return to the state-dominated economy and substantial government interventions in markets is unrealistic, but linkages may nevertheless be manipulated for political ends like employment creation. Policy instruments may still be applicable for reducing market failures and to facilitate commercial transactions in an economy characterised by disintegration and sectoral and geographical disconnection. Commercialisation and liberalisation normally mean withdrawal of labour from the agricultural sector (Pingali and Rosegrant 1995), and labour surplus from rural areas should ideally form a growth input in the formation of modern manufacturing and service industries (Mellor 1995). The continuous economic crisis and growing population challenge these assumptions in the present Indonesian context. An abundance of millions of labourers in rural areas need assistance to find employment and make an income. Given the steady long-term decline in raw agricultural commodity prices, it is also not to wonder why researchers increasingly advocate stimulating rural value-added in agribusiness and other non-farm economic activities for livelihood security and improved living standards (Reardon and Barrett 2000, Ellis 2000). Most use of the linkage term in economic development discussion is related to some sort of government intervention to facilitate or strengthen commercial transactions between firms, sectors or geographical areas. This paper aims to discuss experiences from former linkage strategies for rural non-farm employment creation and to point at new policies suitable in various and changing economic, political and cultural contexts of Indonesia. The report is mainly based on literature surveys but information is also gathered from interviews in Indonesia with government officers at central, provincial and district levels. A number of.
3 fieldwork sessions have also contributed to an understanding of the growing problems of rural unemployment and measures that could be taken. The analysis is the result of research conducted by the author on small-scale rural enterprise development for several years. Recent research by the author also includes impacts of political-administrative changes and regional autonomy on the supply of public services like education, health and security. All recent research in Indonesia falls under the institutional collaboration agreement between Agder University College and Gadjah Mada University, which has been funded by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and NORAD since 1999. The writing of this report is rendered possible by a visiting scholar assignment with FAO's Agricultural and Development Economics Division in Rome, March-May 2003. The paper is organised as follows. This introduction is followed by a presentation of the backdrop of Indonesian economic growth, crisis and social unrest. The third section is a discussion of the present free market policy and the ongoing process of decentralisation and regional autonomy. The aim of these two sections is to create an understanding of the macro economic and political context for change in the country. Section four presents an overview of rural non-farm businesses in developing economies and challenges of high transaction costs and entry barriers, among others. Empirical findings are collected from Asia, Africa and Latin America, but a focus is set on the role of small-scale enterprises in rural areas of Indonesia. A more thorough discussion of linkage strategies follows in section five. This is mainly a theoretical discussion, starting with an overview of the importance of the growth linkage model in post-war development planning and continuing with efforts to clarify various meanings of the linkage concept. Section six offers an outline of previous experiences from Indonesian central government policies for linkages and rural employment creation. A large number of programmes have been initiated and carried out by various ministries, often with support from foreign donors. A total overview is difficult to gain, not least because borders between programmes are unclear, programmes change names when they loose recognition, and the ministries do not keep records of all programmes in all provinces. A selection is made based on relevance of the programmes and availability of literature and assessments. From lessons learned, we turn to a discussion of possible new policy instruments, realising that both the state and the markets have failures. An overview is presented of current programmes that fall under the responsibility of three ministries. They all aim for rural non-farm employment creation and they are not very different from earlier policy portfolios under the same ministries. New policy instruments are proposed, focusing on social networks and social capital formation. Improved general education and information flows are at the core of our proposed policies. Finally, a concluding section also presents some prospects for further research.
Indonesia from growth to crisis and social unrest The present problems of rural unemployment and social dissatisfaction in Indonesia can not be understood without some historical perspectives on an amazing previous economic development process. The country saw a steady and remarkably high rate of economic growth after Suharto took power and the era of the New Order was initiated in 1965. Growth in income per capita averaged 4.5% per annum between 1965 and 1990. In the oil boom years of 1974-1981 the GDP growth reached an average annual rate of 7.7% (Hill 1996a). Manufacturing industry expansion reached peaks between 1968 and 1977, in a period of protection and extensive state regulations. Agricultural growth has been slower but the sector played a leading role in providing employment to the increasing and poorly educated labour.
4 power. The country also managed to became self-sufficient in rice in the mid 1980s, and farm exports of commodities like spices, cocoa, coffee and palm oil expanded rapidly. Hill (1996a) explains agricultural growth by two main sets of factors. Firstly, a strong government commitment, for instance by large input subsidies and infrastructure development was of crucial importance. Secondly, a favourable external environments, and specifically technological advances in rice production, has pushed out production frontiers. The intensity of government intervention in the economy in general reached its peak in the early 1980s. According to Hill (1992), these policies for many years after obstructed the development of an efficient and outward-looking manufacturing sector. However, mostly large-scale and urban-based enterprises were favoured by government interventions and import substitution policies. The ascendancy of the conglomerates in many sectors allowed for little participation and substantial competitive disadvantages for rural and small-scale competitors (Mubyarto 1996). The `technologists' played an important role in economic policy making, especially after the increasing oil incomes from 1974. The schools of economic nationalists and interventionists (Mackie and MackIntyre 1994) are characterised by a reservation about the free market ideology, distrust in foreign capital, and a belief in the infant industry argument, supporting and protecting emerging domestic industries. In the mid-1980s, the economic policy pendulum started to move in the direction of the economic liberals, the `technocrats'. The reduction of oil export income induced limited economic growth and rapidly rising current account deficits. According to Hill (1994), the economic liberalisation really started in 1987 with continued fiscal austerity, effective exchange rate management and decisive microeconomic reforms. Policy changes included a shift from tightly-protected to marketbased agricultural and industrial development. The selected adjustment package in the 1980s was successful in restoring equilibrium, and income distribution in the country was improved according to official statistics (Thorbecke 1991). Exchange rate adjustment had a significant impact on exports, especially from the manufacturing sector, while food imports actually rose through the deregulation period. Fertiliser subsidies were large through the 1980s, and Rosegrant et al. (1998) argued that an alternative reinvestment of fiscal savings from fertiliser subsidies in research, extension and irrigation would produce large benefits for agricultural production. Subsidies to the agricultural sector were in general gradually reduced, actually almost halved until the early 1990s (Tambunan 1998). Import duties and taxes on export were also cut down on most agricultural commodities. It is generally agreed that policy adjustments were consistent from a macroeconomic management point of view (Usui 1996). Through the 1990s, Indonesia went through most of the steps and procedures normally prescribed in a structural reform package: prices being determined by markets, privatisation, reduced government spending, and institutional reforms. The government generally maintained macroeconomic stability, got prices right, provided public goods and left growth to the private sector (Rock 1999). However, reforms focused on the financial sector while resistance was stiff to real sector reform by the inner circle of the political and economic elite. Through the 1990s, new monopolies were granted to the Suharto family members and their cronies. Examples are found in car imports, toll roads, and numerous other ventures, accompanying previously established monopolies in cloves, transport and other sectors. As stated by one observer: `Indeed, after 1993, there was a near reversal of the liberalization', and that was due to the widespread nepotism and expansion of oligopoly power (Cassing 2000: 165).
6 than 1.000 small farm households outside of Java, Sunderlin et al. (2001) concluded that most farmers perceived themselves as worse off after the crisis and that there is a great need for alternative employment and income generation. The share of agriculture in total employment remains high, around 45% (BPS 2003). In spite of a steady growth in agricultural value-added, Tambunan (1998) argued that the sector has been curbed due to under-investment and lack of technological development. In spite of rapid urbanisation, 65% of Indonesian households still live in what is classified as rural areas, while only 46% of them get their sole income from agriculture (Booth 2002). Especially in the period from 1990 to 1998, rural small-scale industries were in many ways disfavoured compared to the large-scale businesses. The value of credits available through different microcredit schemes was reduced, while interest rates increased through the deregulation policy period. High transaction costs is one reason for interest rates well above 40% in the mid1990s, while larger companies in the formal sector of the economy had access to credits at international rates and even far below. The large-scale enterprises also had superior access to information, raw materials, technology and markets, thereby avoiding the creation of `a level playing field' in domestic competition. The economic crisis and increased rates of unemployment spurred criminality, violence and social unrest in society. Vertical violence and human rights violations continue, especially in the troubled provinces of Aceh and Papua, while an increase in horizontal violence may be regarded even more alarming. Theft and destruction of common people's property, and ordinary people being threatened, tortured and executed by their peers have become common phenomena in urban and rural areas all over the country. Especially problems of violent youth groups have escalated (Kristiansen 2003a), following unemployment and broken expectations. Religion in some cases is used to legitimise violence and fighting between groups, villages and regions. A weakening of Indonesian state institutions, like the police and the judiciary, creates a condition conducive to the rise of social conflicts and violent actions. Problems of unemployment need to be regarded and addressed also from this social perspective.
The new context of free markets, democracy and regional autonomy Indonesia's economy remains hobbled by the effects of the 1997-98 recessions, and dependency on international donors and lending agencies has amplified. In exchange for huge financial bale-out packages, Indonesia has repeated its pledges to continue the development towards macro-economic stability, global free markets and liberal democracy. The crisis triggered broad economic, legal and administrative reforms. Major political changes followed President Suharto's resignation in May 1998, and a strong spirit of democracy facilitated a successful general election in June 1999. On the economic policy arena, the crisis led to a further strengthening of market liberalisation. The government is forced to save, and thereby to resist the earlier efforts to protect non-competitive industries and monopolies. The official policy tells there should be a fair process of entry and exit in business, stated to be critical to economic recovery and industrial growth (BAPPENAS 1999). On the output side, the sectors leading in the economic recovery process seem to be consumer-related industries and industries with high local value-added and export potentials, e.g. agriculture, fisheries and mining. International competitiveness has generally been improved by the exchange rate adjustments.
7 In the commodity markets, tariffs are gradually reduced, following agreements with the WTO, and more specifically with the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) since 1992. The goal is to reach a complete free trade zone within the six original ASEAN countries and AFTA signatories in 2003 (by 2006 for Vietnam, 2008 for Laos and Myanmar and 2010 for Cambodia). Approximately 90% of traded items now keep tariffs between 0 and 5% for the ASEAN area. Among the countries with which Indonesia might soon choose to build bilateral free trade relations, is low-cost China. Generally, the continued trade liberalisation increases competition and the need for adjustments and information flows, creating great challenges not least for labour-intensive small-scale and cottage industries in rural areas of Indonesia. Fear of free trade is strongly expressed and business people and politicians are worried that free competition will force increasing numbers of companies out of business. A new wave of economic nationalism may emerge and a formal break with the IMF seems to be impending. The pendulum might be swinging away from global market liberalism, but should, according to laws of dialectics rather than gravity, turn in a different direction than nationalistic and interventionist import substitution policies. It is generally recognised that a sustainable national development needs entrepreneurs, also in rural areas, who are creative, innovative, and ready to take calculated risks based on competence and information. There is an alarming level of information asymmetry between economic actors, however, and the government warns against the related moral hazards (BAPPENAS 1999: 75). The government emphasises market friendly policies that foster healthy competition, while official policy statements also underline the role of continued human resource development and the strengthening of institutions that can improve flows of information and knowledge. The fall of Suharto and the political reforms following the open, general election in 1999 created a more open society. Information is in circulation, there is freedom of expression, and the media has developed a remarkably open and critical attitude. There is still a strong commitment to the process of democratic reforms. This was clearly evidenced by the general election of 1999 and the mobilising of multiparty competition for political power. The process of democratisation is at risk, however, especially by the ongoing economic hardship and the widespread sectarian and social violence. Strong centrifugal tensions have for long challenged unity and territorial integrity in the extreme heterogeneity of the Indonesian population. During the Suharto presidency, issues relating to SARA (Suku (ethnicity), Agama (religion), Ras (race), and Antar Golongan (class)) were banned from open discussions, while today each of them represents problems that have to be faced in a transparent society with political competition. The combined process of weakening the military's political power, working toward democratic governance, and decentralising the state administrative structure is certainly a difficult task. Two new laws, Law 22/1999 on political and administrative decentralisation and Law 25/1999 on fiscal decentralisation, were implemented from January 2001. This started a giant political and administrative reform leading to a high degree of regional autonomy. Great political power and economic responsibility were placed on the third level of the previous centralised six-layer administrative system, on the districts (kacamatan (rural) and kota (urban)). Some say that the impact of the `Big Bang' approach to decentralisation is a loss of government control of economic spending and political development (Indrawati 2002). Others regard the reform towards federalism as a golden opportunity for diversity to be maintained and the only way `to avert the growing threat of national disintegration' (EIU 2000).
8 There are currently 30 provinces and 420 districts in the administrative system. The districts will now remain with a substantial share of incomes from natural resource extraction, in addition to transfer of a quarter of central-government revenues. The districts' share of total government expenditure has more than tripled over the last two years. The districts are given the responsibility for all government matters except in five areas, which are foreign affairs, defence and security, justice, monetary and fiscal affairs, and religion. In other words, areas like agriculture, education, health, public works, transport, industry and trade, investment and environment are now under district authority. Decentralisation of government also means decentralisation of corruption. Bribery and collusion are transferred to regional government officials, supported by local politicians seeking to gain as much as possible while in position (Jakarta Post 8.4.2003). Decentralised services can be more efficient if better adjusted to the specific needs of people in the localities they are offered. Welfare could be enhanced because residents in different jurisdictions could choose the mix of public activities that best matches their preferences (Smoke 2002). However, the districts face enormous challenges in the improvement of institutions and human resources, while they are mostly inexperienced in self-governing and confronted with the lack of guidelines and operational procedures from the central government. The reform comes with the threat of increased regional differences and related geographical and social tensions. District revenues per capita varied from 45,000 rupiah to 8 million rupiah in 2002.1 Poor regions will hardly be able to meet basic requirements to human resource development, like supply of elementary health and education services. The reform also implies more local responsibility for income generation, a potential threat to both businesses and natural environments. Lessons from decentralisation of political and administrative power in other poor countries tell that local authorities, in their eagerness to improve the financial situation, have hindered potential entrepreneurship to unfold by increased taxes and fees (Havnevik et al. 2003: 35).
Rural non-farm business Based on Barrett, Reardon and Webb (2001), Lanjouw and Lanjouw (2000) and Haggblade et al. (1989), we define rural non-farm businesses as all income-generating activities except crop and livestock production and fishing and hunting, located in areas that are mainly servicing agricultural activities. It is not in any sense a homogeneous sector. Rural areas may include villages and smaller towns, without a specific population limit. Rural non-farm businesses are typically small-scale (less than 50 employees) and often operate in the informal sector of the economy. They can often be categorised as `cottage industries' with only a few employees, performed in simple premises with limited capital input. Typical sectors comprise agribusiness, carpentry, tailoring, basket and mat making, and pottery, while also service sectors like transport, hairdressing, healing and `secretarial service' are included. Agribusiness is of special importance as regards rural non-farm business and linkage creation. It comprises all operations involved in the manufacture and distribution of farm supplies, production activities on the farm, and the storage, processing and distribution of farm commodities and the items made from them. Kariala (2000) points to the potential increased role of agribusiness development in Indonesia, due to its preferably rural location and its high multiplier effects through farming activities, input delivery, post-harvest and processing businesses, marketing and infrastructure development.
Figures calculated from data from the Ministry of Finance and Badan Pusat Statistik (Central Bureau of Statistics). 8.
The rural non-farm sector is often regarded as low-productivity, making low quality goods and expected to wither away as a country develops (Lanjouw and Lanjouw 2000). Cottage industries in rural areas of Indonesia can easily be distinguished from urban, modern manufacturing or service industries, not only by scale but also by a series of other variables. Capital to labour ratio is lower, technological flexibility is higher and so also is the ability to absorb labour if salaries are low. Salaries are normally low in the sector, reflecting low productivity (Kristiansen 1999). Products are not necessarily of low quality, but often fit for local markets based on traditional tastes and preferences and low purchasing power. Capital investments are normally low and founded on private savings, and we often find the company owners and entrepreneurs to be as much concerned with neighbourhood harmony and traditions as with profit maximisation. The business owners are mostly without higher education. Competence and skills in professional management, marketing and accounting are normally non-existent or at a very basic level. The small-scale entrepreneurs also normally have limited access to information on markets, new technology and development trends in product design and consumer preferences at the national and international levels. Innovative capacity is thereby limited (Kristiansen 2003b). Ananda (1998) found that most non-farm enterprises in the study area in Kalimantan, Indonesia, are family owned and managed and characterised by conservative attitudes, low education, and risk aversion. The strategy of the enterprises is often one of survival, not growth. Innovative behaviour consists mainly in imitating foreign technology and successful pioneers. Typical rural activities in general also have low social status, and educated entrepreneurs and labour power tend to search for alternative activities and locations. Recent years have seen increased awareness of the role of the rural non-farm sector in economic development, employment creation, poverty reduction, and in maintaining cultural and social values. Various economic reasons can be found in studies of rural areas why individual households should diversify stakes and incomes on non-farm businesses: seasonal variations, diminishing returns to productive assets, missing or incomplete agricultural markets, `economies of scope', and risk reduction. Economies of scope, contrasting economies of scale, exist when the same inputs generate greater per-unit profits when spread across multiple outputs than dedicated to any one output. Ellis (2000) concluded that under the precarious conditions that characterise rural survival in many low income countries, diversification has positive attributes for livelihood security and is increasingly important. Reardon et al. (2001) found that rural non-farm incomes average 40% of rural incomes in Latin American countries, and Reardon (1997) summarised studies indicating comparable shares in countries in Sub-Saharan Africa between 15% and 93%. According to Davis et al. (2002), non-farm income currently contribute 42%, 40% and 32% of rural household income in Africa, Latin America and Asia respectively In Indonesia, little attention was given to rural non-farm employment through most of the 1990s, mainly because the high economic growth rate obtained through outward-looking industrialisation absorbed most labour excess. This happened especially in urban export processing zones and created a substantial rural - urban migration. After the crisis, however, the significance of rural non-farm economic activities has received renewed attention for its potentials to stabilise household incomes of the rural poor (Kusago 2002, Tambunan 2000a). Small-scale industries in Indonesia provide more than 65% of total manufacturing employment, mostly in rural areas. Hill (2001) listed reasons why increased attention is drawn to small-scale enterprises in the country, and dominant are their significant contribution to employment creation and their better performance during the crisis compared to larger-scale.
10 enterprises. Evidence from the 1983 and 1993 Indonesian Agricultural Censuses indicated that the growth of off-farm income (which also includes agricultural income on others property) of agricultural households was 24% faster than the growth in income from the agricultural holdings. Off-farm income accounted for 50% of total incomes of agricultural households in 1993 (Booth 2002). The figure has probably increased after re-absorption of millions of labourers in agriculture, which has happened without measurable output increase for major agricultural commodities. Rietveld (1986) showed that income from non-farm activities has traditionally been much more important for the land-less and small-scale farmers than for large-scale landholders in Indonesia. Low-income non-farm activities have in many cases been a survival strategy for the poor and compensated for a lack of agricultural income opportunities. Especially in the rural Java, characterised by high population density and land scarcity, poor households have for long been forced to seek income outside agriculture to make ends meet (Effendi and Manning 1994). There is a negative correlation between farm size and non-farm activities in these areas. Labour absorption capacity of agriculture is relatively low and escalating land scarcity creates growing need for non-farm employment (Evers 1991, Nibbering and Schrevel 1982). Both White and Wiradi (1989) (from Java) and Meindertsma (1997) (from Lombok) conclude, however, that equalising effects on the rural income distr