Information Asymmetry and Economic Concentration: The Case of Hens and Eggs in Eastern Indonesia.
Stein Kristiansen.
ESA Working Paper No. 03-21.
December 2003.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
December 2003 Stein Kristiansen.
Department of Economics School of Management Agder University College, Norway e-mail: Stein.Kristiansen@hia.no.
Eggs have been important elements of cooking and nutrition in Indonesia for centuries, mostly supplied from ducks and backyard chickens. Consumption of layer eggs has increased 12-fold over the past 30 years, and prices are lowered in central areas of the country. In the outer islands, however, layer egg prices are high and eggs are of lower quality. This report aims to discuss why concentration of chicken feed and egg production is maintained in the central areas of the country, while malnutrition, poverty and unemployment are high and increasing in areas without commercial feed and egg production. The difference is great between those who know and those who do not in the Indonesian poultry industry. Potential gains from information acquisition are not reflected in efficient markets for information, knowledge and skills. Information markets are not established because there are neither suppliers of nor any substantial demand for the competence that could be used by new commercial egg producers at peripheral sites of production. Lowering entry barriers into poultry feed and layer egg production is mainly a question of competence, and policy recommendations include improved dissemination of information and knowledge through schooling systems and local government extension services.
Key Words: entry barriers, information asymmetry, egg production, feed prices, Indonesia JEL: O17; Q12; Q13; Q18.
Acknowledgements:.
The writing of this report was rendered possible by a visiting scholar assignment with the ESAE service at FAO in Rome. The empirical study reported is grounded in an institutional collaboration between Agder University College and Gadjah Mada University, Yogyakarta, and the University of Mataram, Lombok, funded by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and NORAD. Interviews in Indonesia have also been fatefully facilitated by the assistance of people who are not associated with any government or business institutions. The author would especially like to thank Rahmatsyah Fuady for his important contribution in the data collection. I am also indebted to the two referees for their valuable comments to earlier drafts of the report. Finally, I would like to thank the ESA division of FAO and especially Kostas Stamoulis for giving me the opportunity for concentrated work in a stimulating milieu.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Introduction From various parts of the developing world we see that farmers show weak supply responses to allegedly favourable market incentives. Deregulation policies tend to increase levels of inequality in society and poverty of smallholders in poor areas (Reardon and Barrett 2000, Obare et al. 2003). In Latin America, rural poverty is found to affect more people in many countries and to be considerably deeper than urban poverty (de Janvry and Sadoulet 2000). Similar findings are also reported from Africa (Sahn and Stifel 2003) and Asia (Warr 2000). In Indonesia, eggs have been an important element of cooking and nutrition for centuries, supplied from ducks (bebek) and backyard chickens (ayam kampung). There is not a long tradition of commercial poultry and egg production in the country, however. Increasing population, especially in urban areas, has brought bebek and ayam kampung eggs in short supply and prices are high, normally between 1,000 and 2,000 rupiah per egg (0,11 - 0,22 USD). Layer eggs are generally cheaper, but prices vary and are very high in parts of the country without local production. Consumption of eggs has increased from a calculated average of five per capita per year in 1968 (FAO 1972) to more than 60 in 2002 (FAOSTAT 2003), and most of the increase comes from layer hens. Being an important source of protein and a crucial component in Indonesian cuisine, egg production could still be substantially increased and prices lowered in many parts of the country. With a sustained economic crisis and widespread unemployment in rural areas, and even dramatically amplified problems of under- and malnutrition (Dhanani and Islam 2002, Jakarta Post 21.2. 2003), increased egg production could serve multiple purposes. In eastern Indonesia, in the provinces of Nusa Tenggara Barat (NTB) and Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT), more than six million people are practically without commercial egg producers. Consumers are offered expensive ayam kampung eggs from their neighbourhoods or lowquality hen eggs traded from Bali and East-Java, often more than one week in transport. NTT is among the poorest provinces in Indonesia, and NTB has recently experienced decreasing tourist inflows and increasing social unrest and youth violence related to problems of rural unemployment (Kristiansen 2003a). In the early 1980s, the Indonesian government aimed at supporting small-scale layer egg production by regulating the size of poultry businesses. The regulation had a dual purpose: one was the spread of profitable business and employment opportunities; the other was to curb the spread of diseases, typically a risk in large-scale and poorly managed poultry units. This policy was abandoned as a part of the general deregulation policy in the late 1980s and early 1990s, leading to increased plant size and concentration of egg production at a small number of locations in Java. Supply of information and skills through agricultural extension services and vocational training and capital through credit schemes have also recently been reduced, enhancing barriers of entry to the poultry business. Informal institutions and ethnic trading networks also contribute to upholding unreasonably high transaction costs for nonrelated potential business starters. Previous empirical findings from Africa indicate that entry barriers can be high and blocking in the off-farm labour markets as well as in more advanced farm activities. This is due to requirements of investments, information and skills, and various acquisition and license fees (Woldenhanna and Oskam 2001, Barrett et al. 2001, Abdulai and Rees 2001). The same tendencies are found in Latin America (Corral and Reardon 2001), and the process of.
2 `institutionalizing barriers to entry' is reported also from geographical contexts in Asia (Goletti and Chabot 2000). This report aims to investigate what constitute the main barriers of entry into small-scale layer egg production in poor areas, with an empirical focus on eastern parts of Indonesia. More specifically, reasons are sought why prices of eggs divert by as much as 200% within this country, while the quality of eggs in the eastern markets decrease with increasing prices. The research is based on qualitative interviews and market studies in the two provinces, as well as in the major supplying areas of Bali and East Java. Empirical research has been conducted intermittently over a period of two years, facilitated through the well-established institutional collaboration between Agder University College, Norway, and universities in Java and Lombok (NTB). The report is organised in seven parts. After this introduction follows a brief presentation of the macro study context, which is Indonesia through the phases of economic growth and the recent widespread crisis in society. A general description of poultry business in Indonesia follows. The theoretical discussion of entry barriers follows in section four, emphasising general problems of market failures and information asymmetry in rural areas of poor countries. The empirical findings from the research on egg supply in eastern Indonesia are presented in section five, before entering into a more context-specific discussion of information asymmetry and the consequent geographical concentration of production in part six. The report is closed by a concluding section, which also includes some policy recommendations and ideas for further research.
Indonesia through growth and crisis Indonesia saw a steady and remarkably high rate of economic growth after Suharto took power and the era of the `New Order' begun in 1965. Growth in income per capita averaged 4.5% per annum between 1965 and 1990. From 1990 to the outbreak of the financial crisis in 1997 the economy grew by an average of 6.5% per year. The agricultural sector grew along with the rest of the economy, in spite of a reduction of agriculture's share in GDP from 51% in 1965 to 15% in 1996. The country became self-sufficient in rice in the mid-1980s, and farm exports of commodities like spices, cocoa, coffee and palm oil expanded rapidly. Agriculture also played a leading role in providing employment to the increasing and poorly educated labour power. Its share of the total employment remains high, around 45% (BPS 2003a). In spite of growth in agriculture, Tambunan (1998) argues that the sector has been curbed and its potentials not fully utilised due to financial under-investment and a subsequent lack of technological progress and human resource development. Despite a rapid urbanisation during the last decades, 65% of Indonesian households still live in what is classified as rural areas, while 46% of them get their sole income from agriculture (Booth 2002). Following reduced oil prices in the early 1980s and increasing foreign trade deficits, economic reforms from the mid-1980s included a shift from a tightly-protected to a marketbased agricultural development. The selected adjustment package in the 1980s was successful in restoring financial equilibrium, and income distribution in the country was improved according to official statistics (Thorbecke 1991). Exchange rate adjustments had significant impacts on exports, especially from the manufacturing sector, while food imports actually rose through the deregulation period. It was generally agreed that policy adjustments were consistent from a macroeconomic management point of view (Usui 1996). Subsidies to the agricultural sector were gradually reduced, actually almost halved until the early 1990s (Tambunan 1998). Import duties and taxes on export were also cut down on most agricultural.
3 commodities. Through the 1990s, Indonesia went through most of the steps and procedures normally prescribed in a structural reform package: prices being determined by markets, privatisation, reduced government spending, and institutional reforms. The government generally maintained macroeconomic stability, got prices right, provided public goods and left growth to the private sector (Rock 1999). Market capitalisation on the Jakarta Stock Exchange grew from USD 1.8 billion in 1989 to USD 91 billion in 1996, while annual turnover at the exchange climbed from USD 400 million to USD 12.5 billion. A substantial share of the increase was due to an escalating interest from foreign investors in property development, construction works and various manufacturing industries, while certain agricultural sectors were also favoured. The value of net foreign direct investment increased from 1 billion USD in 1990 to 6.2 billion in 1996 (Bank Indonesia 1999). The face value of outstanding foreign loans grew very quickly through the 1990s to around 140 billion USD at the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis (Pangestu 2002, Wie 2002). The Asian crisis hit the country hard, starting from August 1997. In a few months, the national currency, the rupiah, lost 85% of its value against the foreign currencies of borrowed capital. The annual inflation rate was close to 80% at the peak of the crisis. Food prices rose by 133% from 1997 to 1999 (Booth 2000: 148), while wages were falling (Manning 2000). Estimates indicate that around 8 million additional people fell below the poverty line from 1997 to 1999 (Warr 2000) and inequality in society was dramatically increasing, both regionally and socially (Wie 2002). ILO calculated that 5.4 million workers were displaced as an impact of the crisis only in 1998 and that the number of unemployed reached 18 million or around 20% of the workforce (ILO 1998). The National Planning Agency estimated an unemployment rate at 30% in 1999 (BAPPENAS 1999). Official statistics also reveal that more than 18 million people worked without salary in the year 2000, an increase of 3 million from 1997. Agricultural employment increased by 13.3% from 1997 to 1998 (Hugo 2000: 124) and the sector swelled by 6 million workers, without a measurable increase in agricultural output. Towards the end of 2001, the Minister of Manpower formally unveiled an unemployment figure of 40 million (Jakarta Post 22.12.2001). ILO calculates that the national economic growth should be above 5% annually for the economy to be able to absorb only the net population growth, close to three million people. A present GDP growth rate at 3% adds another million or so young people annually to the rows of unemployed. A former labour minister recently declared that the unemployment rate would increase by 6.2% to 42.5 million in 2004 from 40 million early in 2003, which would result in serious impacts on the unstable situation in the social, economic and political spheres (Jakarta Post 14.8.2003). The government has made serious efforts to whisk the unemployed off to the countryside as quickly as possible in order to curtail the rising political tensions in urban areas (Silvey and Elmhirst 2003). The economic crisis and the subsequent termination of the New Order era and its political system provided arguments for continued reforms towards market liberalisation and the rule of law in economic affairs. Indonesia's new antimonopoly law (Law No. 5/1999), along with other acts and regulations, aims to ameliorate conditions for industry and trade and create an improved business environment. Corporate activities that result in monopolistic practices, including market control and holding of a dominant market position, are now formally prohibited. Blocking the entry of new agents in a business line should thereby become more difficult. However, law enforcement mechanisms are still very weak and there is no reason to expect any substantial changes in these conditions in the near future. After the economic crisis and the implementation of decentralisation strategies since 2001, agricultural extension services and other efforts of human capital development in rural areas have been drastically.
4 reduced. The agricultural sector is stagnant but absorbs steadily more workers. Without subsidies on inputs to agricultural production, there is a clear tendency towards a more labourand less capital-intensive agricultural sector. The price of modern farming has become high, and many farmers return to traditional seeds, organic fertiliser and no use of pesticides. Diversification of rural economic activities has received increasing attention after the economic downturn and re-migration of millions of people to their rural home-areas from temporary employment in urban areas or abroad. Finding alternative employment and stabilising household income of the rural poor in Indonesia are crucial issues in policy discussions today (Kusago 2002, Tambunan 2000). There is still a schism, however, in economic development thinking in Indonesia, between priority given to macroeconomic equilibrium and financial stability on the one hand and more proactive policies to boost production in the real sector on the other. At present, the government tends to prioritise policies to stabilise macroeconomic conditions and to harvest the expected effects of free markets, along with advice from the World Bank and IMF (Sadli 2003).
Poultry business in Indonesia Domestication of poultry probably started in Asia, and tropical areas have fostered most modern breeds of chicken in use worldwide today. Poultry as a commercial business, however, was not known in tropical Asia before the twentieth century (Daghir 1995). Indonesia, like most of Southeast Asia, had the bulk of its national supply of eggs from native scavenger flocks in small-scale and subsistence-type farms. According to Daghir (1995: 7), countries in this region have `a tremendous potential for increasing poultry production through the development of small and medium-sized commercial operators', depending on modern practices, human skills and the availability of nutrient-rich feed. Huge varieties of raw materials may be used for feed production, and a better utilization of local feed ingredients could create additional employment and cash income for thousands of producers and inexpensive animal protein for millions of consumers in Indonesia (Bushman 1974, Aarts 1990, Daghir 1995). A distinction is normally made in Indonesian poultry production between two sub-sectors, the one based on native chickens, ayam kampung, and the other based on improved hybrids imported from overseas (Setioko 1991). Ayam kampung is an indigenous breed of chicken domesticated from Galus galus or Galus varius, species that are commonly found in the Southeast Asia region and extensively raised by rural population all over Indonesia. Eggs and meat yields from this sector are mostly for home consumption, while also converted into cash through local markets in times of need. Accidental selections and crossbreeding have led to degradation of genetic quality over time, and egg production capacity of these breeds is presently very low, normally between 30 and 40 per bird per year (Setioko 1991, FAO 1972). This can be compared to approximately 250 eggs in the first year of production for layer hens. The mostly used improved hybrids of layers in the country are Isa Brown, Lohman Brown and Hysex Brown. Hybrid layer chicks in Indonesia are normally produced by one large-scale hatchery, the Javanese PT. Multibreeder, a company owned by the same group as the dominant poultry feed manufacturer, PT. Japfa Comfeed. Chicken feed sellers have for a long time also been active in the eggs trade, buying layer eggs from multiple producers at discounted prices and in payment for feed supply (FAO 1972).
5 In the Indonesian government's first Five Year Plan (1969-74), high priority was given to rising poultry production and thereby to reduce the protein gap in the increasing population. A target was set for an increase in egg production at 350% over a short time-span. In 1968, estimated consumption per capita per year was only five eggs (FAO 1972), while egg production reached approximately 62 per capita in 2002 (estimated from FAOSTAT 2003). Much of the growth of the Indonesian poultry industry occurred through vertically integrated production units controlled by the limited number of large-scale feed manufacturers. In the 1970s, the poultry business, comprising both broilers and layers, saw a strong concentration on a few firms and at a small number of locations in Java. An argument for the geographical and corporate concentration was the easier access to veterinary services and technical support at a selection of localities (Ritter 1984). In 1981, however, the government passed a decree (Keppres 50/1981) that regulated the size of commercial laying farms to a maximum of 5,000 birds, while chicken breeding farms passed unaffected. The idea behind this reform was to bring more small-scale producers into the business and to spread the benefits of poultry profits and proteins. The policy was modified again already in 1984 by the so-called `nucleus farming system', where larger enterprises were expected to promote the development of smaller producers through input and output linkages. Deregulation of the business occurred from the late 1980s, following the general policy of economic liberalization. Suwartini et al. (1997) have calculated that there was a relatively high price, in terms of loss of economic efficiency, which society as a whole had to pay in order to achieve the goal of a more equitable income distribution from the policies of Keppres 50/1981. It remains to be analysed, however, to what extent the poultry business has contributed at all to equity in the country. Indonesia can grow or produce all ingredients that are necessary to make good quality poultry feed (FAO 1975). Most ingredients for present feed production is imported, however, most dominantly corn from the US, China and Argentina. Indonesian total imports of soybeans and corn, which are main feed ingredients, quadrupled from 1991 to 1996. Poultry meat increased its share of total meat production in Indonesia from 13% to 37.2% in the period 1969 - 1993 (Rutherford 1999). Huge investments were made in the poultry industry in the 1990s, facilitated by liberalised capital markets and the inflow of foreign capital. Many foreign companies and lending institutions saw potentials especially in broiler production in a country of 220 million people, mostly Muslims precluded from the consumption of certain other kinds of meat. The Indonesian chicken industry grew rapidly, doubling in size between 1992 and 1997. Foreign loans worth one billion USD were invested in an increasingly integrated chicken industry in the 1990s, stretching from hatcheries to fancy outlets of Kentucky Fried Chicken (Hill 1999). The industry was suddenly and severely hit by the financial crisis from 1997. External debts in the sector and increasing feed prices due to the falling value of the national currency and the high percentage of import brought many producers out of the market. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, 80% of the country's 17,600 poultry farmers at that time were forced out of business only in 1998 (Jakarta Post, 4.3.1999). The Indonesian poultry industry remains highly concentrated, which is not astonishing in a global business where five major international poultry breeding companies supply more than 80% of the world's commercial chickens. With businesses ranging from poultry farming, feed production, poultry shops, egg distribution and butcher shops, the `big five' in the Indonesian context are PT. Japfa Comfeed, PT. Charoen Pokphan Indonesia, PT. Leong Hap, PT. Wonokoyo Rojokoyo and PT. Sierad Produce. The two first mentioned are the dominating feed producers and distributors, with a combined market share of approximately 70%. Both.
6 are parts of typical business conglomerates, owned by ethnic Chinese and with close connections to the Suharto family. There are presently tendencies to more competition in the feed market, however, and weaker vertical ties can be observed between `poultry shops' and egg producers in the dominating production areas. A main issue in the further discussion in this paper is the impacts of the proven oligopoly tendencies in the poultry industry on entry barriers and business opportunities for small-scale and decentralised layer egg producers.
Entry barriers in rural business Deregulation and liberalization as parts of structural adjustment programmes have changed conditions for farmers in the developing world over the last decade. As mentioned, there are general tendencies to increased levels of inequality and rural poverty in Asia as well as in Africa and Latin America, and livelihood diversification is widely discussed as a means of survival and improved rural living standards (Ellis 1998, 2000). From field research in Indonesia comprising more than 1,000 small farmer households outside Java, Sunderlin et al. (2001) concluded that most farmers perceived themselves as worse off after the 1997/98 crisis, that there is a great need for alternative employment and income generation in rural households, and that environmental degradation increased with the aim of household livelihood security. Indonesian newspapers constantly bring news on land slides and water shortage as consequences of environmental degradation. People are simply forced to utilise their surrounding natural resources in a non-traditional and unsustainable way. Among the policy lessons to be learnt is that sound income diversification is important for the household economy, as well as for ecological sustainability. Transaction costs and entry barriers can be high, however, also in the rural off-farm labour market and more advanced farm activities in poor countries. This is partly due to requirements of capital investments and partly because of needs for business information and technical skills. From Latin America, Corral and Reardon (2001) found that high entry barriers in profitable non-traditional businesses lead to geographic and socio-economic concentration of such activities in rural Nicaragua. Areas with denser infrastructure and households with higher incomes and levels of education gain advantages in profitable business entries, and inequalities tend to be escalating. Several studies from Africa have similarly documented how entry barriers tend to curtail employment and the utilisation of business opportunities and to increase regional and social inequalities. In Mali, Abdulai and Rees (2001) found that lack of household resources and education could hinder poor farmers from diversifying into livestock production. Differential access to the high-return cash cropping and non-cropping activities appear to be driving the differences in marginal utilities across households at this location. Similarly from Côte d'Ivoire, Barrett et al. (2001) found that households with poor endowments were less able to respond to attractive emerging on-farm and non-farm opportunities due to entry barriers. The results from a recent study of smallholder production in Kenya add credence to arguments that subsistence-oriented production patterns on small farms are rational responses to high farm-to-market transaction costs (Obare et al. 2003). In the expected continued absence of major investments in rural roads, the policy challenge is to identify and catalyse `bridging institutions' or `shortcuts' of various kinds. Staal et al. (1997) found that farmers' organisations contribute significantly to reducing transaction costs associated with access to assets, markets and information in Kenya and Ethiopia. Policy recommendations generally include institutional innovations to reduce a range of transaction costs and increase assets of social capital. Reardon and Barrett (2000) believe that villagelevel co-operatives are resurgent, after a long period of disfavour due to corruption and.
7 inefficiency. They might be means of overcoming liquidity constraints, information asymmetries and minimum efficient scales of production or marketing. Co-operative selling institutions are potential catalysts for lower transaction costs, thus stimulating entry into markets. Institutional innovations are probably by themselves, however, insufficient to catalyse market entry; they should be accompanied by dissemination of knowledge to the household level (Holloway et al. 2000). In Indonesia, the state-organised co-operative schemes for rural development are highly discredited due to corruption and misuse of power, and any resurgence would have to be based on initiatives from the household level. One conclusion from Weijland's (1999) studies of rural clusters in Indonesia is that the selfinitiated co-operation of small-scale enterprises is successful in many ways. In particular, they achieved transaction cost reductions and social capital development by attracting customers and traders. These are examples of positive agglomeration effects from geographical clustering and business co-operation. Also from Indonesia, Pomp and Burger (1995) showed how limited information leads farmers to copy adoption decisions of neighbouring producers, and most farmers tend to avoid adoptions that have not proved successful in their vicinity. Limited information on business alternatives simply impedes a shift into potential rural trades with higher profitability and growth prospects. Again, dissemination of knowledge to the household level seems to be of importance for new business initiatives in rural areas, and to achieve innovation instead of involution (Kristiansen 2003b). Agricultural extension and small-scale business support services are examples of policy instruments that used to act as an interface between the national macro-economy and decision-making at household and individual levels. Reduced government intervention and the phasing out of these so-called meso-level policies, as can be seen also in Indonesia, brings in new needs to understand actual behaviour of rural households and potential entrepreneurs. The central neo-classical assumption underpinning deregulation in agriculture is that most farmers would rapidly respond to price incentives after suspending protectionist policies and eliminating subsidies of inputs, credits and services (Zezza and Llambí 2002). In a world of frictionless markets and perfect institutions there are no transaction costs, and factors of production can move to maintain equilibrium, irrespective of entry barriers. The involved actors have complete information about market opportunities, costs and benefits. In reality, however, also neo-classical economists know that economic agents only act to move the system back to equilibrium when the deviation from equilibrium exceeds a critical threshold, whereby the benefits of this adjustment exceed the costs. Concurrently, increasing attention in economics is offered to the fact that incomplete and costly knowledge cause `x-inefficiency' in society (Leibenstein 1966, Stiglitz 1989, Arnott et al. 1994). Lack of information, or lack of efforts to gather information, as well as lack of motivation and incentives, create a substantial time lag before individuals and firms accomplish potential improvements, and levels of xinefficiency are allowed to increase. X-inefficiency is related to the fact that the market for entrepreneurs is generally one of the least efficient markets in any economy (Casson 1995). Imperfect information prevents the awareness among potential entrepreneurs of possible market transactions generating net benefits, and the result is inefficiency in both `allocative' and `adaptive' or `creative' functions of markets (Arndt 1988, North 1993). `Markets are instruments for economic efficiency (in their allocative function) and for economic growth (in their creative function)' (Arndt 1988: 222). X-inefficiency, or lack of creative efficiency, in a society is the result of missing `gap-fillers', entrepreneurs who find new business opportunities that are based on innovations in technology, organisation or market arrangements (Leibenstein 1968). The `gap-filling opportunity set' is reduced to those.
8 possibilities that might be associated with expected yields of positive net profits, forming the `opportunity context' of the society's potential gap-fillers or entrepreneurs. The lack of gap-filling opportunities is often explained by transaction costs. According to Arndt (1988), market failure occurs where transaction costs are so high that markets are no longer worthwhile. In dualistic economies, especially, the transaction costs between the modern and the traditional sectors are high. There might be `organizational disconnection' between the two sectors, and `the connecting pipelines are clogged up' (Arndt 1988: 225). Certain characteristics of rural economic activity in poor and remote areas, such as inadequate infrastructure and lack of access to capital and information, certainly make costs of action high and uncertain. The deviation from equilibrium may not be known by potential entrepreneurs, entry barriers may be too high, or the risk of adjustments may be considered unreasonable. According to Fafchamps (1992), the major determinants of the scale of transaction costs include the quality of the physical and facilitating marketing infrastructure, as well as market information. In the market for information and knowledge, potential customers are typically ignorant of potential gains from obtaining services above their level of awareness. Private production or supply of information may be inhibited because potential purchasers find it difficult to evaluate information prior to its acquisition. A transition to a new technology, quality, or