A Conceptual Framework for National Agricultural, Rural Development, and Food Security Strategies and Policies.
Kostas Stamoulis and Alberto Zezza.
ESA Working Paper No. 03-17.
November 2003.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
Kostas Stamoulis.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization Italy e-mail: kostas.stamoulis@fao.org.
Alberto Zezza.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization Italy e-mail: alberto.zezza@fao.org.
The purpose of the present Conceptual Framework document, developed in the context of FAO's "Initiative to Review and Update National Agricultural, Rural Development and Food Security Strategies and Policies", is to propose a flexible general approach to addressing food security through agricultural and rural development and direct actions to enhance immediate access to food. The target audience for the paper are member country stakeholders participating or interested in the strategy process, FAO country representatives, and FAO field and Headquarter staff. The paper may serve as a starting point for dialogue among these parties, to clarify the scope of the Initiative, and to propose a broad conceptual approach to the strategy process.
Key Words: Food Security, Poverty, Policy; FAO JEL: O13, O2, Q18.
The authors would like to acknowledge inputs from Lorenzo Bellú, Louis Bockel, Sumiter Broca, Mafa Chipeta, Ben Davis, Christian Lovendal, and Jeroen Steeghs. Several other individuals (too many to be named) inside and outside of FAO also contributed comments. We would at least like to collectively thank participants in the "Workshop to Launch the Initiative to Support the Review and Update of National Strategies for Food Security and Agricultural Development" (Rome, 20-21 March 2003) for a number of useful observations on an earlier draft. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Updating national agricultural, rural development and food security strategies1.
1.1 Introduction and background.
The international community has identified the reduction of poverty and hunger as overarching goals for development policy in the new millennium. Commitments to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) constitute a framework for development actions and a benchmark for measuring development progress. Countries and their development partners are now in the process of formulating strategies and policies to fulfil the commitments they have subscribed to in the context of the MDGs. Reducing hunger and food insecurity is an essential part of the international development agenda, as stated in the Rome Declaration of the World Food Summit in 1996 and re-affirmed by the participants in the World Food Summit: five years later (WFS:fyl). The Millennium Declaration reflected the WFS target by making hunger part of the first Millennium Development Goal. This is not surprising given the now well-known fact that hunger can be an important cause of poverty. Nearly three-quarters of the poor in developing countries live in rural areas, and the rapid increase in urban poverty is in part explained by the decline of agriculture and the rural sector. The rural face of poverty, human misery and hunger is now well established. Many of the rural poor are subsistence farmers or landless people seeking to sell their labour. They depend on agriculture for their earnings, either directly, as producers or hired workers, or indirectly, in sectors that derive from farming. Trading, transportation and processing involve large numbers of small entrepreneurs and are necessary for agriculture but, at the same time, such entrepreneurs depend on farming activities for their survival. A twin-track approach, promises to be the most effective option for hunger reduction in many instances. The approach combines the promotion of broad-based, sustainable agricultural growth and rural development, with targeted programmes to ensure that hungry people who have neither the capacity to produce their own food nor the means to buy it can have access to adequate supplies. However, agricultural growth does not always have a strong impact on poverty and food security. The potential of agriculture and rural development for reducing poverty and promoting food security varies according to the relative importance of agriculture in the livelihoods of the poor and the potential of the sector to grow in a way that increases returns to the assets held by them. Urban food security will increase in importance in the future: Cities worldwide have grown and continue to grow. In the year 2000 nearly two billion people lived in cities, and by 2030 this is expected to double. As cities expand so do the food needs of urban families. In many cities in the developing world poverty rates are 30 percent and rising, consequently more and.
The papers covers agriculture only, it does not cover activities related to forestry, fisheries, and aquaculture. Also, the term food security is meant to include nutrition security.
more people have difficulty in accessing the food they need. Protecting and promoting the food security of urban populations is therefore an increasing concern. While many countries have recently put a strong focus on poverty reduction, some of them in the context of the PRSP process, it is not uncommon for these efforts to have underplayed the importance of hunger, food insecurity and rural development, and their interdependence. In addition, monitoring of trends and reporting on the hunger goal does not always receive the attention it deserves in the Millennium reports at the country level. For these reasons, in 2002 FAO decided to launch, in cooperation with member countries, an initiative to update national strategies for agricultural development and food security. This process will take into account and contribute to other assessment, programming and development initiatives and processes (UNDAF, PRSP etc), and will provide countries and their development partners with new opportunities to focus their effort on hunger, food security and agriculture and rural development. The objectives of the Initiative can be summarised as follows: · support countries to address food insecurity issues within a medium/long run framework that ensures consistency among objectives, policies, resources and results; · strengthen country capacity to formulate, implement and monitor adequate policies for food security, hunger eradication and poverty reduction; · ensure full country ownership of the strategy formulation process and output; · incorporate food security objectives into country/regional processes, such as Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, Regional Integration Agreements etc.; · facilitate resource allocation towards hunger reduction, with particular focus on the needs and expectations of poor farmers and other disadvantaged groups; and · design a country framework for the whole FAO's assistance at national level. An important dimension of the updated strategies is that the whole process and output cannot be driven by FAO but must be nationally owned and carried out with full stakeholder participation. Therefore the Initiative will be implemented under the leadership of Ministries of Agriculture with the full engagement of farmer's representatives, community-based and civil society organizations, NGOs and the private sector. In order to ensure consistency and complementarity with other strategic and programming processes and instruments in the countries, co-operation with Ministries of Finance, Planning and Budget, Health and Social Welfare will be pursued. Carried out in such a way, the process should result in a strengthened political commitment to cut the incidence of hunger, and the mobilisation of adequate resources to key sectors and activities. The purpose of the present Conceptual Framework document is to propose a flexible general approach to addressing food security through agricultural and rural development and direct actions to enhance immediate access to food. The framework is developed on the assumption that the overall process will be demand-driven, and that countries will maintain ownership of the exercise. National governments will therefore be responsible for setting the goals for their strategic planning, while ensuring co-ordination with other relevant initiatives and programmes ongoing or in the pipeline. The target audience for the paper are therefore member country stakeholders participating or interested in the strategy process, FAO country representatives, and FAO field and Headquarter staff. The paper may serve as a starting point for dialogue among these parties, to 3.
clarify the scope of the Initiative, and to propose a broad conceptual approach to the strategy process. Two clarifications are in order as per what this paper does not attempt to do. First, the paper does not provide guidelines as per how the strategy process itself may develop (a separate document that is being prepared in the context of the Initiative will tackle this aspect). Second, it is important to keep in mind that this paper is only a framework, it is not a strategy in itself. Having to be of relevance to all member countries, this paper is developed at a high level of generality with the objective inter alia of facilitating the dialogue among various stakeholders. The Conceptual Framework is organised as follows. The next section delineates some general principles which guide the Initiative. Part 2 outlines definitions and concepts regarding FS and poverty (Section 2.1), and makes a case for a specific food security focus in poverty reduction strategies (Section 2.2). It then goes on to discuss the links between (income and non-income) poverty and hunger, as well as the impact of conflicts and other emergency situations on hunger (Section 2.3). A discussion of broad typologies of food insecure households is also presented in section 2.4 to show how the constraints to food security vary with the different profiles of food insecurity. Part 2 closes with a discussion of the policy areas that should be addressed by a national food security strategy. Part 3 concludes by outlining the need for the strategies to consider the institutional mechanisms that need to be put in place for their implementation, and with some final remarks2.
The paper draws, among other sources, on a number of published and unpublished documents prepared by FAO staff. This material is sometimes used and duplicated without citation.
1.2 Definitions and general principles.
It may be useful to start by clarifying a few definitional issues so as to set the stage for the discussion that follows. First of all a definition of what is meant by "strategy" is in order. The Webster's dictionary definition of strategy that applies best in this context is the one that reads "a plan, method, or series of manoeuvres or stratagems for obtaining a specific goal or result". Strategy is a term often employed in the business literature, where elements recurrently included in its definition are the resources which are to be committed to achieving the objectives, how resources will be organized, and the policies that will apply for the management and use of those resources. Hence, having a specific goal is an essential element of a strategy. The strategies that will be defined in the context of the initiative will have as the ultimate objective the alleviation of hunger and the improvement of food security, with a precise target and time horizon to be defined according to the country context. For reasons that will be discussed in more detail below, the policies that will have to be reviewed in this context will include national agricultural and rural development policies, but will not be limited to these. Macroeconomic, trade, institutional, social polices all have a role to play. Most likely, in all the instances in which the review will recommend some adjustment to existing policies, a reallocation of resources or efforts for additional resource mobilisation will have to be devised for the achievement of the strategy's goals. The Initiative starts from the assumption that almost all countries already have some agricultural and rural development plan in place, and many have a poverty reduction strategy. Such plans may be in the initial stage or in the process of being revised or finalised. Clearly, the scope and timing of the initiative, at the country level will depend upon the careful consideration of processes planned or already in place. A further concept that needs to be introduced is that of the "twin track" approach, that has already been mentioned earlier in this paper. This approach has emerged as part of FAO's effort in mainstreaming policies towards the achievement of the World Food Summit goals, and has been popularised and presented to development partners in the last couple of years, in occasions such as the Monterrey conference on Financing for Development in March 2002, and the publication of the second draft of the Anti-Hunger Programme, in July 2002. The pillars of the approach are widely shared among development partners, and have been endorsed by the Committee of World Food Security in June 2003. The approach constitutes the analytical framework for many FAO initiatives including such as the Special Programme of Food Security, the International alliance Against Hunger and the support to the Interdepartmental Working group on the Right to Food. The approach constitutes the framework for collaboration with WFP and IFAD and has been adopted as the overall analytical framework by the Millennium Project's Hunger Task force. The basic premises behind the approach are (a) hunger is a cause as well as a consequence of poverty and (b) the majority of poor and food insecure people live in the rural areas. It follows that achieving massive and sustainable poverty reduction entails (a) targeting hunger directly so as to increase productivity and productive potential of those who suffer from it, and allow them to take advantage of the opportunities offered by development and (b) stimulating.
agriculture and rural development, both essential for overall economic growth and sustainable rural poverty reduction. The following are the main principles which underline the overall strategy work as envisaged in the Initiative: · Focus on food security. This initiative adds value not only by arguing that poverty reduction strategies, should have a food security and nutrition improvement focus, many of which currently lack. The strategies should look at the broad picture of what affects food security at the national, sub-national, household, and individual levels with particular emphasis on the potential role of agriculture and rural development in reducing hunger and extreme poverty. Fostering broad-based, sustainable agricultural and rural growth. Overall economic growth is essential ( albeit not sufficient) for substantial and sustainable poverty reduction. Where and in which sectors growth occurs is a very important factor. In this context, growth in farm and non-farm rural activities, that is environmentally and socially sustainable, and the benefits of which are widely shared, is a necessary starting point for any strategy to achieve those goals. Improvements in agricultural productivity can be a corner stone for the development of rural economic activities. Agricultural growth creates employment directly and, with it, incomes and capital for sustaining non-farm rural activities. Addressing the entire rural space. The Strategies will have to look beyond farming, to include off-farm income opportunities, but also human development and other factors that may hinder hunger and poverty reduction. An incomplete list of such factors include: health, education, discrimination and biases of various types (e.g. urban bias, gender discrimination, problems linked to ethnicity), access to resources, and the coping strategies of rural households. Addressing the root causes of food insecurity. Productivity growth is important but does not necessarily lead to substantial improvements in FS unless the underlying causes of extreme poverty and food insecurity are understood and addressed: (lack of) access to resources, insecurity of tenure, low returns to labour and education, lack of nutrition information and awareness etc. The effects on inequality, risk reduction and resilience building of the strategic options considered should also be evaluated. Addressing the urban dimensions of food insecurity. Urban poverty and food insecurity are on the increase. Although strong rural growth can stem premature urbanisation, urban hunger and malnutrition have to be addressed directly. Cities and peri-urban areas have problems that are very different from those of rural areas in terms of availability and access to food, market development, management of natural resources, access to basic services. As their population grows rapidly in much of the developing world, it will be crucial for the National FS Strategies to consider ways to address these issues, including through agricultural and rural development programs (e.g. improvements in the functioning of input and output markets, promotion of infrastructure and reduction in transactions cots). Addressing cross-cutting issues. The Strategies should be drawn up taking into account national and international policies and issues that affect implementation and 6.
potential impacts. National issues of this type include public sector reform and decentralisation, peace and security, trade and macroeconomic policy reforms. Examples of global issues include developments and prospects in the international markets of relevance to the country, international trade policy issues and commitments (WTO, participation in regional trade agreements, etc.), global environmental changes, etc. · Encourage the participation of all stakeholders in the dialogue leading up to the elaboration of the national strategies. At the national level, an effort should be made to obtain a broad consensus on issues, goals and solutions. This process, to be led and facilitated by the Governments, should include both national actors including NGOs, social and other organisations such as farmers and consumer associations and those of civil society. It is also essential that the donor community is involved in the process and that other ongoing strategic initiatives (such as the PRSPs ) are considered.
Part 2 : A conceptual framework for national agricultural, rural development and food security strategies and policies.
2.1 Food insecurity and poverty: Definitions and concepts.
A first step in setting up a strategy is that of defining its scope. To this end it is useful to clarify a few definitions, concepts, measures, and indicators that will come in handy in the discussion of food insecurity and poverty that follows.
Food security.
"Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life"3. This widely accepted definition points to the different dimensions of food security:.
Food availability: The availability of sufficient quantities of food of appropriate qualities, supplied through domestic production or imports (including food aid).
Food access: Access by individuals to adequate resources (entitlements) to acquire appropriate foods for a nutritious diet. Entitlements are defined as the set of all those commodity bundles over which a person can establish command given the legal, political, economic and social arrangements of the community in which she lives (including traditional rights - e.g. access to common resources).
Meeting nutritional requirements: Utilisation of food through adequate diet, clean water, sanitation, and health care, to reach a state of nutritional well-being for which all physiological needs are met. This brings out the importance of non-food inputs in food security. It is not enough that someone is getting what appears to be an adequate quantity of food if that person is unable to make use of the food because he or she is often falling sick.
World Food Summit Plan of Action, Rome, 1996; available at http://www.fao.org/wfs/index_en.htm [http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/w3613e/w3613e00.htm#PoA].
Stability: To be food secure a population, household, or individual must have access to adequate food at all times. They should not be at risk of losing access to food as a consequence of a shock (e.g. an economic or climatic crisis), or cyclically (e.g. during a particular period of the year ­ seasonal food insecurity). The concept of stability can therefore refer to both the availability and access dimensions of food security. Figure 1 ­ Food and nutrition security, a graphic depiction.
Source: Adapted from www.fivims.org The first point to note is that all four dimensions have to be present before it can truly be said that an individual is food secure4. The second critical point is that food security is defined at the level of the individual even though it is brought about by a combination of individual, household, community, national and even international factors. The third point is that the mere presence of food does not entitle a person to consume it. The quantity of food required must lie within that person's entitlement set.
Throughout this document the concept of food security is meant to include nutrition security. "Food security" is therefore here a synonymous of "food and nutrition security".
There was a tendency to underplay the importance of the fourth dimension, stability, in the past. It is, however, crucial, because it is required for understanding the concept of vulnerability. Food insecurity can be transitory (when it occurs in times of crisis), seasonal or chronic (when it occurs on a continuing basis). A person can be vulnerable to hunger even if he or she is not actually hungry at a given point in time. In general, the ability to call upon resources in emergencies reduces vulnerability. Clearly, different types of food insecurity warrant different policy responses. It is also important to understand the determinants of the dynamics of food insecurity, i.e. the factors that help people to escape food insecurity and vulnerability, and those that may push into food insecurity households and individuals that were not previously food insecure or vulnerable. Another element of the food security picture that is highlighted in the graph, as well as in the definition of food security recalled above, is that of food quality and safety. The recent move towards a holistic approach to food safety along the food chain is likely to require special efforts by countries to adjust their systems. This model varies from the previous where responsibility for food safety tended to concentrate on the food processing sector. Quality assurance systems are required at each step in the food production chain to ensure safe food, and to show compliance with regulatory and customer requirements. The systems are a set of controls implemented and verified by the responsible person(s) at each step in the chain (e.g. producers, farmers, fishermen, food processors, retailers, distributors, storage and transport personnel, etc.). Governments have an important role in providing policy guidance on the most appropriate quality assurance systems and verifying/auditing their implementation as a means of regulatory compliance. Finally, a careful reading of the graphical depiction contained in Figure 1 shows how policymakers for whom agricultural and food security issues are the main concern, and who are the traditional counterpart of FAO at country level, need to take into account a number of (a) exogenous factors; (b) developments in policy domains that are less familiar to them. FAO operations at all levels need to explicitly incorporate this fact in their work. International market conditions and prospects, globalisation, macroeconomic trends, education and health policies, are factors that play a crucial role in food security outcomes, but that are largely beyond the domain of competence of, say, agricultural ministries. This fact points to an increase in the level of policy coordination with other ministries, agencies, NGOs and the private sector in the context of a food security strategy. It also points to the need to account more explicitly in any strategic planning for foreseen development scenarios of the global and macroeconomic environment. Since food insecurity is a complex concept, several measures of food insecurity are available, each capturing a different aspect of the problem. The main terms and indicators employed in the food security discourse are briefly listed and explained in Box 1.
Box 1: Food security and malnutrition terminology.
Anthropometry - Use of human body measurements to obtain information about nutritional status. Body mass index (BMI) - A ratio of weight for height often used to estimate body fat. It is obtained by dividing the weight (in kilograms) by the square of the height (in meters). BMI is not appropriate for assessment of growing children, frail and sedentary elderly individuals, or women who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Dietary energy requirement - The amount of dietary energy required by an individual to maintain body functions, health and normal activity. Dietary energy supply - Food available for human consumption, expressed in kilocalories per person per day (kcal/person/day). At country level, it is calculated as the food remaining for human use after deduction of all non-food consumption (exports, animal feed, industrial use, seed and wastage). Kilocalorie (kcal) - A unit of measurement of energy. One kilocalorie equals 1 000 calories. In the International System of Units (ISU), the universal unit of energy is the joule (J). One kilocalorie = 4.184 kilojoules (kJ). Malnutrition - An abnormal physiological condition caused by deficiencies, excesses or imbalances in energy, protein and/or other nutrients. Minimum dietary energy requirement - In a specified age/sex category, the amount of dietary energy per person that is considered adequate to meet the energy needs for light activity and good health. For an entire population, the minimum energy requirement is the weighted average of the minimum energy requirements of the different age/sex groups in the population. It is expressed as kilocalories per person per day. Overweight and obesity - Body weight that is above normal as a result of an excessive accumulation of fat. It is usually a manifestation of overnourishment. Overweight is defined here as BMI >25-30 and obesity as BMI >30. Stunting - Low height for age, reflecting a sustained past episode or episodes of undernutrition. Undernourishment - Food intake that is insufficient to meet dietary energy requirements continuously. Undernutrition - The result of undernourishment, poor absorption and/or poor biological use of nutrients consumed. Underweight - Low weight for age in children, and BMI <18.5 in adults, reflecting a current condition resulting from inadequate food intake, past episodes of undernutrition or poor health conditions. Vulnerability - The presence of factors that place people at risk of becoming food insecure or malnourished, including those factors that affect their ability to cope. Wasting - Low weight for height, generally the result of weight loss associated with a recent period of starvation or disease. Source: FAO, The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2000.
Poverty is closely related to food insecurity and hunger. A recent authoritative definition of poverty is found in the OECD Development Assistance Committee's (DAC) Guidelines on Poverty Reduction, which state that: "Poverty encompasses different dimensions of deprivation that relate to human capabilities including consumption and food security, health, education, rights, voice, security, dignity and decent work."5. This approach to conceptualising poverty is widely accepted. It is also widely accepted that these dimensions of deprivation interact with and reinforce each other. However, it is much less clear how to create a measure of poverty that takes into account the multiple dimensions of poverty. Furthermore, the different dimensions of poverty are difficult to measure and quantify. National income poverty lines are usually constructed by calculating the cost of purchasing a basket of food products to satisfy the food energy requirement for a healthy existence and (in most cases) adding an allowance for non-food expenditures. A household is regarded as poor if its consumption expenditure is below this level6. This methodology of calculating poverty introduces a link between household poverty and food insecurity, as poverty is implicitly seen as the inability to adequately provide for the household's food needs. It should however be stressed that the poverty measure is based on the potential for the household to satisfy these needs, it does not look into the actual outcome (i.e. the food consumption level of the household, let alone the individual). Once a multidimensional definition of poverty is accepted, however, it becomes necessary to also quantify its non-income dimensions. To this end poverty measures based on lack of economic resources, are often supplemented with information on other forms of deprivation. These may take the form of simple or composite indicators. The Tanzania PRSP uses a Composite Deprivation Index that is particularly interesting in the context of this discussion, as it is brings together food insecurity (defined in terms of availability of cereal equivalent levels), income and production, education, and health and nutrition services7. What is important to note in this context, is that food insecurity and poverty are deeply interrelated phenomena. When one attempts to define, conceptualise, measure, or combat them with policy measures, the relationship between them should be explicitly taken into account. It should also be made explicit that the two are not perfectly overlapping, and that specific action to fight hunger and malnutrition are needed, in conjunction with other anti-poverty measures, to most effectively tackling both. The following box on Guatemala shows, drawing on a concrete illustration, why this is the case.
OECD (2001), p.
National poverty lines for international comparison (the widely cited 1 and 2 dollar a day poverty lines) are calculated with the same methodology but expressed in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) rather than local currencies. Income is sometimes used instead of consumption expenditure in poverty measurement. 7 See FAO (2002).
Box 2 ­ Malnutrition and Poverty: The Case of Guatemala While malnutrition and poverty are clearly related, there are factors other than poverty that impact on malnutrition. Also, malnutrition itself contributes to poverty by impairing the learning and work capacity of undernourished individuals, particularly children. A recent study of Guatemala offers a good example of this point. Guatemala is a country with one of the worst nutrition situations. The incidence of chronic malnutrition was 44 percent in 2000. Despite some recent progress, Guatemala remains the country with by far the worst child malnutrition indicators in Latin America and also the one in which recent progress in malnutrition reduction has been slowest. Multivariate analysis of the determinants of chronic malnutrition among Guatemalan children shows that, besides income poverty, a number of other factors contribute to explaining child malnutrition. For instance, the presence of women over 14 years of age is associated with taller children, indicating that care practices are important. Ethnicity and the mother's ability to speak Spanish, probably reflecting social exclusion and differential access to services, are also significant determinants of child malnutrition in Guatemala, a country with a large indigenous population. Parental education, access to water and sanitation, number if children in the household are also factors that explain much of the difference in nutri