Food Insecurity and Vulnerability in Viet Nam: Profiles of Four Vulnera ble Groups.
Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service (ESAF).
ESA Working Paper No. 04-11.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
www .fao.org/es/esa.
Food Insecurity and Vulnerability in Viet Nam: Profiles of Four Vulnerable Groups.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization Italy Contact: Christian Romer Lovendal e-mail: christianromer.lovendal@fao.org.
This report documents the main findings of the vulnerable profiling work carried out in Viet Nam, in cooperation with national partners and under the framework of a UNDP "Policy and Strategy for Sustainable Food Security in Viet Nam" project, as a means to support the planning of appropriate interventions at the national level. Similar studies were undertaken in Guatemala and Nepal, and related work was carried out in Afghanistan and diverse mountainous areas in connection with the International Year of Mountains (2002). The report describes the livelihood strategies of four vulnerable groups (small farmers in the Red River and Mekong Deltas, small farmers in the Northern Region, artisanal fisherfolk in Central Coastal Region, and urban workers without stable employment), investigates the characteristics and causes of their vulnerability and how they cope, and recommends specific options to reduce their vulnerability. Given the scope and focus of this study, it could be particularly useful in supporting implementation of the national Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS), which seeks inter alia to enhance food security and reduce vulnerability, as well as other national programmes like the 1 715 Poor Communes Programme (Programme 135, 1998-2005).
Key Words: Vulnerability, Food Insecurity, Vulnerable Groups, Livelihoods Profiling, Nepal. JEL: Q18, Q19, O20.
This study was prepared by the Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service (ESAF) in the Agricultural and Development Economics Division (ESA) of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The financial support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to the "Policy and Strategy for Sustainable Food Security in Viet Nam" project (SPPD/VIE/00/009) under which this profiling work and analysis was carried out is gratefully acknowledged. This study would not have been possible without the support and assistance of a large number of people and institutions. In particular, ESAF wishes to recognize Mr Paolo Mori, international consultant on participatory appraisal, for his role in analysing, documenting and finalising the four preliminary profiles in close collaboration with national consultants: Ms Tran Thi Dinh (small farmers of the Red River and Mekong Deltas), Mr Nguyen Dinh Huan (small farmers of the Northern Region), Ms Dang Minh Hoa (poor urban workers with unstable occupations) and Ms Tran Thi Xuan (artisanal fisherfolk in Central Viet Nam). ESAF also recognizes the contributions of Mr Ha Hai Ly and Mr Nguyen Dinh Chung who prepared preliminary draft profiles for small farmers in the uplands and deltas, Ms Nguyen Xiem and Ms Thu Ba (FAO Representation in Viet Nam) for their interpretation assistance, and Ms Fernanda Guerrieri (former FAO Representative in Viet Nam) for continuous support. In addition, the assistance of Mr Jack Colwell (Chief Technical Advisor) and Mr Ha Hai Ly (Deputy Chief DPP/MARD) of the FAO "Strengthening National Food Security Information System" project in organizing a National Seminar on Food Security to present the results of the profiling exercise is also appreciated. Many other individuals, too numerous to identify by name, from government organizations at the central, provincial, district and commune level, Vietnamese membership organizations, international projects and the FAO Representation in Viet Nam provided valuable insights and information to enrich the profiling exercise, and participated in working meetings and interviews in Hanoi and the provinces. Not least, an equally large number of people from the different vulnerable groups generously provided their time to discuss and shed light on issues related to the various livelihoods under consideration. This study draws heavily on earlier methodological work by FAO staff, in particular Mr Fabio Pittaluga and Ms Barbara Huddleston, and has been strengthened through comments provided by Alice Carloni, Geneviève Coullet, Marijke Drysdale, Margarita Flores, Naoko Horii, Marco Knowles, Naoki Minamiguchi, Mark Smulders and Françoise Trine. Finally, ESAF wishes to recognize Mr Christian Romer Løvendal (Economist, ESAF), responsible for guiding and coordinating the vulnerable groups profiling work, and Marlynne Hopper (Consultant) for synthesising and editing the four profiles into this final document. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Abbreviations.
CEMMA CPRGS.
DFID DPP ESAF FAO FIVIMS GDP GNI GSO HCMC HEPR MARD MOLISA MIS NIN PRA PPA RPA SLA UNDP VW U VLSS VGP.
Committee for Ethnic Minorities and Mountainous Areas Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (The CPRGS was formulated by 16 Government ministries and line agencies, in consultation with international organizations, donors and NGOs, and launched in 2002.) Department for International Development (UK) Department of Planning and Projection (Viet Nam) Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service (FAO) Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Monitoring System Gross Domestic Product Gross National Income General Statistics Office Ho Chi Minh City Hunger Eradication and Poverty Reduction Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs Minimum Information Set National Institution of Nutrition Participatory Rural Appraisal Participatory Poverty Assessment Regional Poverty Assessment Sustainable Livelihood Approach United Nations Development Program Viet Nam Women's Union Viet Nam Living Standards Survey Vulnerable Group Profiling.
Map 1: Regions and provinces of Viet Nam.
Introduction 1.1 Purpose and structure of the document By providing a thorough and disaggregated understanding of vulnerability to food insecurity, the purpose of this document is to inform policy and programming interventions for reducing vulnerability, as experienced by different groups of people. Section 1 includes an explanation of key terminology and concepts used in the document and of the methodology applied during data collection. This is followed by a description of the overall food security and vulnerability situation in Viet Nam and a detailed explanation of the characteristics of the vulnerable groups identified and the sub-groups within them, including their livelihood activities, food security status, location, asset holdings, intra-household food distribution practices and population size. Trends, shocks, policies and underlying structural factors making different livelihood groups vulnerable to food insecurity are described in section 3, followed by an explanation, in section 4, of how these different groups attempt to maintain their food security when confronted with these negative forces. On the basis of these findings, the opportunities for reducing vulnerability are described in section.
1.2 Concepts and terminology Concepts of food security, vulnerability and vulnerable and food insecure groups are sometimes used with different connotations in the literature and among practitioners. For the purpose of this paper, key concepts and terms are used as follows: Food security As defined by the 1996 World Food Summit, food security "...exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life." (WFS, 1996 para. 1) This definition integrates access to food, availability of food and the biological utilisation of food and the stability of these. These factors are interrelated. Having access to food means little if poor health status impinges on people's ability to utilise the food they consume. Likewise, earning income to purchase food (access) matters less if insufficient food is available in markets. And, a well-stocked market is irrelevant to those who do not earn income to purchase food. Hence, developing policies and interventions to increase food security requires an understanding of each of these factors, their inter-relations and their relevance to particular groups of people. Vulnerability The "at all times" aspect of the food security definition refers to the stability of the other three food security factors over time. This can be understood through the concept of vulnerability. In the food insecurity context, this refers to the propensity to fall, or stay, below a predetermined food security threshold1 in the future. Vulnerability is a function of exposure to risks/shocks and of resilience to these. Risks/shocks are events that threaten people's food access, availability and utilisation and hence their food security status2. Resilience in the food.
1 Although food security is a multidimensional concept, various measurements exist for establishing a threshold. For international comparison, minimum daily intake of food and measured as calories/caput/day is often used. 2 Given the focus on food insecurity, this paper mainly focus on downside risks. Risks with positive effects are in this paper referred to as opportunities.
security context is determined by the effectiveness of risk management strategies at different levels (through prevention, mitigation and coping) and by the resources (household, community, extra-community) that can be drawn upon. Vulnerability correlates positively with the probability and impact of a shock and negatively with resilience and its determining factors. Potentially food insecure, chronically food insecure and vulnerable groups In the context of this paper, the term "vulnerable groups" is used to refer to both the potentially food insecure and the food insecure. Looking at both segments allows to take into account the dynamic nature of food insecurity (and poverty), and the fact that over time move people in and out of food insecurity, as shown by numerous studies (for example, Baulch, B, & Hoddinott, forthcoming; Dercon, 1999; Gaiha, & Deolalikar, 1993; Townsend, 1994) Although outcomes differ, factors making people potentially food insecure or maintaining people in food insecurity are often the same (FAO, 2000). Potentially food insecure groups include people who are "living on the edge" of food security. Although they are not food insecure at the specific point in time at which their food security is assessed, it is highly probable that they will become so. People in this group face a risk of being exposed to a negative shock/trend that, given their risk management capacities, make them food insecure. Those able to recover from such shocks are considered transitory food insecure. Chronically food insecure groups are comprised of people who already today are below a food security threshold and who are unlikely to emerge from this in the foreseeable future. The potentially food insecure and the food insecure can therefore be considered to form a non-discrete food security continuum. Moves along this (i.e. from food insecurity to potential food insecurity and vice-versa) are highly dynamic (see Box 1).
Box 1: Vulnerability continuum.
Vulnerable people are extremely sensitive to shocks and transitory food insecurity. Seasonal events (such as floods or limited food availability in the pre-harvest period) or unforeseen circumstances (like work-related accidents or illness) cause them to become food insecure temporarily when their ability to manage a shock is weak. W hen potentially food insecure people can no longer meet their minimum food needs, because the negative influences they face are too high and/or their risk management capacity is weak, they become food insecure. The transition from potential food insecurity to food insecurity (and from food insecurity to potential food insecurity) is very dynamic and can occur rapidl y.
Vulnerability continuum.
Foo d insecure people.
Potentially food insecure people.
F ood secure people.
A livelihoods approach to food security analysis.
A working definition of livelihoods, provided by Ellis (2000: 10) is: "...the assets (natural, physical, human, financial and social capital), the activities, and the access to these (mediated by institutions and social relations) that together determine the living gained by the individual or household". The vulnerable group profiling technique presented below specifically draws from the sustainable livelihoods approach (SLA) developed by DFID. The SLA provides a lens for analysing how people go about maintaining a livelihood. It helps in analysing how people combine the different assets to which they have access in order to pursue activities to attain a livelihood objective, within the policy and vulnerability context within-which they are embedded. The SLA is a multi-sectoral approach that allows to take into account the multidimensionality of factors that determine food security. It provides a way of looking at the macro-, meso-, micro linkages, thereby accounting for the fact that household food security is determined by household-level factors such as a household's food production but also by macro-level factors such as inflation, devaluation, changes in world markets etc. In this way, the appropriate type and best level of interventions for improving food security can be identified. The participatory principles underlying the SLA mean that through its application the perspectives of different stakeholders, including those whose food security is being analysed, are included in the analysis. This contributes to increasing the ownership and accuracy of findings and thereby the success of the ensuing interventions. 1.2 Methodology used to identify vulnerable groups in Viet Nam The process and methodology applied in profiling vulnerable groups in Viet Nam is described below. National-level workshop for the preliminary identification of vulnerable groups An initial national-level workshop was carried out to identify the main vulnerable groups. The workshop saw the participation of officers from different institutions, including the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), the Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA), the National Institute for Nutrition (NIN), the Women Union (WU) and the General Statistical Office (GSO), under the coordination of MARD, and other stakeholders. It provided a preliminary national classification of the main vulnerable groups located throughout the country. While a review of secondary literature could also have perhaps brought the same results, the interdisciplinary workshop was considered important. People brought perceptions and insights to discussions that would otherwise have been missed through a more formal study. This workshop allowed to identify who were some of the vulnerable groups, but only provided a first-cut understanding of why they are vulnerable and thereby how their vulnerability could be reduced.
Review of literature and key-informant interviews to develop preliminary profiles Of the seven vulnerable groups identified during the national-level workshop, four were selected for more detailed profiling3. Each profile was assigned to a multidisciplinary team of three members from different agencies who received training from the visiting Team Leader of the project. To guide data collection for each of the vulnerable groups, a minimum information set4 was used. Data collection involved reviewing secondary sources and interviewing, in Hanoi, key informants from national ministries and line departments, research institutes, mass organizations5, bilateral donors, international development organizations and projects. Because the initial categories of vulnerable groups were fairly broad, there were significant differences within each group with respect to the causes of vulnerability. In order to obtain a more thorough understanding of the different causes of vulnerability the initial groups were divided into sub-groups based on degree of vulnerability. Information gaps for each of the sub-groups became more obvious and guided additional data collection. Each of the subgroups was described along the following dimensions: · · · · · · Incidence of low food intake, health status and symptoms of malnutrition Household characteristics and assets Access to support services and infrastructure within the community Influence of economic and environmental conditions on household behaviour Influence of customary beliefs on household behaviour Influence of political structures, public policies, development programmes and projects, laws and regulations on household behaviour · Livelihood strategies, care and feeding practices, health and hygiene practices and risk management strategies of households · Forces of change (e.g. positive developments and trends, acute and chronic risk factors) · Strengths, weaknesses, threats and opportunities.
Key informant interviews at provincial and district levels With the purpose of validating the sub-group classification and filling information gaps, additional data was collected in eleven provinces6 that had been selected as representative of different types of poverty and food insecurity contexts. In each province, meetings were held at provincial and selected district level with local authorities and officers from line agencies, mass organisations, relevant institutions and projects. During the meetings the geographical distribution of people and resources was investigated and a series of field-sites were selected for community-level focus-group discussions and individual interviews.
Due to resource limitations, only four groups could be addressed in this study. The groups were selected for their larger size and as representative of different livelihood conditions. After the fieldwork the vulnerable group classification was revised and one VG was split, bringing the total number of VG to eight. The four VG for which profiles could not be prepared are the following: small farmers of the Central Highlands, farmers living in disaster-prone areas of Central Viet Nam, rural contractual labourers outside the agricultural sector, and people living on social entitlements.
The Minimum Information Set describes typical characteristics of households within a particular vulnerable group and provides information about the various factors that affect their food securit y situation and household members' access to food, as well as their health status and uptake of food (FAO, 2000).
5 Mass or socio-political organizations (such as the Viet Nam Farmers Association and the Viet Nam Women's Union) have a large membership and widespread network from the central to the local level. 6 Thua Thien Hue, Quang Tri and Quang Nam (in Central Viet Nam); Nam Dinh, Ha Nam and Ha Tay (in the Red River Delta); Tuyen Quang and Ha Giang (in the Northern Region); Dong Thap, Tra Vinh and Can Tho (in the Mekong Delta).
Community-level focus group discussions Field work was carried out with the support of an international consultant on participatory appraisal, from August to November 2001. Participatory rural appraisal (PRA) techniques as well as interviews and focus-group discussions with members of vulnerable households were used to obtain information about diet, health and hygiene patterns, expenditures, productive activities and incomes, seasonal patterns, risk management strategies, customary behaviours and other relevant livelihood aspects. Enumeration of the vulnerable groups Once the sub-group classification had been established, a broad estimation of the number of people in each sub-group and of their location along the vulnerability continuum (Box 1) was made by using poverty as a proxy indicator and by matching the vulnerable groups to occupational categories and asset holdings used by the GSO (Box 2). Three sources of data were particularly useful for this purpose: · data on the percentage of the urban and rural population (by region) under the general poverty line and food poverty line, calculated by the GSO and the World Bank on the basis of the two VLSS; and · provincial-level poverty estimates that combined data from the VLSS and population census (Minot & Baulch in 2001). · annual surveys and poverty data from MOLISA For the artisanal fisherfolk, poverty could not be utilised as a proxy indicator since they represent only a small percentage of the rural provincial population. For this vulnerable group, another method of indirect enumeration was used based on the vessel size, which is the main characteristic utilised for the sub-group classification. Difficulties were encountered because data disaggregated by vessel category were not available at central level. However, they could be found in the few provinces visited although each province used different vessel classes. Enumerating the vulnerable groups was made difficult by the shortage of specific data and the inability to find key informants who could provide reliable estimates of group size by province or region. Although the estimates produced by this approach should be treated cautiously also because of the age of the census data, this was considered a viable approach for gaining an understanding of the relative size of each groups. Also, the location of subgroups along the continuum is flexible and dynamic (reflecting the nature of the relationship between food security and vulnerability as illustrated in Box 2). Presentation of findings The initial outcomes of the vulnerable groups profiling work were presented at a national seminar on food security in Hanoi in November 2001. This provided an opportunity for officials from national institutions, international projects, multilateral agencies and NGOs to discuss the profiles. The findings were also presented in the local consultative group on food security.
Communitylevel focus group discussions.
Enumeration of the number of people in each group.
Analysis of inf o rmation.
Box 2: Using income as a proxy indicator of food security.
Using poverty as a proxy indicator involved investigating how dietary patterns change in relation to level of income for each of the sub-groups. This was achieved through a rapid appraisal where information on food items, expenditures and income were collected by interviewing key informants and a limited number of households for each vulnerable group. Through this exercise, it became evident that the amount of meat and fish consumed provided a quick indicator of the dietary pattern and clearly correlated with income. Once the relationship between food insecurity and household income level for the different sub-groups became clear, the size of each sub-group was calculated based on the poverty rates and asset ownership/income within the occupation group. Households were subsequently classified along the vulnerability continuum as food insecure or potentially food insecure. In the present study the food security threshold corresponds to the level of income which enables a typical family of a given group to eat a diet similar to the standard diet identified in the Vietnam Living Standard Survey. The standard food basket of 2100 calories per day is based on the average food consumed by Vietnamese people according to the VLSS 92/93. It has been used by the WB and GSO to identify food insecure people by linking it to a given level of per capita expenditures, which is the same nation-wide. Families are considered under the food poverty line when their expenditures are equal to the cost of purchasing the food items included in the standard food basket, therefore non-food expenditures are made at the expenses of an adequate nutritional intake. To calculate the general poverty line, essential non-food items are included (Te B.Y. and Duong V.D. 2000). During the rapid appraisal expenditures and earnings were analysed and crosschecked to determine the family income level. Local prices were used and food produced and consumed by the family was included. The results show that it is not possible to use the same monetary parameter all over the country and that it is necessary to adjust this parameter by determining the threshold level for each vulnerable group based on livelihood conditions. The threshold of food security changes between rural and urban areas. Although the sample size was relatively small, the results were nevertheless consistent with available statistics on malnutrition, which show higher relative incidence of malnutrition vis-à-vis poverty in urban areas (see section 2.5 and Box 7).
Who are the vulnerable in Viet Nam? 2.1 Vulnerability in Viet Nam ­ the context During the past decade, Viet Nam has achieved remarkable progress in expanding agricultural production and increasing incomes. Rice production increased dramatically following the distribution of agricultural land to rural households, increased integration of agriculture in the market economy and other economic reforms, transforming Viet Nam from a net importer into the world's second largest exporter of rice. The achievements made in poverty Box 3: Viet Nam at a glance reduction have also been impressive. Population: 79.5 million Poverty fell from 58 percent of the total Population per sq. km: 241 population in 1993 to 29 percent in 2002, Population growth: 1.2% enabling as many as 20 million people to Life expectancy: 69.4 years Child malnutrition (% under 5): 34 (1996-02) move out of poverty in less than ten years Illiteracy (% pop. aged 15+): 7 (1996-2002) (World Bank 2003). However, grain selfGross National Income per capita: US$410 ufficiency has been achieved at the Agriculture (% of GDP): 23.2 aggregate level and a large number of Exports of goods and services (% of GDP): 54.7 Imports of goods and services (% of GDP): 56.8 people have been able to escape poverty; Economic growth: 7% (2003 estimate) many others still do not have physical, Note: Figures for 2001 unless otherwise indicated social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their Source: www.worldbank.org.vn dietary needs and cultural preferences to have an active and healthy life. Others are likely to become food insecure following small to moderate changes in their household production, income or health. Vulnerable groups are located throughout the country and involved in different occupations. They belong to different ethnic and age groups, and include men and women. As a group, ethnic minorities ­ mainly located in isolated upland areas ­ stand out as being particularly vulnerable. As illustrated in Table 1, rural food poverty was estimated at 13.6 percent in 2002. Among ethnic minorities, food poverty stands at more than forty percent and has shown almost no decline over the last four years. Table 1: Poverty, food poverty and child malnutrition in Viet Nam (as a share of the population) Stunting General Poverty Food Poverty (low height/age By Area and Rate < 5 years) Ethnic Group 1998 2002 1998 2002 1987-89 2000 Urban 9.2 6.8 2.5 1.9 49.0 24.6 Rural Mountainous areas Kinh and Chinese Ethnic minorities National 45.5 31.1 75.2 37.4 35.6 23.1 69.3 28.9 18.6 10.6 41.8 15 13.6 6.5 41.5 10.9 59.4 48.8 N/B N/B 56.5 42.6 45.1 N/B N/B 33.8.
Note: The food poverty line is calculated by the World Bank and General Statistics Office (GSO) based on the level of expenditure needed to buy food (rice and non-rice) to provide 2 100 calories per person per day. Source: World Bank (2003) and WHO (2003) Table 2: Poverty, food poverty and child malnutrition by region General Poverty (2002) Region Rate (%) North East North West Red River Delta North Central Coast South Central Coast Central Highlands South East Mekong Delta National 38.4 68.0 22.4 43.9 25.2 51.8 10.6 23.4 28.9 Share (%) of total poor 16 7 17 20 7 10 5 17 100 Rate (%) 15.4 46.1 5.3 17.5 9 29.5 3 6.5 10.9 Share (%) of total poor 17 11 11 22 7 16 4 13 100 Food Poverty (2002) Stunting (low height/age < 5 years) 2000 41.5 43.9 31.9 44.1 36.9 49.9 26.9 34.0 33.8.
Note: Poverty rates are measured as a percentage of the population. Source: World Bank (2003) and WHO (2003) NOTE: Tables 1 and 2 provide the general context and the trend of poverty reduction in Vietnam but do not provide in-depth information on the actual situation of the identified vulnerable groups. As already explained food insecurity in the present study is different from food poverty as calculated by the VLSS. Another point to remark is that the study was conducted in 2000-2001, before the 2002 VLSS. Although the incidence of poverty is higher in the Central Highlands, Northern Mountains and North Central Coast (see Table 2), because of higher population density, the absolute number of poor people is higher in the two delta areas than in the remote areas. Rural migrants living in urban areas are another group at high risk of food insecurity. Bigger households, and especially those with more children, more elderly members, or where a spouse is missing, also tend to have a lower level of expenditure per capita (World Bank 2003). Using the Vulnerable Group Profiling methodology, the four groups listed below, spread throughout the country, were identified as particularly vulnerable (see Map 2 and Table 3):.
Populatio n s ize (millions).
Each of these groups is located in a specific geographical region with particular agroecological conditions, production patterns and social structures. Taken together, these four groups comprise 23 percent of the national population. The two largest groups are the small farmers of the Mekong and Red River Delta (11 percent of the country's population) and small farmers of the Northern Region (8 percent). Poor urban workers account for 4 percent and artisanal fisherfolk for 0.5 percent of the national population.
Map 2: Location of Vulnerable Groups.
Small farmers in the Northern Uplands and Midlands (Northern Region).
Small farmers in the Red River Delta.
Artisanal fisherfolk in the Central Coastal Region.
Small farmers in the Mekong Delta.
Urban workers without stable employment.
ESAF, SDRN (FAO) INRM (2003).
2.2 Small farmers in the Mekong and Red River Deltas Some 8.7 million people belonging to small farm families in the Mekong and Red River Deltas, equivalent to 28 percent of people in the deltas, are estimated to be food insecure or potentially food insecure. They include landless farmers in the Mekong Delta who rely on casual employment for their living, as well as marginal and small farmers in both deltas (see Figure 2). Approximately one in five of these households are female-headed and more likely to be vulnerable than male-headed households. Although the principal livelihood of these groups is agriculture, long-term migration by a son or daughter to work in manufacturing or construction in urban areas has become a common livelihood diversification strategy for a significant number of households. These sub-groups were identified within this group. Some key characteristics of the sub-groups can be seen in Figure 2 Figure 2: Vulnerability continuum for landless and small farmers in the Red River and Mekong Deltas.
Landless farmers and their families in the Mekong Delta Approx. No.: 700 000 (8%) Marginal farmers and their families in the Mekong and Red River Deltas Approx. No.: 4 700 000 (54%) Small farmers and their families in the Mekong and Red River Deltas Approx. No.: 3 300 000 (38%).
Food security status Land holdings No. of crops Soil type Farm diversification Risk of flooding Cereal production.
None One Acidic, saline, sandy soils Low High risk: low-lying lands unprotected by dikes Rice deficit.
Potentially food insecure.
0.25 ha (Red River Delta) 1.00 ha (Mekong Delta) Two to three Alluvial soils Moderate Low risk: higher lands protected by dikes Rice self-sufficiency.
Landless fam ilies in the Mekong Delta are the most food insecure households within this group. They rel