Globalisation of Indian Diets and the Transformation of Food Supply Systems.
Inaugural Keynote Address 17th Annual Conference Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing Hyderabad, 5-7 February, 2004 Prabhu Pingali and Yasmeen Khwaja.
ESA Working Paper No. 04-05.
February 2004.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
Prabhu Pingali.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization e-mail: prabhu.pingali@fao.org.
Yasmeen Khwaja.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division Economic and Social Department Food and Agriculture Organization e-mail : yasmeen.khwaja@fao.org.
This paper examines the change in the nature of food demand in India in the last twenty years. It identifies two distinct stages of diet transition associated with the period of economic growth. During the first stage, income-induced diet diversification, consumers move away from inferior goods to superior foods and substitute some traditional staples, especially rice. In the second stage, diet globalisation, the influences of globalisation are much more marked with increased consumption of proteins, sugars and fats. Diet diversification has marked the process of transformation in food production systems. The implications for small and marginal farmers could be serious, unless there are incentives and policies that allow them to move away from subsistence agriculture and become more integrated in the global food market.
Key Words: India, Globalization, Diet Transformation, Food Supply. JEL: F02, Q18.
The authors are grateful to Kostas Stamoulis, Ben Senauer, Prakash Shetty, and Louise Fresco for their comments and suggestions. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Inaugural Keynote Address to the 17th Annual Conference of the Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing, held in Hyderabad, 5-7 February, 2004 Introduction India is in a phase of rapid economic and demographic transition. Per capita income has been rising steadily since the 1980s. Life expectancy is increasing and birth rates are falling. The impressive growth rates of the 1980s were maintained in the last decade with reforms to open up the Indian economy. Poverty levels continue to decline as does the incidence of malnutrition and stunting. A key feature of this remarkable period of growth has been the change in the nature of the Indian diet. As the world economy becomes more integrated and communication faster, diet transition would have been inevitable. But it is clear that during the most recent decade globalisation has played an enormously important role in the transformation of food consumption patterns of Indian households. This is particularly evident in urban areas. The change in consumer tastes and demand has critical implications for the whole food supply system. The present paper looks at the impact of globalisation on both the demand side and the supply side of the food system in India. Pingali (2004) has identified six key stylised facts characterising the changes in food demand in Asia. These facts pertain to changes in the consumption of rice, wheat, protein and energy-dense foods, and diet diversification. We explain these facts by identifying a two-stage process of diet transformation. During the first stage consumers move away from inferior goods to superior foods and substitute some traditional staples with primary food products that are more prevalent in western diets. In the second stage the influences of globalisation are much more marked with increased consumption of proteins, sugars, fats and temperate zone products. The figures on the demand structure for food in India are consistent with our analysis of a two-stage process of dietary change. As the demand profile changes with economic growth and globalisation, so the supply systems must adapt to accommodate this change. We examine the effects of the change in demand on the supply of food in India and draw some key policy implications.
Section 2 analyses in depth diet and nutrition change in India. We begin this section by looking at the crucial factors that have brought about this change and the emergent trends. The section ends with an analysis of the main effects on social welfare. Section 3 analyses the supply effects brought about by changing demand. We examine the effect of diet change in urban centres on the structure of food production. Particularly we consider the role played by supermarkets and other food outlets that are a part of a large global concern and the interaction between distribution and production. Section 4 explores policies and strategies that may protect the livelihoods of domestic farmers and allow small farmers to participate in the transformation process. Section 5 concludes.
2.1. Diet and Nutrition Change in India Driving forces of diet and nutrition change Since the 1980s India has enjoyed quite remarkable economic growth. Incomes have been steadily rising and per capita real expenditure has increased across all groups. Significantly, and consistent with high rates of growth, the proportion of per capita expenditure on food items has fallen. Economic growth has been accompanied by rising urbanisation (see tables 1 and 2). Indian cities are expanding with substantial increases in the growth rates predicted in the next thirty years. Table.
Annual growth in GDP per capita 1996-2000 3.6.
Years 1967-80 1981-2000 1981-1990 1991-2000 1.3 3.5 3.3 3.7 India Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2002 Table.
Urban Population, percentage.
India 1980 1981 1989 1990 1991 1999 2000 2001 2010 2020 2030 23 23 25 26 26 27 28 28 30 35 41 Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the UN, 2002 Revision and World Urbanization Prospects. Reforms introduced in the 1990's have been successful at maintaining these rates of growth. Tables 2, and 3 provide a picture on the nature of urbanisation in India. In 1950, the degree of urbanisation was estimated at 17.3%. By 2000, this figure stood at 28% and it is projected that by 2030 the figure could be as high as 41% 2.
(see table 2). Table 3 indicates significant regional variability in urbanisation trends, the southern and western states are leading the way, while the north eastern and eastern states are lagging behind. Table.
Percentage of urbanisation in Indian States State 1 Percentage of population living in towns less than 50000 13.47 47.23 29.18 19.59 24.09 76.10 31.76 25.31 41.61 36.01 14.70 37.76 25.37 29.58 42.95 29.74 17.05 7.23 0.00 12.85 26.22 2 3 4 Percentage Percentage Percentage of of of urban population population population living in living in towns towns 50000above 200000 200000 27.08 36.33 50.21 24.67 12.72 28.10 10.47 34.53 36.29 37.35 53.54 26.87 29.00 37.92 37.98 9.79 23.90 0.00 24.88 10.74 57.50 52.17 33.98 22.52 25.97 33.08 25.31 26.67 38.83 25.16 42.40 11.27 74.03 14.97 26.92 35.32 44.32 33.95 30.30 47.33 23.38 23.09 43.86 35.41 21.65 20.78 48.04 22.23 30.62 52.33 28.03 13.89 78.88 93.01 0.00 100.00 89.78 74.51 66.57 12.64 23.73 50.05 27.78.
Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu & Kashmir Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Orissa Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Delhi Chandigarh Pondicherry All India Source: Census of India 2001.
Increased urbanisation has seen the rise of the middle classes and it is predominantly the lifestyle preferences of this group that mark a change with the past. Moreover, economic growth alters the structure of the labour force in urban areas characterised by increased female participation with important consequences for the family diet. As more women enter the labour force, the traditional role of the Indian housewife to be in charge of food preparation is eroding. Whilst women may still 3.
have prime responsibility for providing the daily meals, the nature of these meals may change. The consumption of ready made meals, or foods that cut the long preparation time of traditional dishes, are likely to be a predominant feature of the diet for families where there is a high female participation rate. Chapati-mixes for example can be likened to the availability of ready-made bread mixes in developed countries. Both are designed to appeal to women whose opportunity cost of time is high. Moreover, working couples with no children may enjoy on average higher disposable incomes and are thus likely to consume food outside the home on a regular basis. It should be noted that whilst the emergence of the nuclear family is growing, India is still far from having the same numbers of two-income families that characterise labour markets of developed nations. With further increases in economic growth and greater integration in the global market, this may change more rapidly and consequently, we may see an even stronger upward shift in demand for convenience processed food. Increased economic growth not only brings about divergences in the diets between different socio-economic groups but also across the age divide. Food preferences of older age groups tend to be relatively static over time. Where there is increased income for consumption, food preferences still tend to remain within an identifiable traditional boundary. Whilst there may be increased expenditure on superior foods, these tend to be prepared according to long-standing customs and practices. Younger generations are more influenced by new foods particularly when these are introduced through an advertising campaign that targets the group specifically. The divergence between the dietary habits of young and old tends to persist over a long-time horizon if not indefinitely. Generally, lifetime eating habits form at a young age and are difficult to reverse as age increases (see FSA, 2002; HPA, 2001 ). The process of diet transformation in India can be seen as involving two separate stages: (i) income-induced diet diversification. At the start of the process of faster economic growth, diets diversify but maintain predominantly traditional features; (ii) diet globalisation. As globalisation begins to exert its influence, we see the adoption of markedly different diets that no longer conform to the traditional local habits. 4.
During income-induced diet diversification, economic prosperity enables consumers to afford a more varied and balanced diet and to demand nutritionally superior food products. In this stage, the demand for food would still be largely directed towards traditional foods with positive income elasticities of demand as opposed to foods that display negative elasticities. Consumers typically move away from rice consumption or may consume higher quality varieties of rice. Increased consumption of wheat, in the form of bread and other wheat-based products, such as cakes, and cookies is also observed. As growth consolidates and the economy opens up to globalisation, households start to adopt food consumption patterns that differ from the traditional ones. The new dietary habits reflect global patterns, and could be quite unlike the habits that had developed locally over many generations. Consumers exhibit strong preferences for meat or fish, temperate zone foods such as apples and highly processed convenience foods and drinks all of which are readily available in the emerging supermarkets and fast-food outlets. 1 A critical implication of globalisation is the severing of the link between diets and the local availability of resources and local habits. In the second stage of diet globalisation in particular, consumers have access to varieties of food that were not previously available to them. Thus, consumers are no longer constrained in their demand to purchasing local produce. The process of diet globalisation is clearly assisted by the globalisation of the media. The proliferation of global entertainment through popular television programmes or block-buster movies, permits the wide-scale advertising of global products. Both McDonalds, Coca-Cola and Pepsi have been able to broaden their appeal by linking their products either to specific films etc or personalities. Sports events that have global coverage are often sponsored by these big name food brands too. This has huge appeal particularly for the young market. The internet has broadened the advertising possibilities for these larger food companies.
The adoption of a globalised diet should be seen as a dynamic process: once the national diet opens up to the world influence, it will always be subject to ongoing changes.Thus, over a longer time horizon, we may continue to see a sequence/series of discontinuous structural breaks. Future generations may start to consider the energy dense diet as their traditional diet and move away from this to one that is more healthy with increased income. (see Popkin 1993 for a full discussion).
Trends in diet diversification in India The two-stage model of diet diversification identified in Section 2.1 has a.
number of specific implications on the demand for food. During diet diversification, we should observe an increase in the demand for all traditional foods as income increases, such as rice, wheat, pulses, cereals, and animal products. During the second stage of change, as global influences begin to exert their effects, we should observe that the increase in demand is mainly concentrated on wheat, animal products and related foods, and there could be a decline in the consumption of traditional foods such as rice, pulses and cereals. However, it is important to note that income-induced diversification is still continuing and will do so for a long time to come but there are signs that diet globalisation is emerging. Diet globalisation is a phenomenon to watch over the future. The evidence on diet change is both direct (food consumption/demand) and indirect (health indicators, indicators of malnutrition, incidence of diet-related diseases like obesity, cancer, diabetes, etc.). In the next section we will look at the indirect effects in more detail. FAOSTAT figures presented in Table 4 below provide some compelling direct evidence for the two phases of diet diversification and allows us to identify the historical periods corresponding to each stage. Income-induced diet diversification occurred during the 1980s, when India experienced impressive growth rates, and stage two, diet globalisation, in the 1990s, after reforms were introduced in 1991 to open up the economy. During the 1980s, consumption of both animal and vegetable products increased very substantially. Among the animal products, the largest proportional increase was in the consumption of milk. Among the vegetable products there were large increases across all food groups, but particularly for rice, pulses, wheat and cereals. Rice and pulses are essential components of the traditional diet. The 1980s also saw an increase in the consumption of spices and oil crops. Overall, the structure of food consumption has not changed markedly during the decade, but there was a rise in demand across all the main food groups. The 1990s, by contrast, saw a significant change in the pattern of food consumption. There was a marked increase in the consumption of animal product, especially animal fats, whereas the increase in the consumption of vegetable products was relatively modest. Among vegetable products, there were large increases in the 6.
consumption of wheat, starchy roots, vegetable oils, sugar and sweeteners, and fruits, whereas the consumption of rice, pulses and cereals has declined. These are evidence of a structural break relative to the previous decade. The 1990s were associated with the consumption of significantly larger amounts of energy-dense foods in the form of fats, oils and starchy roots. Whilst starchy roots represent a staple, the considerable increase in the 1990 captures the increased consumption of potatoes, a food with strong associations with energy-dense food products such as fries and potato chips. The decline in the consumption of rice and pulses and the increase in the consumption of wheat are particularly significant. It is important to note that the use of wheat in the diet is changing as well, since there is a move away from the traditional chapati to more commercialised bread products similar to those found in the West. This pattern is indicative of a specific move to a more western diet in the early stages of diet transformation. Traditionally, wheat represented a key staple in the north of India whereas in the south rice tended to dominate the habitual diet. With economic growth, dietary preferences in the south are moving away from rice towards wheat whereas in the north preferences are veering more towards rice. The net effect for India as a whole is a decline in total rice consumption given the neagtive income elasticity of demand for rice.
Food consumption in India Product (the unit used is cal/cap/day) Averages 79-81 89-91 99-01 2083 120 23 0 3 5 16 71 2 1963 5 1368 31 25 120 670 11 41 1 193 8 3 127 32 390 2365 163 28 0 5 7 20 102 2 2202 8 1508 34 37 133 779 14 40 1 221 9 4 158 35 461 2492 196 47 0 6 8 22 111 2 2296 11 1470 51 43 109 751 17 49 1 247 11 5 239 45 493.
Grand Total Total Animal Product Animal Fats Aquatic Products, Other Eggs Fish, Seafood Meat Milk- Excluding Butter Offals, Edible Total veg product Alcoholic Beverages Cereals Fruits- Excluding Wine Oil Crops Pulses Rice (Milled Equivalent) Spices Starchy Roots Stimulants Sugar & Sweeteners Sugar Crops Tree Nuts Vegetable Oils Vegetable Wheat Source: FAOSTAT, FAO.
The values of the income elasticity of demand for the different categories of food can help us understand the changing food consumption patterns by Indian households. As income increases, the structure of consumption will shift away from low-elasticity towards high-elasticity food. This can certainly be extremely valuable for predicting the demand for the different food categories by Indian households as a result of income growth during the first phase of diet diversification. Table 5 summarises the elasticities for key foods. As expected, staples show a negative elasticity of demand. The figures suggest that with increases in income, consumers.
move away from the consumption of rice, wheat and other cereals or coarse grains. Indeed, this result seems consistent with the general consensus on wheat consumption not only for India but Asia as a whole.
Income Elasticity for Cereal and Cereal Components.
Income elasticity Cereals -0.05 Rice -0.29 Wheat -0.001 Other Cereals -0.37 Source: Are Income-Calorie Elasticity's Really High in Developing Countries?: Some Implications for Nutrition and Income, by Arjunan Subramanian, 2001.
The figures on consumption patterns and elasticity for the staples reveal a clear direction away from what are regarded as inferior foods. However, what these figures do not fully capture is the changing nature of the household food basket itself. The demand for wheat is rising but more precisely it is increased household demand for bread that is rising. Additionally, while we see that consumption of fruits and vegetable is rising it is also clear that consumption of temperate zone fruits and vegetable accounts for an increasing share of this.
Diet diversification and health The process of diet transformation has far-reaching consequences for public health. The adoption of a more varied and nutritionally balanced diet, typical of income-induced diet diversification, generally leads to a substantial improvement in public health indicators. The health implications of the globalisation of diets are less clear-cut. On the one hand, the availability of a much broader range of food products enables consumers to overcome the limitations of the traditional local diets in terms of availability of resources. Also, the process of food standardisation that is put in place by large food distributors and supermarket chains can ensure higher levels of food hygiene. Both these aspects would be associated with an improvement in health indicators.
The incidence of moderate and severe malnutrition in India for children between the ages of one and five has fallen markedly across all states. In 1991-2, severe malnutrition for India stood at 11.1% but by 2000-1, the figure has fallen to 6.4%. Moderate malnutrition too has fallen for the same periods from 45.1% to 41.3%. Table 6 gives a detailed breakdown for all states. The reduction in severe malnutrition is explained precisely because of diet diversification. From table 4 it can be seen that there is amarked increase in the consumption of milk, animal protein and fruits and vegetables all of which combined can explain the reduced incidence of malnutrition. On the other hand, the increased consumption of highly-calorific and more energy-dense food could lead to an increased incidence obesity and of diet-related diseases, like diabetes, coronary heart disease and certain types of cancer. It seems clear that dietary patterns are contributing to a clear change in the trends of chronic diseases in India (see Shetty, 2002). Shetty (2002) remarks: "There is clear evidence of a demographic, epidemiological and nutrition transition in India that is fuelling the epidemic of chronic diseases and obesity, particularly in the urban areas." From Table 7 the impact of globalisation and economic growth on health is overwhelmingly concentrated in urban areas. Indeed, whilst we have identified diet change as being a two-stage process made up of distinct phases, it is clear that the rate at which diet change occurs is a function of location. This is, of course, as we would expect. The mechanisms and institutions that drive economic growth and consequently globalisation are primarily concentrated in urban centres with a lagged effect in rural areas.
Distribution of Children (aged 1-5 years) by Nutritional Grade in Rural Areas of Select States (per cent).
Kerala Tamil Nadu Karnataka Andhra Pradesh Maharashtra Gujarat Madhya Pradesh Orissa West Bengal All States.
7.5 17.6 20.8 6.2 8.0 10.5 4.6 3.6 7.2 6.1 9.9 11.5 3.2 4.5 8.2 3.8 2.4 7.4 8.4 5.8 7.5 6.0 6.7 9.3 7.4 5.9 7.2 9.0.
Source: National Nutritional Monitoring Bureau; Report of NNMB Surveys (1991-2), National Institute of Hyderabad, 1993; Report of the Repeat Survey_Rural, 2001, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1999; Diet and Nutrition Status of Rural Population , National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 2001.
Urban-rural differences in chronic disease risk in developing societies.
NIDDM prevalence, Tamil Nadu (%) Urban Rural Reference 8.2 2.4 Ramachandran, 1998.
CHD prevalence, Delhi (%) 9.7 2.7 Chadha et al., 1997.
CHD prevalence, Moradabad (%) 9.0 3.3 Singh et al.,1997.
Cancer incidence, Delhi vs. Barshi, per 100000 118.8 57.6 Gopalan, 1997.
Note: NIDDIM- non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus CHD- Coronary heart disease Epidemiology of non insulin dependant diabetes mellitus in India Urban-rural difference in the prevalence of coronary heart disease and its risk factor in Delhi Prevalence of coronary artery disease and coronary risk factor in rural and urban population of north India Diet, Nutrition and Chronic Disease: Lessons from Contrasting Worlds.
Moreover, the steady and visible expansion of the fast food outlet appears to add credence to some of the concerns raised by nutritionists on the rising incidence of obesity in India (and other diet related illnesses). Popkins et al. (2001) carried out an analysis of diet trends and nutritional status in India and China and calculate the economic costs of these changes. Whilst the incidence of undernutrition by their estimates is declining, the incidence of obesity, diabetes and hypertension is rising. Table 8 summarises some of their results for India. Significantly, the consumption of saturated fats is predicted to double over a thirty year period. Popkins et al. go on to corroborate that the prevalence of diet-related non-communicable diseases is higher in urban than in rural areas as we would expect. A further important point that contributes to the increased incidence of a high-fat diet is that real prices for energy dense foods has fallen. Compared to the 1960's, it is now possible to eat a diet that is made up of 20% fats at almost half the cost (see Popkin, 1993). A diet that is particularly unhealthy, for instance because it is highly energydense or includes a high proportion of processed food, would clearly have individual costs in terms of a higher risk of illnesses for the individuals or households involved. These costs might be taken into account by the consumers, although they are often not given the weight they deserve. However, an unhealthy diet also has social costs, in terms of aggregate public health indicators, that are not considered by individual 12.
consumers. The worsening of the health indicators would bring about a larger health care expenditure. In addition, they could have severe negative economic implications for instance in terms of a lower productivity of the workforce, and in the worst-case scenario this could jeopardise the very potential for growth of the economy. It is well established that there is a close link between nutrition and productivity, particularly in agrarian societies. In summary, the social public health implications of switching to a new diet ought to inform food policy decisions.
Changes in Health Indicators 1995-2025 Category India 1995 9% 4.7% 44% 57% 16.3% 2.1% 929 73% $340 $170 India 2025 24% 9% 28% 53% 19.4% 3.0% 1330 48% $875.
Overweight (including obesity) Saturated fat, % of total energy Low birth weight (30 years ago) Stunting (30 years ago) Hypertension Diabetes (% of whole population) Population size (millions) Percentage rural GDP/capita Annual wage (US$) Source: Popkin et al. (2001).
Urbanisation, food consumption patterns and food security are strongly related. Table 9 shows that in some cities a large part of urban growth can be attributed to the growth of the informal urban economy, with households living in slum accommodation on the peripheries of urban centres. Supermarkets and fast food outlets etc. tend to target the middle-classes and so the location of these enterprises is likely to be in areas that are inhabited by or serve these higher income groups. The food consumption patterns of poor migrants in the urban slums are different from those in the formal urban economy who enjoy substantially higher incomes. Urban slums are often characterised by copycat street foods, that is, food stalls that seek to mimic the branded products of fast food outlets. Moreover these.
street vendors are part of the unregulated economy and this has implications in terms of food safety which could exacerbate the poor health effects of a nutritionallydeficient diet. The development literature has not focused specifically on the analysis of the dietary habits of the urban poor, precisely because the overwhelming majority of India's poor live in rural areas. However, the consumption patterns of the urban poor cannot be ignored, particularly given the rate of urban expansion, and are likely to differ markedly from those of the rural poor. An important social aspect of the globalisation of the diet is that, once the traditional food consumption habits have been displaced by the new consumption patterns, the change becomes largely irreversible. Processed food is both easier to prepare and less time-intensive than the traditional food. The skills required to prepare the local food that have been developed over centuries and had been passed on from generation to generation can easily be lost. The globalised diet therefore becomes an absorbing state, in the sense that it would be virtually impossible for the dietary habits to revert back to the old traditional ones. This process is very visible in Western countries, where the availability of convenience food is leading to a rapid loss in the ability of households to prepare the traditional recipes. The globalisation of diets would therefore have critical implications for the whole food culture of the country, leading to a cultural homogenisation to the global model.
Greater Mumbai Delhi Kolkata Chennai Bangalore Hyderabad Ahmedabad Nagpur Pune Surat Vadodara Ludhiana Kalyan Haora Thane Nashik Faridabad Pimpri Chinchwad Kanpur Lucknow Jaipur Indore Bhopal Patna Varanasi Agra Meerut All Metro Cities.
Source: www.censusindia.net.
Transformation of Food Supply Systems India is beginning to observe a dramatic change in food supply systems in.
response to rapid urbanization, diet diversification, and the liberalization of foreign direct investment in the food sector. The observed changes are in both the retail sector as well as in the production sector. This section describes the changes in food supply systems, with a particular emphasis on provisioning the cities. It then proceeds to examine the implications for domestic production and the specific impact on small farmers.
Feeding the cities Feeding the burgeoning urban masses is one of the most important food policy challenges facing India today and for the foreseeable future. There are three specific dimensions to the issue of feeding the cities. The first stems from the quantitative aspect. Towns are getting larger and so the size of the urban market is expanding. This requires not only increases in total urban food supply, but also the establishment of large suppliers in order to manage the increased level of activity in the market. The second dimension derives from the qualitative aspect of demand changes in cities. The rapid diversification of the urban diet cannot be met by the traditional food supply chain. It requires in effect the commercialisation and diversification of domestic production systems and/or increased food imports. The third dimension draws from the location of urban centres. India's most populous cities and towns tend to be located on the coast. Importing food to satisfy the changing food demand could be relatively easier and less costly than acquiring the same food from the domestic hinterlands. There will be a growing choice, at the margin, between domestic supply and imports, although one would suspect that both would rise in absolute terms. The change in urban food demand is almost simultaneously accompanied by changes in retail preferences. Western style marketing outlets are gaining a foothold in most Indian cities. Whilst income-induced diet diversification may be met by local suppliers with few changes to the existing production environment, the second stage of diet globalisation requires a shift away from traditional products. Globalisation results in a significant increase in the size of the domestic food market and this generates powerful incentives for foreign suppliers and supermarkets to enter the food sector. Trade liberalization greatly facilitates the widespread establishment of global supermarket chains and fast food outlets and thus speeds up the diffusion of homogenous foods and of a global diet in the Indian market. The growth of 16.
supermarkets is thus a crucial determinant for the second stage of the change in dietary habits. Supermarkets are in the ideal position to deal with both the quantitative, qualitative and locational elements of changes in the urban food market. Moreover, supermarkets also play an active role in accelerating and broadening the scope for diet diversification. The wide product range of supermarkets, from fresh produce to detergents to light household electrical appliances, allows consumers to avoid the need to visit distinct retail outlets. Consumers are able to buy detergents and kitchen utensils etc., which can be regarded as complements to food preparation, all under one roof. This is particularly important in urban areas, where changes in the pattern of work place increased constraints on time. Moreover, supermarkets provide food that must conform to certain standards of safety and quality. The combination of choice, convenience and safety as offered by supermarkets has huge appeal for the burgeoning middle classes. After a relatively slow start, supermarkets are beginning to move in to the Indian market. FoodWorld is the largest supermarket chain in India operating in Southern India, with 80 outlets and with plans to have 100 stores by en