United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit.
Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Liv e l i hoods Programme (DiMP).
THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND IN SUSTAINAB LE LIVELIHOODS DEVELOPMENT.
Case study Assessing the Role of Local Institutions in Reducing the Vulnerability of At-Risk Communities in Búzi, Central Mozambique.
Zefanias Matsimbe Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme (DiMP) University of Cape Town October 2003.
Co-financed by the Rural Institutions and Particip ation Service of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarb eit (GTZ).
T he designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression o f any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
M ap of Mozambique showing the study area.
Acknowle dge me n ts.
The Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme at the University of Cape Tow n (DiMP) w ould like to express its appreciation to a number of key people and organisations w ho generously gave of their time and support in the course of this research. We are grateful to all those w ho set aside time from their busy schedules to participate in interview s and to provide information relevant to Assessing the Role of Local Institutions in Reducing the Vulnerability of At-Risk Communities in Búzi, Central Mozambique. In this context w e would like to thank specifically community members, traditional and administrative authorities w ithin the Munamícua and Boca, Bândua and Estaquinha, and Búzi districts, and the Sofala provincial authorities in Búzi and Beira respectively, the national government in Maputo, the UN family, the INGC (Maputo and Beira) the Mozambican Red Cross (CVM) in Beira and Búzi, GTZ-Proder, as w ell as NGOs and individuals that directly or indirectly contributed in different w ays and at different stages of the research. In particular w e w ould also like to thank individually Nicolas Lamade from the GTZ and Franziska Steinbruch from CIG-UCM, w ho supported the research both intellectually and logistically. Special thanks are also due to the principals of the Estaquinha and Bândua secondary schools w ho provided accommodation for the team.
Figures, tables, boxes and appendices ...................................................... Abbreviations and acronyms ...................................................................... Executive S um m a r y ..................................................................................... PART 1 Introduction, background, study site identification and methodology.
PART 2 Dealing with natural hazards in Mozambique: the case of the 2000 floods.
PART 3 Institutional assessment.
PART 4 Lessons learnt and recommendations.
Appendices .................................................................................................... References and Selective Bibliography ...................................................... Glossary .........................................................................................................
Figures, table s , boxe s and appendice s.
Appendix 1: Tropical depressions betw een January and April 2000 ......................... Appendix 2: Level of appeal and response ................................................................ Appendix 3: Summary of assistance recei ed as result of appeal v ... Appendix 4: Main policies and legislation after 1990 Appendix 5: Map indicating the concentration of institutions in basin during the 2000 floods ........................................................................... Appendix 6: Institutions and their role during the emergency ....................................
Abbrev ia tions and acronyms.
CCM ­ Mozambique Christian Council CIG-UCM ­ Centro de Informação Geográfica da Universidade Católica de Moçambique (Geographic Information Centre of the Catholic University of Mozambique, Beira) CVM ­ Cruz Vermelha de Moçambique ( Moza mb ic an Red Cross) DiMP ­ Disaster Mitigation for Sustainable Livelihoods Programme DNA ­ Direcção Naçional das Águas (National Directorate for Water Management representing the Ministry of Public Works and Housing), DORCAS Aid ­ International Christian Aid and Development Organisation ESMABAMA ­ A Catholic charity organisation w or king in four mission of southern Sofala (Estaquinha, Machanga, Barada and Mangunde) FAO ­ Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations FCF ­ Foundation Against Famine GRC ­ Committee for Risk Management GTZ ­ (Deutsche) Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (Ger man Technical Cooperation Corporation) INA M ­ Instituto Naçional de Meteorologia ( Natio nal Institute for Weather Forecasting) INE ­ Instituto Naçional de Estatistica (National Statistics Institute) INGC- Instituto Nacional de Gestão de Calamidades (National Institute for Disaster Management) KULIMA ­ Mozambican NGO w or king on agricultural and rural development NGO ­ Non-governmental organisation MADER ­ Ministério da Agricultura e Desenvolvimento Rural ( Ministr y of Agriculture and Rural development) MISAU ­ Ministério da Saúde Ministry of Health ORAM ­ Rural Mutual Assistance (Mozambican NGO w or king on agriculture and Rural Development) PMA ­ Programa Mundial para Alimentação (World Food Programme).
UCM ­ Universidade Católica de Moçambique (Catholic University of Mozambique) UCT ­ University of Cape Tow n UN ­ United Nations UNDP ­ United Nations Development Pr ogr amme UNEP/HABITAT ­ United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO ­ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA ­ United Nations Population Fund UNHCR ­ United Nations High Commission for Refugees UNICEF ­ United Nations Children Fund USA ­ United States of America USA ID ­ United States Agency for International Development WFP ­ World Food Programme WHO ­ World Health Organisation.
Executive Summary.
From December 1999 to March 2000, Mozambique recorded the highest rainfall rates since 1951. They w er e associated w ith tw elv e meteorological systems, and triggered massive flooding in the southern and central regions of the country, w ith disastrous consequences, including human, physical and economic losses. This event, reported as a `flood event', w ith more people affected by flooding than directly by the rain, had a considerable affect on the livelihoods of over a million people. The heavy rains in other southern African countries such as Botsw ana, Zimbabw e, South Africa and Sw az iland, caused in part by the cyclones Connie and Eline, w ere precursors to the flooding in Mozambique. Neighbouring countries w er e forced to open their dams, resulting in excessive volumes of w ater entering the Mozambique catchment areas. The Búzi catchment in central Mozambique w as one of those affected by w aters released from the Chicamba Dam, causing rising levels in the Búzi River, w ith consequent flooding. This helps explain w hy floods in that area occurred some days after the cyclones had passed. Most communities in Búzi Province w er e declared disaster-affected. With limited resources to respond to such an event, the Mozambique government w as forced to seek assistance from the international community. They launched tw o international appeals, which resulted in aid being supplied for both evacuation and rehabilitation. This study aims at understanding the role of local institutions and organisations in reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards. It w as based in Búzi District, w her e tw o villages, namely Munamícua and Boca, w er e selected for the fieldw or k. Both sites still reflect the impact of the events of 2000 in the highly vulnerable livelihoods of their households. The research methodology involved multidisciplinary methods and techniques. Data w as gathered from a number of institutions before the fieldw or k w as conducted. The 2000 floods: Early w arnin g , emergency response and recovery in Búzi The uncharacteristic nature of the 2000 flooding event had serious implications for the earlywar ning system mechanis ms , since riverine communities did not respond appropriately. The flooding in the Búzi catchment, triggered by the Búzi River inundation, w as uncharacteristically higher than normal cyclone-triggered flooding. The Búzi administrative authorities w er e alerted to the rapidly rising river w ater by the Chibabava administrative authorities in the Búzi upper stream. Communities surrounding the Búzi headquarters w er e w arned, but w ar nings failed to the reach remote zones of the district on time. How ev er even the alerted communities did not take the w ar ning seriously because the rain had stopped some days before, and as a result no measures w er e taken to reduce the impact of w hat w as later reported as one of the most intense floods in the communities' history. In Búzi no formal rescue w as provided at the beginning of the flooding, so that by the time rescue measures w er e provided by official authorities or external agencies, households had already evacuated themselves to safer locations. Both case studies show the prevalence and importance of informal social netw or ks , local institutions and local authorities (traditional and.
administrative) and locally-based organisations (e.g. churches) for disaster mitigation, response and recovery, using local natural resources. The limited capacity of the national government to respond to the emergency w as clear from the outset. Many of the emergency relief organisations provided immediate assistance that lasted almost six months and satisfied only immediate needs. Emergency aid relief consisted mainly of food, clothing, medicines and ­ in a few cases ­ money. This assistance w as provided after a rapid needs assessment, conducted by the donors and the administrative authorities. The relief distribution encountered several problems because of the limited and non-standardised needs assessment, together w ith inefficient coordination of distribution. This meant that there w as no coverage of many places, especially in the more remote areas. After the immediate emergency situation w as over most of these organisations disappeared, with only a few left, running reconstruction programmes for affected households. Unfortunately these w er e far from sufficient for the needs of the villagers, considering the level of destruction suffered. Most of the organisations assisted the communities for less than six months after the floods ­ the only organisations still w or king in the Búzi basin w er e those whose main activities were related to disaster risk management, such as the GTZ 1, CVM2 and some organisations working on food and seeds distribution (CCM3, ESMABA MA4) .
Re co mme nd at ions.
The study in the tw o villages highlighted the critical importance of both traditional authorities and informal social netw or ks in mitigating the impact of recurrent disasters. Some problems did, how ev er , arise because of corruption and nepotism betw een traditional authorities, as w ell as due to internal conflicts in the local traditional structures. This affected local communities after the 2000 floods because traditional authorities participated in the identification and assessment of flood-ravaged households w ithin their area of jurisdiction. In order to strengthen local capacity for reducing the people's vulnerability to natural hazards through efficient early w ar ning and through adequate response and recovery action, the study presents the follow ing specific recommendations: Early warning and emergency planning To include: a) Development of local management plans involving the local authorities and the most influential people w ithin the community; b) Promotion of the local community radio station in Búzi to disseminate early w ar nings ; c) Distribution of solar or w ind- up radios, as villagers often cannot afford batteries; d) Active involvement of GRC members to complement the information broadcast from local radio to local communities, especially in remote locations along the Búzi catchment; e) Working w ith communities to inform them of the recurrence of extreme w eather events, so that all w ar nings issued by government are taken seriously;.
A German gov ern ent -owned corporation f or interna ional cooperation. m t The Mozambican Red Cro s. s 3 The Mozambique Christian Council (Protestant). 4 A Catholic charity organisa ion working in four missions of southern Sofala (Estaquinha, Machanga Barada and t , Mangunde).
f) Promotion of national and provincial teams for monitoring, recording and evaluating indicators of natural hazards, and subsequently disseminating information to potentially affected communities; g) Facilitation of environmental education programmes w ithin local communities, to increase their know ledge of natural hazards, and especially to increase their capacity to understand uncharacteristically extreme events; h) Design of evacuation plans w ith at-risk communities, specifying locations to w hic h they should evacuate in case of emergency, and w her e to access necessary resources; i) Integration of the scientific understanding of natural hazards w ith local "conventional w is dom" or traditional beliefs. Designing of evacuation, search and rescue plans T include: o a) Development, for the youth in all vulnerable zones, of ongoing training programmes in emergency first aid and in evacuation and search-and-rescue procedures. Impact assessment and relief distribution To include: a) Standardisation of assessment procedures; b) Pre-assessment and monitoring of food relief distribution by the local authorities to avoid community conflicts; c) Encouragement of partnerships betw een the Mozambican government and external agencies to overcome the external agencies' mistrust of local authorities, and promotion of collaborative w or k to avoid haphazard assessment and distribution of relief; d) Design of emergency food aid interventions, not only to provide immediate relief, but also to support mitigation activities; Recovery and rehabilitation To include: a) Establishment of long­ter m rehabilitation processes involving all community members; b) Design of planning and recovery programmes w hic h take into account local cognitive factors that w ill influence their effectiveness; c) Support local informal support netw or ks . Reducing the vulnerability of at-risk communities by strengthening and diversifying community livelihoods To include: a) Focus on extensive and diverse sustainable utilisation of the natural resource base (agriculture, livestock, w ildlif e, fishery, forestry) and efficient utilisation of river basins for crop production; b) Focus on female-headed households w hos e livelihoods are agriculturally dependent; c) Encouragement of local seed exchange betw een farmers from different communities (local seed is more resilient as is has adapted to local soil and climate conditions); d) Promoting local agrarian extension officers to help communities improve agricultural production; e) Encouragement of NGOs in implementing s mall projects for livestock production as a second means of livelihood.
Strengthening the coordination role of local institutions to reduce the vulnerability of at-risk communities To include: a) Increased coordination betw een government institutions at national, provincial, district and local levels; b) Per ma nent operation of disaster committees at each level of government; c) Strengthening coordination betw een the Mozambican government and other southern Africa countries, especially in w ater management; d) Setting up a database of all institutions and organisations w or king on disaster management at local level; e) Establishment of communication mechanis ms among local institutions to ensure better coordination; f) Strengthening of initiatives such as the GRC (Committee for Risk Management) set up by the Red Cross and GTZ; g) Strengthening the organisational capacity of local organisations; h) Government collaboration w ith NGOs and other agencies that have already understood the importance of local organisation. Need for integration of disaster m an agemen t in the sectoral policies To include: a) Increased sectoral engagement betw een government departments on disaster risk management; b) Integration of disaster risk reduction principles into government programmes; Promoting multidisciplinary research into vulnerability reduction To include: a) Adoption of a multi-disciplinary approach to assess communities at-risk; b) Encouragement of government and local institutions to development an interdisciplinary "vulnerability index"; c) Work by local authorities on a long-term basis to persuade communities that extreme events like the 2000 floods can occur again.
Introduction, background, me th odo logy.
1.1 Introduction5 From December 1999 to March 2000, the highest rainfall rate since 1951 w as recorded, triggering the w ors t flooding ever recorded in southern and central Mozambique. This rainfall was associated w ith twelve meteorological systems, namely cyclones and tropical storms (see Appendix 1) which originated in the Mozambique Channel in the Indian Ocean. The Mozambican Government assessed the dramatic consequences of this disaster over three dimensions: ! Human dimension: a total of 5.2 million people w er e affected (30% of the Mozambican population): 699 people died, 491,000 w er e displaced and 95 disappeared. ! Physical dimension: roads, railw ays and other infrastructures w er e destroyed; an area of 30,000 square kilometres w as inundated from the Umbelúzi, Incomáti, Limpopo and Save River basins in southern Mozambique to the Búzi River basin in the central region of the country; ! Economic losses: economic losses w er e estimated to have totalled USD 600 million, with a reduction in the country's economic grow th from 10 per cent to 3.8 per cent (GOM, 2000). This event w as reported as a `flood event' because more people w er e affected by flooding than by rain. No exact data are available, but it affected the livelihoods of millions of people In central Mozambique about 1,730,600 people w er e affected. In Sofala, a province w ith an 87.9% poverty index, 257,908 people w er e affected: 101 died and 94,200 w er e displaced (ibid.). The high level of poverty exacerbated existing conditions of vulnerability and impeded recovery. The heavy rains in other southern African countries6, caused in part by cyclone Connie (w hic h hit the area on 4th and 5th February 2000), and cyclone Eline (21st and 22nd February), w er e precursors to the Búzi flooding. This w as in part because the extremely heavy dow npour forced neighbouring countries to open their dams, resulting in excessive volumes of w ater entering Mozambique catchment areas. This exacerbated the local flooding triggered by the tw o successive cyclones. The Búzi basin, for example, w as affected by w ater s released from neighbouring Zimbabw e, w hic h forced the Chicamba Dam to be released, causing rising levels in the Búzi River and consequent flooding. This helps explain w hy floods in that area occurred some days after the cyclones had passed. Most communities in Búzi w er e declared disaster-affected. With limited resources to respond to such an event, the Mozambique government w as forced to seek assistance from the international community. From February to March 2000, they sent out international appeals w hich elicited a response of about USD 162 millions (GOM, 2000).
Most of the data reported in this section were taken f rom GOM (2000). We clearly acknowledge the source and the copyright. 6 Botswana, Zimbabwe, Sou h Africa and Swaziland. t.
identification.
This assistance w as destined mainly for food, infrastructure reparation and rescue material (see Appendix 2). This assistance made it possible for people to buy essential goods, and funded services for the emergency operations being undertaken by state institutions, NGOs, UN agencies and religious organisations. The involvement of several organisations in the reception and distribution of aid made the operation more flexible and efficient. It w as also possible to rescue 53,000 people, to provide emergency assistance to about 676,700 people in the established accommodation centres, and to start the process of population resettlement. Assistance w as distributed using criteria based on the declaration of items lost. This study aimed at understanding the role of local institutions and organisations in reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards in Búzi. To explore institutional coordination, the 2000 Mozambique disaster (floods and cyclones) w as taken as a point of reference. To reach our goal, a research methodology involving multidisciplinary methods and techniques, previously discussed at UCT w ith the South African team, w as applied. This w ill be discussed later in Part 1, as w ell as the criteria for selecting the study sites. This report is structured as follow s : Part 1 presents a general introduction to the study, background on Mozambique, and identification of study sites. It also presents the methodology used for data collection. Part 2 describes how early-warning mechanis ms w er e operated, the role of informal social netw or ks in emergency response, emergency assistance itself, the role of institutions in longter m recovery and risk reduction of at-risk communities. Part 3 deals w ith institutional assessment at national, provincial and district levels. Part 4 presents the lessons learnt from the 2000 floods, and addresses some recommendations to improve emergency responses and to reduce the vulnerability of at-risk communities. 1.2 Background on Mozam biq ue Mozambique is one of the southern African countries most disposed to hydrometeorological hazards (Boudreau et al, 2002). In the last tw o decades climate-related shocks have tended to increase in frequency and severity, resulting in catastrophic damage to livelihood (ibid.). Data gathered during the last tw o decades suggest that, throughout the country, more than 8 million people w er e affected by natural phenomena ( ibid.) , the most frequent being droughts, floods and cyclones. They had a devastating impact on the most vulnerable 80% of the population, living in the rural areas. The state of vulnerability of these people is aggravated by their extreme poverty, itself compounded by their limited access to essential services, by fragile infrastructures and by low productivity levels. Mozambique is one of the w or ld's poorest and most in debt countries (Abrahamsson & Nilsson, 1995), occupying position 170 out of 174 in the w or ld poverty ranking ( UNDP, 2002). The extreme vulnerability of rural livelihood w as generated in part by the Mozambican civil w ar that lasted for 17 years after the country became independent in 1975. This w ar caused demographic upheavals, especially in the rural areas. About 3.5 million people w er e internally displaced or became refugees in bordering countries (Devereux & Palmero, 1999). Other.
consequences included the loss of lives of approximately one million people ( Pitc her , 1996), and landmines placed throughout the countryside made it almost impossible for rural people to access their cropping lands. The civil w ar destroyed significant parts of the physical and commercial infrastructure in rural areas. Numerous roads, bridges, shops, schools and health-care institutions w er e destroyed (Devereux & Palmero, 1999; Pitcher, 1998) and caused US$15 billion w or th of damages (Pitcher, 1996). According to calculations made by the UN, the cost of the physical destruction during the 1980s amounted to 250 years' worth of exports at the 1992 level, and tw ice the annual influx of foreign aid (Devereux & Palmero, 1999 and Abrahamsson & Nilsson, 1995). With the uncontrolled dispersion of communities, rural households lost their social netw or ks , families w er e split up, and individuals w er e taken aw ay from a context in w hich they could draw on mutual support, an important base for rural livelihoods. Mechanis ms such as local norms and values, traditional rules, taboos and ceremonies that had influenced the sustainable use of natural resources and environmental protection w er e all abandoned, and traditional authorities that had been responsible for the dissemination of values and know ledge, especially to the younger generation, collapsed and lost their legitimacy. Indigenous know ledge of farming techniques, livestock production, and disaster prevention and preparedness w ere lost completely or replaced by others acquired from abroad or from other areas w ithin the country, not alw ay s suitable for the local physical environment (Watson, et al, 1999). As an indirect consequence the vulnerability of rural livelihoods increased, placing these communities at greater risk to natural hazards. The economic and political changes introduced in the early 1990s also exacerbated the situation of vulnerability. In 1987 w hen structural adjustments w er e introduced, state enterprises w ere privatised, leading to a decrease in the provision of goods and services to the poorest people, w ith negative impacts mostly on poor Mozambican households. Politically, the country observed changes of legislation in response to global economic and political changes. Several policies w ere amended and some new ones approved specifically to include a livelihood component, especially in rural communities, but most of these policies did not have the desired results. The most important policies and legislation are indicated in Appendix.
The 2000 floods that affected the country opened a w indow of opportunity for the government to move faster tow ar ds the definition of a legislative framew or k on disaster management. By 2001 the Law of Disaster Management w as finally approved. This law aimed at establishing strategies, plans, legal nor ms and operational programmes for disaster prevention, aid and rehabilitation. It w as also intended to reduce communities' vulnerability through a continuous, integrated, multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral process, based on an adequate information and communication system (Bill of the Law of Disaster Management, 2001). This legal tool recognises the role of local governance in reducing the vulnerability of communities at-risk, but its focus is still predominately on the protection of state resources. Indeed, national strategies are still based on disaster management or on strengthening the state's capacity to respond to disasters, w ith a limited focus on increasing the community's capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters or to reduce risk conditions. The challenge for local government is to strengthen local communities' capacity to cope, w hils t linking them to external support at both local and national levels.
1.3 Reasons for selection of case study sites The case study w as to take place in the Búzi River basin, in central Mozambique. This region was chosen for the follow ing reasons: · This part of the country is one of the areas most subject to flooding; · Since the floods of 2000, the area has been continuously affected by cyclones, affecting the livelihoods of thousands of people reliant on subsistence agriculture. · During the floods of 2000 this region w itnes s ed the arrival of hundreds relief workers from national and international organisations, both governmental and non-governmental. Although problems emerged from the lack of coordination betw een these organisations, the role of local institutions in disaster management became a significant issue of debate. It should be noted that, although the Búzi basin w as one of the areas most affected by the 2000 floods, the disaster situation has not been as extensively profiled as the flooding in the Limpopo basin, in southern Mozambique. Initially tw o study sites w er e selected along the Búzi basin: the Búzi district in Sofala province, and the Mussorize district in Manica Province. Ow ing to unforeseen administrative circumstances it w as , how ev er , not possible to conduct research in the Mussorize district. The main reason for choosing these tw o sites was that, although the tw o districts were affected similarly by the 2000 floods, they w er e not covered in the same w ay by early w ar ning information, rescue operations, assistance measures (sanitation, medical assistance and shelter) and resettlement and reconstruction programmes. Most of the aid supplied w as concentrated in the Búzi district rather than in Mussorize. (See the map in Appendix 4). Another reason for choosing these study sites w as their geographical position: up t ill now most studies carried out in Mozambique have taken place in the south. This is a result of historical regional inequalities ­ infrastructure and accessibility are better developed in southern Mozambique, w her e the capital of the country is located. Central Mozambique, especially Sofala Province, is the poorest region of the country and has been neglected by the national government because it is considered as being dominated by opposition forces. It is also the area most affected by the recent civil w ar . In addition, this region presents an historical picture of the influence of traditional authorities. After independence, pow er w as removed from traditional authorities w ho w er e seen as the product of colonial rule. People unfortunately did not recognise the important role of existing local authorities in allocating resources to sustain their means of livelihood. How ev er , these authorities continue to play important role in reducing people's dependence on natural resources, as they replace absent state institutions. An administrative circumstance in the Mussorize district required a shift in the initial research design, and in the end research w as undertaken only in Búzi. In this district tw o study sites, Munamícua and Boca, w er e selected. The first criterion for selection of these sites w as that both w er e affected by riverine flooding (natural events), although the intensity and impacts differ betw een the sites. The second criterion w as based on geographical situation: Munamícua is situated w ithin the Bândua administrative area, w hile Boca falls under the Estaquinha administration. The proximity of Munamícua and the remoteness of Boca from the Búzi headquarters w er e considered important elements in this selection. The underlying assumption w as that, with Munamícua closer to the Búzi headquarters, there w ould be more efficient institutional coordination and communication. This w as understood as being a major factor in the rate of response and recovery, influencing the vulnerability of these communities.
In the case of Boca, w her e there are only limited social infrastructure and facilities, the vulnerability of the communities w as considered higher. It also important to note that information collected in previous interview s w ith people in Maputo and Beira helped to choose these sites. Some organisations that had already w orked in these areas provided us w ith basic information about the area, including the presence of local institutions, conditions of accessibility and w or king conditions. 1.3.1 Description of study sites The Búzi district, w ith a population of about one and a half million (INE, 1999), covers an area of a little over 7000 square kilometres and is divided into three administrative posts namely Búzi, Estaquinha and Nova Sofala (see Figure 1 below ) . The tw o communities taken as study sites are situated along the low er part (floodplain) of the Búzi River. The river is 379 kilometres long, w ith its catchment in eastern Zimbabw e. Búzi is characteristically a very poor district w ith households basing their means of livelihood on agriculture and livestock. In order of importance the most important crops are maize, sorghum, rice, beans, sw eet potatoes, groundnuts and vegetables. Livestock is the second main activity that guarantees the subsistence of most of the households studied. Goats, chickens and ducks are the most common livestock produced in both areas. Livestock is