THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND IN SUSTAINAB LE LIVELIHOODS DEVELOPMENT.
The role of Qashqai nomadic communities in reducing vulnerability to recurrent drought and sustainable livelihoods development in Iran.
Prepared by CENESTA (Centre for Sustainable Development), Iran for the Rural Institutions and Participation Service, FAO.
February, 2004.
T he designations emp loy ed and the p res ent at ion of material in this p ublicat ion do not imp ly the exp res s ion of any opinion whatsoever on the p art of FAO concernin g the legal status of any country , territory , city or area or of its authorities, or concernin g the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Op inions exp res s ed in this p ublicat ion are those of the authors and do not imp ly any op inion whatsoever on the p art of FAO.
In tro d u ctio n.
M ore than 90% of Iran's surface is arid or semi-arid land and p as t oral communities have alway s p layed an imp ort ant role in food p roduction by developing creative and sustainable systems for the use of scarce natural resources. Although migratin g p ast oralis ts number only about 2% of the entire p opulat ion (1.3 million p ast oralist s ) accordin g to government figures, they satisfy about one quarter of the country 's livestock needs. The p ress ures of drought, debt and p ro-s edent aris at ion p olicies are drivin g p as t oralis t s to abandon their livelihoods sy st ems and settle p ermanent ly in villages and cities. However, there is lack of jobs for settled p ast oralis ts . Furthermore exp erienc es with industrial livestock p roduct ion--t he main alternative to p as t oral livestock p roduct ion--have not been p romis ing. This case study seeks to understand how local p as t oral communities could p lay in the management of drought in Iran. It begins with an examination of the range of organ is at ions that are involv ed in drou ght management in Iran. The next section focuses on the experien ce of the drought of 1999-2001 in the words of Qashqai p as t oralis ts from the south of Iran. Their testimonies mak e a strong case for increasin g the involv ement of local communities in managin g natural disasters that affect them. The tragic earthquake that struck the Iranian city of Bam in December 2003 has made a big imp act on this rep ort . The resp onse to the earthquake served to sp ark a debate in the Iranian media, and interest amon g the public, on the strengths and weaknesses of Iran's disaster management p lan and strategy. The first and most tragic observation was that so-called "natural disasters" do not necessarily need to result in disasters-- they can be avoided and their imp act mitigated. The two earthquakes that hit California and Iran just days ap art in December 2003 both measured at about 6.5 on the Richter Scale, but whereas only 3 people were killed in the California earthquake, rou ghly 43,000 dead according to official numbers have been registered in Iran. The government has been heavily criticised in the weeks followin g the earthquake for its lack of prep arat ion and p oor coordination for such a disaster, even though it is widely known that Iran is one of the most earthquake p rone areas on earth. And while Iranians have been very eager to donate money and goods to the earthquake survivors, many have organised their own deliveries for fear that their donations would not end up in the hands of the victims. Following the earthquake, M s . Jamileh Kadiv ar, M P for Tehran made the link b et w een the Bam disaster and the state of governance in the country. "When the institutions that run this country are constantly arguin g with each other and constantly faced with challen ges and crises and one institution is try ing to eliminate the other, we cannot create a society which benefits from order and security." She went on to say , "If our politicians were really motivated to develop the country for all its p eople then our develop ment p roject s would not lie half-fin ished for y ears on end, our v ill ages wouldn't be emp ty of their p op ulat ions , traffic and p ollut ion would not have reached crisis p oint in our cities and our tourism sector would not be as inactive as it is today ". This p ublic and critical look at the government's record is a very p os it ive step and should be welcomed by the govern ment as it is necessary for develop ing alternatives and for buildin g the p olit ical will to imp lement them. However, one striking feature of all the criticism--.
w het her voiced in parliament, in newsp apers , or in academic journals-- has b een the lack of systematic and in-dep t h analy s is of "what went wrong". As is the norm in Iran, a hu ge p ublic outcry follows a major and tragic national d is as t er and loud calls are mad e for imp rovement s to the sy st em. But there are very few specific reco mmend at ions based on an aly s is of laws, p olicies , budget and on-the-ground exp erien ces . The tragedy is never forgotten, but the call for imp rovement s fades from our consciousness. This case study attempts to p res ent a more in-depth look at the system for managin g natural disasters in Iran and p articularly the new National Comp rehens ive P lan for R elief and Rescue. There are both p os it ive and n e gat ive aspects of the comp rehens ive p lan, but perhap s the most imp ort ant recommendation would be to design a national p lan that put the citizens of the country at its centre. The current p lan is supp osed to be imp lement ed by a maze of overlap p ing committees and workin g group s with no clear p ict ure of how a local commun it y could negotiate its way through such a system to p lay a more active role. Legal obstacles to registering non-governmental and co mmunit y -bas ed organ is ations present another major difficulty in envisionin g a national p lan that could involve local communities since legal registration is a p rerequis it e for any social group to become active. Lastly, the develop ment of a na tional p lan with local commun it y involvement would require local commun it ies to be organised into coalitions or unions at the national level. Since this is currently not the case, the recommend at ion is to start building up exp eriences fro m the most local levels, with the ultimate go al of arrivin g at a full national p lan of coop erat ion.
Context of the case study.
T h e drought.
Iran suffered three consecutive y ears of major drought from 1999 to 2001. Estimates p ut the statistical probability of such a drought at once in 30 y ears . A largely arid and semi-arid country with wide weather fluctuations, Iran is accustomed to drought. However the recent drought was p art icularly hard-hitting. Variation between and within p rovinces was high, but it has been estimated that 25 out of 28 p rovinces were affected in some way and that 37 million p eop le-- half the p op ulat ion-- were affected. Even p art s of the country with high levels of p recip it at ion in normal y ears were severely impacted. Although the drought was less severe each y ear of its duration, the social and economic imp act was greater as it p rogres s ed; an estimated 90% of the p op ulat ion were imp act ed in the last y ear. Rural food p roducers -- farmers and p as t oralis t s -- were the hardest hit. The drought comp ounded stresses already present in the rural economy , p art icularly p oor and inefficient management of water and land. The long-standin g conflict over access to land between farmers and p as t oralis t s also became more acute. Pastoral communities currently comp ris e some 2% (1.3 million p eop le) of the total p op ulat ion of Iran and meet about 25% of the livestock needs of the country. Pastoralists dep end largely on grazin g liv es t ock for their livelihoods but ran ge lands were under sev ere p ress ure due to the drought. During the last drou ght rangeland production fell to half that of a normal y ear in many p rovinces , and less than that in some. The livelihoods of pastoral communities suffered in numerous way s: animal mortality increased, p roduct ion of meat,.
milk and wool fell and sale of animal in creas ed. The UN estimates that the drought affected more than 75 million animals (out of a national total of around 90 million), and immediate small stock losses were about 800,000. The negative imp act of the sale of animals--the source of p as t oralists ' wealth--was compounded by the decline in animal p rices at the same time that the p rice of imp ort ant stap les such as flour increased, thus trapp ing pastoralists in a terms of trade collap s e. The most obvious and severe effect of drou ght on pastoral communities is the ab andonment of their traditional liv elihoods sy s tem and settlement in villages, suburbs and cities.
Background on Confederation.
the Koohi Sub-tribe of the Qashqai Tribal.
The largest group of migratory nomadic p as t oralis ts in Iran is the Qashqai Confederation. The Qashqai live and migrate through p art s of the Zagros M ount ain range of southern Iran (see attached map ), mostly within the p rovince of Fars. Their environ ment is qu it e arid, with an average annual p recip it at ion in Fars of about 300mm. Faced with the aridity and high variability in the amount and distribution of rainfall-- and therefore available forage in their environment-- the Qashqai h ave developed co mplex natural resource management strategies to exp loit the uncertainties by recognisin g and workin g with the p at t erns that emerge in nature. This has led them to a livestock-based livelihood sy st em based on migration in order to make the best use of p recip it ation p atterns . The Qashqai have traditionally migrated with their herds from summer to winter p ast ures twice p er year and gained their livelihood from meat, dairy, wool, and other animal p roduct s . The Koohi Sub-tribe is one of dozens of sub-tribes of the Confed erat ion. Their summer p astures are located to the north of Shiraz, the cap it al of Fars p rovince, near the town of Eqlid and their winter p as tures are located to its south near the town of Farashband. The total distance travelled by the Koohi sub-tribe is about 860 kilometres. In general the b es t grazin g areas are in the summering grounds, p articularly those near the Kooshk-e Zar wetlands, but there are also some good grazin g areas in the winterin g grounds ­ p art icularly at the foothills of the mountains. According to the Koohi, in general, all areas which have little or no hu man imp act are good for grazing but unfortunately there are few such p laces left. Level of p recip it at ion is also a very imp ort ant indicator of quality of grazing land. The Koohi Sub-tribe includes 573 tentholds with a total p op ulat ion of about 3,500 p eop le accordin g to current calculations by the members of the sub-tribe. It should be noted that these figures include the migratory p op ulat ion only ; if the settled p op ulat ion were added the figure would rise to about 1,000 tentholds or families. The official estimates are slightly lower: accordin g to the 1377 (1998) n at ional census of no madi c p as t oralis t p opulat ions there are 536 tentholds with a total p op ulat ion of 3,264 (49.2% female). According to the same census, 52.76% of the Koohi are literate and of this 41.7% are female. In total, the province of Fars has about 145,000 migratory p ast oralis ts in the various summering grounds of the province (the highest number of any of the p rovinces ) and about 170,000 in the winterin g grounds (the second highest figure). The livelihoods p att erns of the Koohi (and all Qashqai in gen eral) have chan ged greatly over the past several decad es , particularly since land reform. Today their production is no longer.
p rimarily for self-subsistence. They sell their various animal p roduct s and buy a wide range of consumer items (mainly food and fuel) from the market. Raisin g liv es t ock is still the cornerstone of their economy , but there are clear signs that the situation has been changing. Accord in g to estimates from the Koohi, before the land reform of the early 1960s they had 40,000 to 50,000 heads of liv es t ock. They kept a wide v ariet y of animals, includin g sheep , goats, camels, donkey s, horses and to a more limited degree, cows, to satisfy a variety of needs, from food to transp ort at ion to clothing and shelter. The livestock were owned by the leaders of the clans and tribes while the other members of the tribe worked as shep herds and herders. Today the role of the traditional leaders has been greatly undermined : they have been stripp ed of their p ow er and this has contributed to changes in their livelihoods sy st ems . For instance, agricu lt ure is p laying an in creas in gly imp ort ant role as an income earner. In the p as t although they p lant ed some crops this was usually for p ers onal use only . Today growing crops (near their summer and winter grazing areas) is p lay ing an increasin gly imp ort ant role, although it tends to be the more financially p rivileged families that can afford to do this, the main constraint bein g access to land. Accordin g to estimates by the Koohi, about one fifth or one sixth of them hav e access to agricu lt ural land (on average about 5-6 What happened in the Iranian land reform? hectares of land p er Land reform refers to a series of laws in 1963 that the Shah was fond tenthold) both in the of calling the "White Revolution." In order to understand the nature summerin g and winterin g and impact of land reform it is important to keep in mind that: grounds. The main crop s.
Th e European concept of "feudalism" never existed in Iran. Unlike the European serfs--who went with the land and had no grown are wheat (for rights at all-- Iranian agricultural systems were based on a p ersonal use) and barley concept more akin to collaborative management. Different and corn (for sale).
elements of production (land, water, labour, animal traction and seeds) each had an agreed share (usually one-fifth each) in the product, and whoever put in each factor got the corres on din g p share of the crop once common expenditures (such as field guards, craftspeople, etc.) were taken off the top. Th e land reform included, more important than the land distribution, the nationalisation of all natural resources, including rangelands, fores s and water. t In the case of pastoral nomads, this meant that land that was ancestrally theirs, and which they managed sustainably and held as common property, was alienated from them and taken over by the State. Sin ce then the nomads have had to obtain individual grazing permits based on a state expert assessment of the carrying capacity of the range. The notions of carrying capacity are based on old approaches to range ecology and management that were mentored by Utah State University, now considered fundamentally in error. Th e present system of individual short-term permits means that the nomads are unable to work together to apply the principles of sustainable use. It also means that the government, unable to manage the rangelands (about 90% of the usable land in the country), has now decided to give it to the private sector--but usually not to the traditional holders of rights to the range. It is usually given to those with power and influence, who use it, more often than not, for speculation.
Both the size and the diversity of their herds are on the decline. The Koohi estimate that they currently have about 30,000 to 40,000 livestock, but also p oint out that their own p op ulat ion has increased from about 300 tentholds to about 600. Today sheep and goats dominate the herds while camels, donkey s , horses and cows are all fast dwindling in number. Accordin g to the national census of nomadic pastoralists of 1377 (1998) the.
comp os it ion of nomadic herds in the v arious summerin g grounds of Fars province is as follows: 51% goats, 47% sheep , 1% donkey s and the rest camels, donkey s , horses and cows. The main reasons for this are rep lace ment of animals by motorised vehicles for transp ort at ion and market orientated herdin g which favours sheep and goats. In fact, meat is by far the most imp ort ant pastoral livestock p roduct because it brings the best p rice. By contrast there is much less dairy p roduct ion because the women are less willin g to do the h ard work invo lved for relatively little cash benefit. Other sources of inco me includ e emp loy ment in the service sector and hand icraft p roduct ion (women only ). In the summerin g grounds some of the Koohi offer their labour to local farmers, either for a wage or for one fifth of the p roduct . In the wintering grounds they rent agricultural land to grow crops or they offer labour to local farmers. In general, the older members of the tribes continue herdin g while the y ounger generation look for new kinds of 1 work. Accordin g to the census about 40% of the Koohi are employ ed . Of this, roughly 59% raise livestock, 10% work in the agricultural sector and 31% work in the handicrafts sector. Throughout the p rovince on average 51% of nomad ic p as t oralis ts only raise livestock as their main source of in come, 32% raise livestock and grow crop s , 15% raise livestock, grow crop s and keep orchards and 2% raise livestock and keep orchards. The main expenses of a Koohi tenthold are for food, fuel, health, education, clothing, housing in wintering grounds, tents in summering grounds, fodder, and transportation of 2 animals. M any of these are relatively new exp enses , such as fodder and rental to farmers for grazin g on the stubble of their crop s , or are much greater than they were in the p ast , such as for clothin g, food, etc. In fact the Koohi say that although their cash in come has in creas ed in the p ast several decades their exp ens es have also increased a great deal. In recent y ears consump t ion p att erns have changed greatly , under the direct influence of the chan gin g consump t ion p att erns of Iran's villages and cities, facilitated by enhanced communications and transp ort . The result has been a desire for greater consump t ion and therefore greater costs of living. For example, rice h as become a stap le whereas in the p as t it was seen a luxury . Owning audio visual equ ip ment , comp ut ers and mobile telep hones are also increasin gly seen as n ecess it ies for mobile commun it ies -- p art icularly amon g the y out h. Accordin g to national census data on average about 26% of migratory pastoralists in Fars use some form of motorised vehicles, 41% have radio /audio equip ment and about 6% have televisions. These cultural factors, as well as the rejection of raising livestock as a form of livelihood by the youth, have led to widesp read migration to villages and cities. Another effect of modern urban life has been the in creas in g use of illegal dru gs by p as t oralis ts , esp ecially among the y outh. The Qashqai have developed a comp lex social structure which is intimately connected with their indigenous sy st ems for natural resource management. Customary regulations for natural resource use and management were develop ed and enforced by traditional tribal leaders at various levels of the structure of the confederation.
1 T he term " em pl oyed" includes all people 6 years of age and older who hav e worked for the 7 days prior to the census, or who don't have full-time work but worked for at least 2 of the 7 days prior to the census, or those who are engaged in seasonal work (as long as they are not looking for other work during their off-season). 2 In the past the animals survived on the natural vegetation of the rangel ands but today there is much less vegetation so they are f rc ed to hand feed their animals. o.
T he Qashqai Confederation comprises six tribes (tay efeh) includin g the "Shish Bay li" tribe. The Koohi Sub-tribe (tireh) is one of about 20 sub-tribes of the "Shish Bay li". The Koohi sub-tribe is divided into 14 clans (bonkooh), and each clan is divided into several households, or more accurately, tentholds (obaa). These organ is at ions will b e referred to in the general term, "p ast oral organisation" in this p ap er. Each tenthold is comp os ed of related families and is the smallest unit of the Qashqai social structure. Generally , families mak ing up tentholds will migrate together, and both in the summering and wintering grounds tend to camp and work near each other as a un it . The head of the confed eration (khan) and the h eads of the tribes were essentially responsible for political and strategic decision-making, coordin at ion of all the tribes and mobilisation. The heads of each of the sub-tribes (kalaantar), clans (kadkhod aa) and tentholds (reesh sefid) were more invo lved with decision-makin g about natural resource management. Socio-p olit ica l and economic chan ges that have envelop ed Iran in the last several decades have fundamentally influen ced and chan ged life for the Koohi sub-tribe and other p astoralis t s. One of the major drivin g forces behind these chan ges has been land reform (see text box, above). The p re-1963 land reform p ast oralis t communities used common prop erty management systems. The land reform p rogramme of the Shah brou ght about the nationalisation of all natural resources, including ran gelands , forests, water and wildlife; individuals were granted use of land b as ed on a sp ecific short-term grazin g licensin g sy st em. Thus p ast oralis t s were alienated from their common p rop erty land and customary rights and their incentives for p roper management and sustainable use of land were weak ened. Nationalisation has further marginalised p as t oral communities by not only fragmentin g and destroy ing their summer and winter p as t ures , but also by imp eding on their migratory routes. Rangelands b eca me state p rop erty and continue to be gov erned by p rincip les of ran ge management which h ave recently been refuted. Nationalised ran ge lands were turned over to agriculture or to a national sy s t em of p rotect ed areas both of which resulted in environmental degradation. While these p olicies have continued and intensified under the Islamic regime, since the reign of Mr. Rafsanjani, the government has adop t ed a dual policy of supp ort (with subsidies and services) and a relentless effort at sedentarisation. This has been arran ged with some encouragement from the World B ank.
Fi gure 1 Because of fragmentation of their migra tory routes, pastoralists, like members of the Koohi Sub-tribe, above, are forced to migrate along roads by truck.
Brief introduction to the host project.
The p res ent case study is embedded within a larger on going p roject entitled Reviving nomadic pastoralism in Iran - Facilitating sustainability of b iodiv er s ity and livelihoods--A learning by doing project. Workin g within the framework of the host p roject allowed the researchers to conduct the case study in a very limited time by building on the relationship s that the authors had already established with one p ast oral community in Iran ­ the Koohi Sub-tribe. Some of the recommendations that conclude this case study are guided by lessons learned so far in the host p roject, therefore a brief p resent at ion of the host project will be useful in situating the case study in context. The p roject to revive nomadic pastoralism seeks to promote sustainable liv elihoods and conservation of biolo gi cal d iversit y among nomadic p as t oralis t s in arid and semi-arid rangelands of Iran and greater Central Asia. Fundamental asp ect s of this p roject are revival and strengthenin g of traditional social organ iz at ions and cu lt ure, as well as collaborative and community management of ecosy st em health and biodiv ers it y . The initial pilot p roject focuses on one sub-tribe of nomadic p as t oralists in central Iran (the Koohi Sub-tribe). The larger goal is to perfect a modular, scalable, self-rep lic at ing, iterative model in which migratory p ast oralis t s themselves are the central d ecis ion- makers , and in.
w hich the processes and projects undertaken are app ropriat e to each group 's unique culture, p resent status, strengths and limitations. The p roject, which was launched in January 2003, began by identify ing the main p roblems , and p os s ible solutions, of the sub-tribe. Following the identification and categorisation of the main p roblem areas members of the sub-tribe tried their hand at writing p roject p rop os als aimed at p roject s which could contribute to solving each of the main problem areas. They also sketched out their overall vision for the p roject . Project funds will be used to implement some of the p roject s that have been devised by the sub-tribe. The results of the problem identification, p roject p ropos al and visionin g exercises are p res ent ed in Annex.
In order to imp lement the projects and to rehabilitate the traditional social structure destroy ed by the recent decades' econo mic and social d evelop ment s , the local community has formed "The Koohi Sub-tribe Nomadic Pastoralist's Sustainable Livelihoods Council". This council consists of rep res ent at ives from all clans comp ris ing the sub-tribe through elections at the lowest social organisational level (tenthold). The council has recently been officially registered as a non-p rofit comp any due to restrictions which make it difficult to register nongovern mental organisations. Subsequently , the sub-tribe created a Community Investment Fund or sanduq, with initial funding don at ed by a non-governmental organ is at ion, designed to fuel small-scale economic d evelop ment initiatives. The Council will act as an advisory and (as needed) d ecis ion mak in g board and will facilitate social mobilisation. Preliminary p roject p lans have also been p urs ued for a number of initiatives. The p rofit s from any investment made with sanduq funds will be returned to the sanduq for further investment. Once the level of investment reaches an adequate level for their needs, the sub-tribe will use any "excess" funds to establish new sanduqs in other sub-tribes and tribes, with a view to sp reading this community investment sy stem throughout the entire Confederation. The sanduqs supp ort two main functions: a) wealth generation for empowerment of the subt ribe; and b) conservation of their landscap e including their rangelands, water sources, and a unique wetland. The wetland and its related landscap e are now b ein g established as the first official Commun it y Conserved Area with the endorsement of the government of Iran. Besides the Koohi Sub-tribe and Cenesta the main partners are various branches of the Iranian Govern ment includin g the M inis t ry of Agriculture and Rural Develop ment , the Organisation for Forests, Rangelands and Watershed Management, and the Organisation for Nomadic Pastoralists Affairs. International p art ners includ e IIED, UNDP/GEF and IUCN/CEESP's Workin g Group on Sustainable Livelihoods. All p artners from outside the Koohi commun it y op erat e through its Council of Eld ers and all major decisions are mad e by them.
Organisations working on drought relief in Iran.
Local institution s.
Organisations working at the local level in Iran are either governmental or nongovern mental. It is imp ortant to note that local-lev el govern ment al organ is at ions are simp ly rep res ent at ives of national organisations, imp lement in g p olici es that are made in Tehran at the local level. All government policies are determin ed in the 5-y ear development plans of.
t he Planning and Management Organisation. Therefore government agencies at the local level will not be treated as "local" institutions in this study . The only governmental organ is at ions which are constituted at the local lev el are the village councils which h ave b een active since 1999. Village coun cils ("Islamic Councils," as they are called under the law) are the rep res ent at ives of the Ministry of Interior at the local level and the memb ers are elected by local residents. "Pastoral councils" are also p lanned but have not yet been established. Levels of exp ect ation and excitement about the councils were high at the outset, but their level of effectiveness seems to be mixed. Elections take p lace every 4 y ears and the turnout for the 2003 elections were much lower throughout the country than the first round in 1999 which saw a massive turnout largely because the councils are seen to be ineffective in addressing peop le's needs. Very few active NGOs exist at the local lev el; most have b een n ew ly established and lack basic cap acit ies and resources. Because of d ifficu lt ies in officially registering NGOs, many NGOs have been registered as non-p rofit comp anies under the law of registering companies. The strongest NGOs tend to be concentrated in the cap it al. Thus the main local, nongovern mental institutions are traditional community based organisations (CBOs) which are informal organ is at ions , not officially reco gnis ed by the government. The p recis e structure, roles and functions vary throughout the country , but it is clear that these organisations have traditionally p lay ed a central role in decision-mak in g about natural resource man a gem ent , includin g drou ght . In recent decades as the role of the central government has increased and modern develop ment app roaches have been adopted, CBOs have been weakened and in many cases have started to dissolve. Remaining elements of CBOs are stronger at the grassroots levels rather than at the higher levels of the structure. For examp le, in p astoral communities the structures are still mean in gful at the level of tentholds, clans and sub-tribes whereas the tribes and confederations have effectively been dissolved. During the p ast few y ears with greater govern ment interest in p ublic p art icip at ion and the greater involvement in international p roces s es related to sustainable development there is increasin g interest in the ro le of ind i genous knowled ge in natural resource man a gem ent . Nevertheless there is still little understanding of the role of CBOs in creatin g, using and p reserving traditional knowled ge. Another major obstacle in rehabilitating CBOs is that they are not officially reco gnis ed by the government.
Non-governmental organisations.
There are no NGOs in Iran that work specifically on drought or any other natural disaster. M any civil society groups get involved in relief efforts at the time of a national emergency , but these efforts are usually organised by the Iranian R ed Crescent So ciet y (IRCS) to deliver relief or raise funds. However IRCS is not a non-govern ment al organ is at ion in Iran (see below for more information about the IRCS). Also, there seems to be greater activity by various civil society groups following a "sudden" disaster such as an earthquake or flood rather than more gradual d is as t ers such as drought.
Gove rnme ntal organisations.
Various government ministries, dep art ment s and organisations are involved with disaster p reparedness and relief at various stages and according to their own mandate. The most wide-sp read criticism of govern ment al resp ons e to natural disasters is that there is no single effective p lan for dealin g with disasters. In fact, the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescue was ratified in 1382 (2003), but it is not yet widely known or debated. It was highlighted in the media durin g the post-Bam earthquake coverage, but mostly for being ineffective. The Plan is run by the Disaster Task Force and is discussed in great detail throughout this report.
Disaster Task Force.
The Disaster Task Force (DTF) is the govern ment al body resp ons ible for the imp lem ent at ion of the Comp rehens ive National Plan for Relief and Rescu e which was ratified in 1382 (2003)--see legislation and p olicy section, below for more information on this p lan. However, the DTF had existed before the introduction of the Plan and was also responsible for coordination of natural disaster p reparat ion and resp ons e. With the introduction of the Plan the resp ons ibilit ies , members and constituent p arts of the DTF have been clarified or changed. DTF is headed by the M inis ter of Interior and its secretariat is hosted at the M inist ry of Interior. The DTF has a largely coordinating and mon it oring role, but it contains a comp le x web of working group s which are also resp ons ible for imp lement in g p roject s . Its coordinating role is reflected in 