Identifying the Factors that Influence Small-scale Farmers' Transaction Costs in Relation to Seed Acquisition.
An ethnographic case study of maize growing smallholders in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca, Mexico.
Lone B. Badstue.
ESA Working Paper No. 04-16.
September 2004.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/esa.
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center CIMMYT e-mail: l.badstue@cgiar.org.
Using an ethnographic approach, this study explores small-scale farmers' perceived transaction costs in relation to maize seed acquisition in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca. These farmers have different needs and require seed of diverse maize types with multiple traits in particular combinations. Formal seed distribution has yet to develop in this region and farmers depend mostly on informal seed sources. Issues of information about maize seed, seed transaction negotiation and enforcement are examined from a small-scale farmer perspective through the use of qualitative data. Results show that farmers' perceived transaction costs are low to negligible in most cases where seed transactions take place locally, and trust is indicated as a factor which serves to reduce transaction costs to a minimum. Though maybe not a transaction cost in the theoretical sense, the risk of crop failure due to inadequate seed is a main concern for farmers in relation to seed transactions.
Key Words: Small-scale farmers, Transaction costs, Seed acquisitions, Maize.
(Zea mays L.), Informal seed sector, Oaxaca.
D23 (Organizational Behavior; Transaction Costs; Property Rights) O17 (Formal and Informal Sectors; Shadow Economy; Institutional Arrangements) Q12 (Micro Analysis of Farm Firms, Farm Households, and Farm Input Markets) Z13 (Social Norms and Social Capital).
This work was funded by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The author thanks the farmers who participated in this research for the information they provided and for their kindness and patience. Thanks also to Mauricio Bellon, CIMMYT, for his guidance and important contributions, and to Leslie Lipper, Alberto Zezza and Romina Cavatassi, FAO, for their useful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Introduction This paper presents the findings of an exploratory study with the purpose of identifying the factors that influence the transaction costs of acquiring seed for maize growing small-scale farmers in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca, Mexico. A formal seed sector has yet to develop in this region, and most farmers therefore continue to produce their own maize seed year after year. However, maize farmers in the study area occasionally acquire seed from other sources, mostly other farmers, either because of seed loss due to climatic or storage problems, or because they want to try out / work with other kinds of maize. Previous research in the region showed that 89.7% of maize seed lots were saved by farmers from their own previous harvest, and the rest were acquired from other farmers (Smale et al. 1999). These farmers have different needs and require seed of diverse landraces with multiple traits in particular combinations. Finding seed that meet the individual farmer's particular requirements is not always easy (CIMMYT 2002). First, the farmer has to find out who grows what maize variety and investigate the characteristics and performance of the maize of interest. Then he/she must make sure that the information offered is trustworthy and the seed is reliable. Finally, he/she has to negotiate the conditions of the transaction with the seed provider. Under such conditions it seems reasonable to expect that acquisition of seed of diverse maize varieties entails high transaction costs to individual farmers. The study was financed by the FAO and undertaken in Mexico by CIMMYT's Economics program in collaboration with the FAO. The research was carried out using qualitative research methods and was supported by a considerable body of information previously collected by CIMMYT in the region. The experience and results of this study will provide the basis for the design and planning of a second phase, which will attempt to quantify the transaction costs experienced by various social actors in relation to seed transactions. The paper starts out with some general considerations regarding the scope and focus of the study, the methodology used and a brief description of the study area. Subsequently, the presentation of the findings is structured according to the key issues raised in the economic literature on transaction costs. This is followed by a discussion, and finally, a conclusion. Scope and focus of the study This research was carried out using an ethnographic approach. Fundamental to the ethnographic research method is trying to understand the issues at hand, e.g. the factors that influence maize growing smallholders in relation to maize seed acquisitions, from the perspective of the people directly involve herein. This requires an open approach and a willingness to step out of one's own personal or professional ways of thinking. Instead the researcher must seek to understand what constitutes the important issues from the informants' point of view, in this case the smallscale maize farmers in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca.
From a different point of view, the small-scale farmers' perspective may not necessarily appear to be rational and coherent, and it may not fit nicely into a preconceived model of how farmers should consider their reality. We should therefore not be surprised that the findings do not coincide fully with the model we took as a point of departure, i.e. the concept of transaction costs as presented in the economic literature. On the concept of transaction costs: The objective of this paper is to identify and describe the various factors that influence farmers' transaction costs in relation to seed acquisitions. The term "transaction costs" has been defined as "the costs incurred by participants in an exchange in order to initiate and complete the transactions" (Dudek and Wienar, 1996, in Cacho, Marshall and Milne 2003). Transaction costs are often subdivided into search or information costs (costs of obtaining information about the product and it's price as well as about trading partners), negotiation costs (costs of negotiating and carrying out the transaction), and monitoring or enforcement costs (costs of ensuring terms of transaction) (Hobbs 1997, Gabre-Madhin 2001, Dahlman, 1979, in Cacho, Marshall and Milne 2003). Transaction costs are specific to each market participant. As pointed out by Sadoulet and De Janvry (in Gabre-Madhin 2001) this means that there is no single effective market price at which exchange take place. Furthermore, as argued by Buckley and Chapman (1997), "transaction cost issues cannot be understood apart from issues of perception", i.e. the perception and definition of reality of social actors. Therefore, transaction costs are difficult to measure in any objective way. In this paper, transaction costs are understood in a broad sense and may include other costs or "sacrifices" that farmers may have to incur to carry out a seed transaction--even if unsuccessful. These include opportunity costs in terms of time, loss of prestige, risk assumed or other. The concept of transaction costs is essentially a child of economic theory, although it has also been used by non-economists studying different aspects of economic life, e.g. Plattner 1989, Godoy 1993, Mayer and Glave 1999. However, the concept of transaction costs does not exist as such in the terminology of ordinary Oaxacan small-scale farmers. As stated above, the ethnographical approach is open and does not define the issues before the study is undertaken. Instead, this approach seeks to understand the issue from the informant's perspective. As such, the point of departure for this study was to try to identify the costs, sacrifices or concerns, which farmers experience in relation to seed transactions. Admittedly, this rather nebulous definition may not be sufficient for the purpose of an analysis based on economic theory, however, in as far as it is our goal to understand what factors farmers consider a sacrifice in relation to seed acquisition; it is necessary to be willing to examine this from a farmer's perspective. In any case, the idea is to look at this from a small-scale farmer's point of view and consider a cost what they consider a cost. This applies both in the cases where the question is e.g. about time spent in a particular way, which in principle could have been spent differently, thereby in theory representing a (lost) opportunity; as well as in the cases where the question is one of shadow value, e.g. by using my own seed, I loose the opportunity of selling it instead, i.e. this is the real cost of using own seed. Most of the farmers interviewed see it as a cost, if they have to acquire seed from someone else, whereas the common perception of using 2.
own seed is, that it is "free". Therefore, notwithstanding that economic theory would look differently at this; in as far as represents a farmer perspective, this does not constitute a transaction cost. Economists may well disagree with this perspective; however, within an ethnographical framework there is no other way to address this. Observed­ unobserved costs Transactions with the formal seed sector in the study region are few and far between, which means that it has not been possible to study this in any great detail, as the study was carried out with a limited number of informants. The unobserved costs, i.e. of formal seed sector transactions or non-local transactions, could potentially be relatively high; however, at this point in time data is not available to document this. In a quantitative survey with many informants this may be approached more easily. What is the desired good in the transactions? The transaction costs are related to the costs of obtaining the `desired good'. It could be argued that the desired good is a `bagful of maize seed'. However, the farmer is not looking for seed per se, but rather for an input in the crop production cycle. In that sense the desired product is a successful harvest which yields grain and fodder of the desired quality. In relation to seed acquisitions, therefore, the farmer wants seed that will perform successfully under the production conditions present in a particular field, and which produces maize grain with the particular qualities desired by the farmer in terms of consumption qualities, storageability, marketing etc. However, the farmers know that simply by looking at the seed, it is not possible to tell under which conditions, it will perform well or if it will germinate at all ­ i.e. seed is not transparent (Morris 1998). When acquiring seed, if the farmer is uncertain as to whether it will live up to the expectations mentioned above, he/she runs the risk that the acquired good may not actually be the desired good. The problem is that the farmer will not know this until he/she plants the seed. In the following this is referred to as the problem of inadequate seed. It should be noted that this can mean either maize seed that is not adapted to the given environmental or management circumstances, or, seed which produces maize that lacks the particular consumption characteristics the farmer sought at the moment of acquiring the seed. From an economic point of view, we may want to separate the seed transaction from the rest of the production process, but for the farmer these are inseparable; he or she does not procure seed unless it is with the specific purpose of obtaining a harvest. Furthermore, the farmers correctly draw attention to the fact that the problem of inadequate seed arises in the moment of acquiring the seed, and not at some later stage in the crop production cycle. As such, both from a farmer's point of view as well as from an economic point of view, I would argue that the risk of crop failure due to inadequate seed should be considered a transaction cost, - the same way risk of getting the wrong product due to lack of information would be considered a transaction cost. Meanwhile, it should be kept in mind that crop failure may also be caused by a series of other factors, e.g. drought, pests, disease or other, in which case it would be a production cost.
Methodology The interviews for the first phase of the present study were carried out in the communities of San Pablo Huitzo and Santa Ana Zegache in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca. Both communities were part of the study area for previous research by CIMMYT in this region. From 1997­2002 CIMMYT collaborated with Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Forestales Agrícolas y Pecuarias (INIFAP) in a research project aiming to determine the possibility of improving maize productivity while maintaining genetic diversity (Bellon et al. 2003a; Smale et al. 1999). This project involved a socio-economic baseline study in six communities as well as research into farmers' seed selection and storage (Mendoza 2000). Another research project, funded by CAPRi (2000-2003) focused on the role of collective action for the conservation of on-farm genetic diversity of maize (Badstue et al. 2003a,b). This study contained a strong ethnographic component and involved ethnographic interviews and case studies as well as a seed flow tracer study following maize seed exchanges between farm households. A substantial body of background information about both communities was therefore readily available. The six communities included in the CIMMYT/INIFAP project were originally selected for their contrasting characteristics in terms of maize yield potential and dependency on non-farm income (Smale et al., 1999). For the first phase of the present study it was not possible to work in all six communities due to the labor intensive and time consuming character of the ethnographic research methodology and the limited time span available (3 months). The two communities with the most contrasting conditions of the six, Santa Ana Zegache and San Pablo Huitzo, were therefore selected for this study. In doing so we were able to get high quality information that sampled the range of situations present in the study area. Data gathering took place primarily in the form of a series of informal, semi-structured ethnographic interviews with key informants from 16 households, 9 in San Pablo Huitzo and 7 in Santa Ana Zegache. A table with a brief description of the informants is enclosed in annex.
An informal interview guide was used and the interviews were tape recorded. The themes covered included: the kind of information farmers considered important about the seed and/or the seed provider; how to get this information? what determines what type of transaction is used and the costs involved; whether or not possibilities for compensation exist in case the seed does not live up to expectations? Information gathered during CIMMYT's previous research activities in the two communities was used to select the informants for this study, particularly information from the seed flow tracer study with a sample of 50 household per community (Badstue et al. 2003b) and the baseline study with a random sample of 40 households per community (Smale et al. 1999). Based on this information, in each of the two communities the informants were selected in order to represent different social groups in terms of gender, ethnicity, economic status, and level of formal education. The results presented below therefore stem from a combination of a new series of ethnographic interviews with key informant, specifically focusing on the issues of farmers' transaction costs when acquiring seed, as well as from previously gathered background information and in-depth knowledge about the seed system in these two and other communities in the region.
The study area Mexico is a center of domestication and diversity for maize (Matsuoka et al. 2002; Piperno and Flannery 2001; Sanchez et al. 2000a,b). Maize agriculture continues to play a significant role in the livelihoods of Oaxacan small-scale farmers as a source of household food security, appreciated local maize products such as tamales and tlayudas, and as a source of income. Farmers in this region value their landraces and continue to plant them, and by doing so they contribute to the conservation of maize biodiversity (Bellon et al. 2003a; Smale et al. 2003). The vast majority of maize grown in this region are local landraces, for example, in six communities in this region improved varieties made up only 1 % of total area planted to maize according to Smale et al. (1999). Therefore, unless other is mentioned, `maize' in this document refers to maiz criollo i.e. farmer varieties1. The communities of San Pablo Huitzo and Santa Ana Zegache are both situated in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca. Yearly medium temperature in this region is 18-22 C with an average annual precipitation between 600-1000 mm (INEGI, 2001a) falling mainly from May-October. The mean farm size in San Pablo Huitzo as per 1996 was 2.44 ha and in Santa Ana Zegache 3.46 ha (Smale et al. 1999). Maize, beans, and squash are the most common crops, and farming systems in both communities are characterized by very low productivity (Smale et al. 1999). San Pablo Huitzo belongs to the District of San Agustin Etla in the Valley of Etla at 1,700 masl. Average farm size in Huitzo is 2.44 ha (Smale et al. 1999). The use of tractors for land preparation is relatively common here, and besides the basic grains mentioned above, alfalfa is also grown for fodder, as milk production is important. Some farmers also grow vegetables for the market and some inhabitants work as skilled or day laborers within or outside the community. In comparison to Santa Ana Zegache, San Pablo Huitzo has a slightly more stable and mild climate, relatively better soils, and a considerably larger irrigated area, favoring more intensive agriculture. Finally, San Pablo Huitzo also benefits from its close proximity to the Puebla-Oaxaca highway. Santa Ana Zegache belongs to the district of Ocotlán in the Valley of Ejutla at 1,480 masl. Average farm size in Zegache is 3.46 ha, and the area is characterized by poor soils and scarce rainfall. Only 3% of farms have any irrigation, as opposed to 85% of farms in Huitzo (Smale et al. 1999). Like in San Pablo Huitzo, alfalfa is also cultivated in Zegache, although on a much smaller scale. Some farmers also cultivate castor beans (Ricinus communis), flowers, garlic, and groundnuts. Even though the community is situated some distance from main transportation roads, access by bus to urban centers like Oaxaca (1-1½ hours) and Ocotlán (30-45 minutes) is fairly easy. Contrary to San Pablo Huitzo, whose population is almost exclusively mestizo and Spanish-speaking only, a large part of the population in Santa Ana Zegache (>30% (INEGI, 2001b)) belongs to the ethnic group known as Zapotecos, and speak Zapotec as well as Spanish.
Farmer varieties (referred to as "varieties" in this paper) are the crop populations that a group of farmers recognize as distinct units. Each variety combines a particular set of characteristics that farmers recognize, such as yield potential, growth cycle, performance under biotic and abiotic stresses, response to management, or culinary and storage properties (Bellon 1996; Smale and Bellon 1999). While they may be recognized as distinct, varieties may not have specific names beyond the color of the kernel, i.e. , two distinct white maize varieties might both be called "whites" or blancos. This definition differs from the definition used by the Union for the Protection of New Varieties and Plants (UPOV 1991) according to which a variety should be distinct, uniform and stable.
San Pablo Huitzo and Santa Ana Zegache each constitute municipalities headed by a municipal president and a body of counselors. Both have electricity and drinking water, some medical services, and are relatively well connected by public transport to nearby regional markets2. Likewise, both have a primary school and San Pablo Huitzo furthermore has a secondary school, while Santa Ana Zegache counts with a tele-secundaria (a national secondary school program via television). Agriculture and maize in particular remain very important to people in these two communities, even though their agricultural resources are limited and they also depend on other sources of income. No public extension service exists for farmers in these communities and any agricultural extension in the region is sporadic. On the occasions where e.g. talks on agricultural issues take place at community level, they are generally organized by political groups. In both communities maize production is primarily for household consumption. Those who produce a surplus of maize grain3 often choose to sell this in smaller portions at nearby retail markets, where the local landrace maize is thought to be the best and the one most buyers prefer for human consumption. Wholesale options do exist, but require large quantities of maize and transport cost can be considerable. Selecting seed from one's previous maize harvest and carefully saving it for the next planting season is a widespread practice among farmers both in San Pablo Huitzo and in Santa Ana Zegache. Many farmers set aside more seed than they calculate they will need for their own planting. This provides a buffer against seed loss in storage as well as the possibility to provide seed should another farmer approach them with this request. In the case of sharecropping, which is a common arrangement, the standard procedure is that the landowner provides the land and the seed, while the sharecropper does the work.
Findings: Search costs In general, searching for information is one situation in which farmers draw on their various social networks. The access to information etc. is heavily influenced by the nature of one's networks of social relations, as well as the farmers own social and political standing or connectedness. Physical isolation can also influence the flow of information, i.e. the further away from the village the less flow of information. In many respects this is the case of Francisco and the other farmers in Rio Blanco who live and farm in the hills several hours travel from the village of San Pablo Huitzo. Still, much also depends on the personality and skills of the individual farmer. For example: As an extremely poor, illiterate, Zapotec, single woman, Miriam is marginalized in a series of respects, and her participation in ordinary social life, local social institutions and other common fora for information is limited. Nevertheless, Miriam seeks to.
For Santa Ana Zegache: Ocotlan (aprox. 10km) and Oaxaca (aprox. 45 km); for San Pablo Huitzo: Etla (aprox. 20 km) and Oaxaca (aprox. 40 km). 3 No evidence was found in this study, that marketing maize grain surplus makes farmers act differently in the seed market i.e. buy hybrid seed.
manage as best she can, using her other social skills and resources in order to acquire information (chatting in the maize mill, cultivating the relationships with the farmers she works for as a day laborer, doing other people little favors when she can etc.). Of course those who enjoy social or political standing and/or have many skills are particularly fortunate, whereas the opposite could be said about those who have neither. How do people get information on seed traits? When maize growing smallholders in the Central Valleys of Oaxaca want to acquire new maize seed4, they look for maize varieties with traits that relate to their particular production conditions and consumption preferences. This is similar to what others have found elsewhere in Mexico and abroad (Bellon 2004; Almekinders, Louwaars and de Bruijn al 1994; Linnemann and de Bruyn 1987). The local maize taxonomy in the region is based mainly on grain color, grain width, and the time for maturing, and in previous CIMMYT studies it has been found not to reflect fully the actual maize diversity present in the region (Smale et al 1999)5. It is therefore relevant to ask in what other ways farmers obtain information on seed traits. Through the interviews several ways used by farmers for gathering information about seed traits were identified: Observation A common form of obtaining information is through direct observation of maize in other farmers' fields. According to informants, farmers gather information when moving about in their communities while paying attention to the crops other people grow, their performance, management and growing conditions. For example, farmer Camilo from San Pablo Huitzo explains that when the maize plants are mature, he will usually `do a round' - just to see. "One must go and look" he says "one must see, that this maize is good, I like this maize ... I am going to see the person who planted this maize....". In Camilo's experience yellow maize can be difficult to sell so last year he decided to acquire seed of white maize from Don Luis. When asked how he found out about the kind of maize that Luis grows and its characteristics, Camilo answered: "Well, we are on friendly terms. A son of his married one of my sisters, so it's like family. Whenever I dropped by I would notice the type of maize he had and I liked it. ... So I saw the maize and the type of ear and everything, and I liked the maize. As it was very good, I decided I was going to get this one".
The main reasons for seed acquisitions cited by maize farmers in a seed flow tracer study, which formed part of another CIMMYT research project in the region, were experimentation and lack of sufficient seed. In a few cases seed acquisition was associated with seed exchange between farmers or as presents. This, as well as farmers reasons for saving own seed, has been described in detail elsewhere (Badstue et al. 2003 b).
The lack of a commonly recognized and clearly defined local nomenclature for local maize diversity, which goes beyond grain color, width, and time for maturing was confirmed by both Zapotec and Spanish speaking farmers from the study communities during interviews and focus group discussions.
Similar to Camilo, the way farmer Pablo L. gets information is by being observant and asking questions. Pedro often works land, which belong to other people, either as a sharecropping arrangement, renting or pawning. If any of this land is under irrigation he sometimes plants hybrid maize H311 on it, which he then sells for silage. He first learnt about this variety some 18 years ago, when one day he noticed a particularly good looking crop. "I saw a maize crop, - so uniform this crop and the ears...! I went and talked with [the owner] and I asked him what kind of maize that was, if it was a criollo. And he said `No, that is a hybrid maize. Look' he said `if you want to plant this, ask for the number 311'. And where do I get it? `In Oaxaca' he says, `in those shops where they sell pesticides.' Conversation Talking to other farmers, family relations etc. is another common way of getting information about seed traits. According to Lorenzo this is an effective way to get information about the characteristics of a certain kind of maize seed: "You get along talking, one asks questions. I ask the other guy, say, `How come this maize looks so good?' `Because I have a well', he says, 'I have irrigation'. So, you may want to buy this maize if you have irrigation, but as it comes from seed that was irrigated, I tell you, it will not succeed where there is no irrigation". Informal gathering and exchange of information, through observation and everyday conversation with other farmers, is in fact so much part of life in Zegache that according to Catarina, the people who come to her for maize seed already know the kind of maize she has. Nevertheless, some will ask if it was fertilized with manure [as opposed to chemical fertilizer], or whether it was rain fed [as opposed to irrigated]. Farmer experimentation Almost all farmers at some stage engage in some kind of informal experimentation. Some farmers are more persistent and structured in their experimentation than others, and those who are continuously on the look-out for new and interesting things may be more curious and innovative than the majority. This is not determined by age or economic standing. Rather, it seems to depend mostly on people's personality. However, it should be noted, that poverty is often accompanied by risk aversion, and that very poor farmers therefore may be somewhat more reluctant to engage in experiments that imply risk, or, their experiments may be of a more humble, low cost nature. Many farmers in the study communities like to carry out their own experiments trying out seed of different crops and crop varieties. When farmers come across interesting maize material, they will often try it out on a small piece of land first, either in the field or in the backyard. Depending on the experiment's outcome and the circumstances in general, they will then decide whether or not to plant this material again on a larger piece of land. Experimenting allows farmers to see for themselves how the variety performs and if it is convenient for them, without incurring in major risks of failure if the variety does not perform. In general maize farmers in the Central Valleys believe that if a maize variety performs well under certain agro-ecological conditions, it may not necessarily perform equally well under different conditions, - what breeders call a high genotype-by-environment interaction (Badstue et al. 2003b).
Francisco farms on common land in the mountains near Huitzo. On several occasions he has experimented with maize seed from elsewhere, mostly with small amounts of seed acquired in the Valley, but on one occasion he tried out maize seed that came all the way from Tapachula, Chiapas. "Sure, the plants grew, but they didn't give any maize" he says. Having made this kind of experiment various times, Francisco is now convinced that the only maize that will perform well on the land he works, is the kind used by himself and the few other families from the little settlement in the woods. In Zegache Don Teodoro and his wife Liliana also stressed the importance of the maize seed being from the same region. As Liliana pointed out, in the opposite case "One doesn't know how this maize will perform; therefore one runs a risk planting this maize". Like most other farmers, Teodoro and Liliana like to make their own experiments planting seed of different crops and varieties. Teodoro recalls, how, many years ago, he brought back with him from "the North" [USA] a big and beautiful maize cob. He planted the seed from it but the experiment was not successful. Liliana comments, that she has tried to plant "this long maize" that the traveling maize vendors sell from their truck, whenever they pass through the little town. "I once planted it here in the yard. It grew a lot and it had hairs on all the leaves. When the maize from around here already had elote, this one was still just growing and growing, but then the rains stopped, and it didn't get any further, it didn't fill. It is not the same". Rodolfo (San Pablo Huitzo) has also tried to plant the maize sold by the traveling maize vendors. "It just grows and is hairy. It doesn't give anything." When Rodolfo tries out a new kind of maize, he first plants it on a little piece of land. "If I plant it on all 12 hectares and it turns out not to perform well, then it is a case of loosing, no? Therefore I try it out on a smaller piece of land, and if God is willing that it succeeds, then I will harvest. Next year you can use it then I have faith in it. Then it is easier to plant it on all the land; then I know that it works on this land." The maize that Rodolfo and his extended family now grow on the various hectares of common lands they cultivate was said to come from Ocotlán. They first tried it out on a smaller piece of land, and after a few years they liked it so much, that they abandoned the type of maize they grew before. Now the maize from Ocotlán is their only maize. This year (2003), when the maize plants were well on their way, a drought set in caus