FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND IN SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS DEVELOPMNENT CONSOLIDATED REPORT ON CASE STUDIES and WORKSHOP FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
Rural Institutions and Participation Service (SDAR) FAO, Rome April 2004.
Prepared by: Federica Battista and Stephan Baas Rural Institutions and Participation Service, FAO.
Front Cover Picture: Haoussa Granaries, Niger (Source: INPhO Image Gallery).
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not imply any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO.
TABLE OF CONTENTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
1.1 1.2 1.3.
2.1 2.2 2.3.
3.1 3.2 BACKGROUND The Challenge Global Agenda on Disaster Risk Reduction and FAO's Related Mandate 4 5 6 6 6.
The Entry Point and Contribution of the Rural Development Division to DRM 8 INTERRIGIONAL, COMPARATIVE STUDY ON `'THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO NATURAL DISASTERS" Review of Secondary Data Case Studies Workshop for Comparative Analysis FINDINGS AND LESSONS LEARNT General Lessons: Specification of Working Hypotheses Specific Lessons: Comparative Strenghts of Key Actors in DRM 3.3.1 Good Practice Examples: Institutional Aspects of Successful DRM 3.3.2 Shortcomings of Local Institutions in DRM 8 9 10 11 12 12 14 19 25.
3.4 4 4.1 4.2 5 6.
Framework Conditions to Better Link DRM Systems with Rural Development 26 THE WAY AHEAD Considerations and Entry Points for Follow-up Follow-up Activities REFERENCES ANNEXES 29 29 31 34 34 34 37 40 41 67 69 70.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
Global data indicates that in the last decade natural disasters occurred more frequently than in the past and were more destructive. While recognizing that assistance in the response phase of a natural disaster remains important and needs to be enhanced at all levels, there is an increased recognition that the ultimate aim of natural disaster management strategies should be to reduce the vulnerability of local communities (and countries) to natural hazards, through the implementation of more effective prevention and preparedness measures, and integration of risk management into long-term development planning. FAO has clearly signaled that long-term development objectives should not and cannot be set aside during emergencies and decided to further strengthen its policy advisory and technical activities in countries that are especially prone to natural hazards with a view to ensuring that disaster risk management (DRM) is a key consideration within sustainable agriculture and rural development (SARD) policies and programmes in such countries. Based on its longstanding working experience in institutional analysis, strengthening of institutional developments in the context of decentralization and in institutional capacity building, the Rural Institutions and Participation Service (SDAR) of the Rural Development Division of FAO (SDA) has a key contribution to make in institutional and participation aspects of DRM. Its Regular Programme activity on "The role of local level institutions in reducing vulnerability to natural disasters" was initiated in 2002 with the objective of gathering experiences and field based evidence in order to provide guidance to policy makers on how local organizations could be best empowered in DRM and to elaborate strategies for incorporating disaster prevention and response activities into long-term sustainable rural development strategies. The first phase of the Programme Activity focused on a comparative study on the role of local institutions in reducing vulnerability to natural hazards and included: a comprehensive analysis of secondary material; nine case studies in different regions (Argentina, Burkina Faso, Honduras, Iran, Mozambique, Niger, Philippines, South Africa, Vietnam) focusing on lessons learned from concrete examples and experiences of local action before, during and after situations of natural hazards; and a workshop for an analytical comparison between the case studies (31 March2 April 2004). The overall outcomes of Phase 1 include: the identification of comparative strengths and weaknesses of local institutions and other key actors in DRM, good practice examples of key elements of DRM systems and case specific policy and operational recommendations. On the basis of SDAR's experience in local rural institutions, follow-up initiatives will continue to focus on recurrent events/chronic processes gradually increasing the vulnerability of livelihoods systems. Three key strategies of the DRM and rural development integration will be taken into consideration: a) increasing local communities' resilience to cope with shocks; b) building on relief as an opportunity to initiate longer term development; and c) improving vertical and horizontal institutional linkages. The follow-up strategy includes the development of normative products and operational pilot projects; the identification of a framework for complementary action with other FAO Services and building strategic and technical partnerships with external partners including Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre (ADPC), University of Cape Town (UTC), and World Food Programme (WFP).
Acknowledgements.
This consolidated report is largely based on the contributions from partner organizations and colleagues. The authors wish to thank the case study working teams for preparing the case studies as well as the other case study backstopping team members, all workshop participants for their contributions and inputs during the workshop, and Julia Wolf, Ian Cherret, Pamela Pozarny, Fritz Rembold, Emmanuel Chengu, and Richard China for their review and commenting on the draft report. Finally we would also like to thank Jennie Dey De Pryck, Chief Rural Institutions Participation Service (SDAR) and Maximilian Cox, Director of the Rural Development Division for the financial and technical support to this activity.
BACKGROUND The Challenge.
Recurrent natural hazards such as drought, floods, storms (hurricanes/tropical cyclones, tornadoes, sand/dust storms), are major factors increasing the vulnerability of local communities and food insecurity of rural producers. They hamper sustainable rural development initiatives and aggravate other financial, health and environmental shocks, and can determine the emergence of complex political disasters. Global data indicate that in the last decade natural hazards occurred more frequently than in the past and were more destructive. Weather-related hazards continue to increase, from an annual average of 200 per year between 1993-1997, to 331 per year between 1998-2002. Although compared to the 1990's, reported global deaths from natural disasters have fallen (24,500 people reported killed in 2002 against a yearly average of 62,000 in the previous decade); the number of people reported affected is increasing dramatically (608 million people affected in 2002 compared with the annual average of 200 million in the previous decade)1. The relationship between development and disaster risk is clearly described in the recent UNDP Report on disaster risk reduction2: about 75% of the world's population lives in areas affected at least once between 1980 and 2000 by earthquakes, tropical cyclones, floods or drought. While only 11% of the people exposed to natural disasters live in countries which were classified according to the UNDP human development index (HDI) as countries with a low HDI, these countries account for more than 53% of the total recorded deaths. In terms of economic impact, two thirds of the losses reported in 2002 (US$ 69 billion) affected countries with high human development indices. However, the latter is clearly a reflection of the value of infrastructure and assets at risk. Figures show that there is a clear link between development status and disaster impact; there is also evidence that disaster risk accumulates historically through inappropriate development interventions (for example, increasing risks related to urbanization, environmental degradation, and climate change). Disaster reduction policies should therefore include a two-fold aim to: "enable societies to be resilient to natural hazards and ensuring that development efforts do not increase vulnerability to those hazards"3.
1.2 Global Agenda on Disaster Risk Reduction and FAO's Related Mandate.
While recognizing that assistance in the response phase of a natural disaster remains important and needs to be enhanced at different levels, there is an increasingly common understanding among all stakeholders that the ultimate aim of DRM should be to reduce the vulnerability of rural and urban people and their communities (and countries) to natural hazards, through the implementation of.
Data from the IFRC, World Disasters Report 2003. Numbers do not include those killed or affected by war or conflict related famine and disease. 2 UNDP, Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development, 2003. 3 Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR), Living with Risk: A global review of disaster reduction initiatives, United Nations, Geneva, 2004, page 8.
more effective prevention and preparedness measures, and integration of risk management into long-term development planning. The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) reflects a shift in focus from hazard protection to risk management and provides a framework for complementary action of different UN Agencies in disaster reduction. It aims at building disaster resilient communities by promoting increased awareness of the importance of disaster reduction as an integral component of sustainable development. The promotion of public commitment in DRM is one of the four main objectives of the ISDR. Furthermore the increased importance given to socioeconomic vulnerability as a key risk factor underlined the need for wider participation of local communities in disaster risk reduction activities The 1996 World Food Summit Plan (WFS) of Action stresses the need to develop efficient emergency response mechanisms and recommends to governments to involve communities, local authorities and institutions in implementing emergency operations to better identify and reach populations and areas at greatest risk (Objective 5.3). In the same spirit, the WFS Plan of Action also recommends to governments to "strengthen linkages between relief operations and development programmes...so that they are mutually supportive and facilitate the transition from relief to development" (Objective 5.4). The 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) Plan of Implementation has reiterated the importance of the issue and called for action at all levels for an integrated, multi-hazard, inclusive approach to address vulnerability, risk assessment and disaster management, including prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. FAO has a crucial role to play. The vast majority of natural disasters occur in rural areas and are threatening agricultural production and food security in particular (on both temporary and long-term scales). FAO is well positioned to ensure that national and local DRM strategies include specific considerations and agendas addressing risks in the agricultural sector in a sustainable and, to the degree possible, proactive way. FAO has clearly signaled that development objectives should not and cannot be set aside during emergencies. In its Medium Term Plan 2002-2007, FAO identified "disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness and post-emergency relief and rehabilitation" as a priority area for inter-disciplinary action (PAIA). This programme is being implemented through a relief-development continuum. On the basis of the recommendations of the Programme Committee Report (Eighth Session, September 2002), FAO decided to further strengthen its technical activities and policy advisory support in countries that are especially prone to natural disasters with a view to ensuring that disaster management is a key consideration within agricultural development policies and programmes in such countries and promoting the more effective integration of post-emergency support into long-term disaster risk management (DRM) and rural development (RD) strategies. However, until to date most of FAO's efforts have concentrated on the responsive aspects of disaster management rather than on the prevention/preparedness phases. To this end, FAO's Emergency Operations and Rehabilitation Division (TCE), together with several technical services of FAO, is promoting a more effective integration of post-emergency support with long-term disaster risk management and rural development (RD) strategies.
1.3 The Entry Point and Contribution of the Rural Development Division to DRM.
The Rural Development Division (SDA) of FAO tackles the issue of disaster risk management from an institutional perspective within the context of Rural Development and Decentralization. Disaster risk management is, among other rural development activities, particularly important for lessening both sudden and chronic vulnerabilities of rural communities and households. The creation of the link between RD and DRM and the identification of the main actors/stakeholders at different levels and their roles in DRM and particularly the key role that local institutions play in implementing successful DRM strategies, describes SDA's entry point to DRM. SDA's working approach builds on the basic assumption that the sound understanding of existing institutional capacities and possible gaps, and the comparative advantages of different actors in DRM, particularly at decentralized levels, is a key requirement for a successful shift from reactive emergency relief operations towards long-term disaster risk prevention and its integration into regular rural development planning. SDA's experience shows that the recognition, responsibilities and resources available to local organizations are often limited, and their capacities are not developed enough to enable them to fulfill their potential roles required to make decentralized operations work. A particular challenge for governments and development agencies in the context of rural development, decentralisation and DRM is the question of how to best promote local capacities and mobilize local organizations to actively participate, according to their comparative advantages, together with higher level institutions, in the design and implementation of locally adapted disaster risk prevention and management strategies. This interim report summarises the main issues, findings and recommendations arising from the first phase of SDA's work on DRM, including a first consolidation and comparative analysis of a literature review, case studies and the workshop discussions.
INTERREGIONAL, COMPARATIVE STUDY ON `'THE ROLE OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN REDUCING VULNERABILITY TO NATURAL DISASTERS".
SDAR's normative activity "The role of local level institutions in reducing vulnerability to natural disasters" was launched in 2002 with the objectives to:  Analyse field-based evidence of the strengths (and limitations) and the comparative advantages of local institutions in disaster risk management, clarifying what tasks and requirements this implies in detail; Provide guidance to policy makers on how local organizations could be best empowered as partners in DRM applying the principles of comparative advantage and subsidiarity; and Elaborate strategies for linking disaster prevention and response activities into long-term sustainable rural development strategies.
Phase I of this programme activity focused on stock taking and a comparative study on the role of local institutions in reducing vulnerability to natural disasters. The main activities included: Phase I ­Activities  A comprehensive analysis of secondary material and a literature review on "The Role of Local Institutions and their Interaction in Disaster Risk Management". Nine comparative case studies were conducted in 2003 in Argentina, Burkina Faso, Honduras, Iran, Mozambique, Niger, the Philippines, South Africa, and Vietnam, focusing on lessons learned from concrete examples of experiences of local action before, during and after situations of natural disasters (particularly in places where phenomena such as droughts, storms, and floods occur periodically). A workshop for a first analysis and comparison between the case studies was held in FAO's Headquarters in Rome from 31 March ­ 2 April 2004 to draw general and region-specific lessons learned; Field projects associated with the subject matter were also used to enrich the learning process4.
Phase I- Expected Outcomes  Improved guidance and guidelines on how local organizations in different settings could be strengthened and empowered to take - as a key aspect of long-term sustainable agriculture and rural development - a more active role in the prevention, preparedness and management of recurrent natural disasters. Recommendations for national and local governments and CSOs in rural areas exposed to recurrent natural disasters on improved or more specific policies that help reduce the vulnerability and negative impacts of risks and disasters for rural communities, particularly for the poor, and minimize the time period required to resume rural development activities.
Review of Secondary Data.
To initiate the study, a basic review of secondary data was conducted with the aim of obtaining an overview of what has been written and shared so far with regard to the roles local institutions and organizations play in disaster risk prevention and management, how they pursue these roles, and to what degree and how they interact with higher level DRM actors and systems. A key finding of the review5 was that in spite of the enormous amount of documentation available on DRM, and its richness, there is (a) a strong bias towards post emergency analyses, and that (b) within the more limited material available on disaster prevention and preparedness the analysis of local institutions and organizations is rather limited. Selected key lessons and good practice examples elaborated in the review have been incorporated into this report. To a large extent they are in line with and.
Norman Messer, The Role of Local Institutions in Disaster Risk Mitigation: a Literature Review. This report is available from FAO/SDAR. 9.
Such as TCP/MON/066 "Pastoral Risk Management Strategy, Mongolia", TCP/CPR/2902 "Strengthening Capacity of Risk Management of the Animal Husbandry Sector and promoting Sustainable Development in the Grazing Area of Qinghai Province", TCP/BGD/2904 "Support to the Strengthening of Disaster Preparedness in the Agriculture Sector, Bangladesh", and TCP/HUN/3002(A): "Support to the Development of a Strategy for Territorial Organization and Sustainable Land Management in Areas with High Natural Risk".
complement the case study findings. Annex 7 provides a list of relevant internet sites assessed by the literature review.
Case Studies.
Building on FAO's concept of the disaster management cycle6, the case studies focused on the role of local institutions in reducing risk and vulnerability to recurrent natural disasters in selected field sites (villages/communities) of Argentina, Burkina Faso, Iran, Honduras, Mozambique, Niger, Philippines, South Africa and Vietnam. The field studies analyzed concrete examples of experiences of local action before, during and after natural disasters. All case study research teams followed the same Terms of Reference, which defined the basic key concepts underlying the overall study, and the common processes of decentralization and social capital formation (Annex 2). As part of their research, the case study teams were asked to assess the following set of key working hypotheses which were formulated on the basis of the fundamental assumption that local government offices and other local organizations/institutions are key actors in natural disaster management and rural development:  Local level organizations and institutions have the following advantages in disaster management vis á vis higher level institutions: (a) represent local perspectives in policy making and DRM planning fora, (b) bridge and promote two-way communication between higher and local policy levels, (c) assist and guide locally the implementation of DRM activities, (d) mobilize local participation; and finally (e) handle at the local level the full emergency cycle, better linking, in particular, emergency prevention and rehabilitation activities based on an anticipatory (as opposed to reactive) mind set. Communities in the high risk and disaster prone areas which have encountered many episodes of disaster have, over time, accumulated considerable experience and knowledge of the causes and nature of the recurrent disasters in their areas.
The institutions covered in the studies include public institutions at the district, ward and village levels of governance (or département, arrondissement and commune levels in francophone countries and municipios in Latin America); rural councils and development committees (in a few cases the involvement of the private sector was also taken into consideration). The studies also analyzed and took into consideration the linkages and partnerships that exist between local authorities and traditional institutions such as chieftaincies, clan heads, councils of elders, headmen, and other village assemblies. Both quantitative and qualitative data were gathered from the selected districts and pilot sites on formal organizations and committees in existence, their resources, and the risk prevention activities they undertake. Qualitative data were also collected from the stakeholders and potential victims of disasters about their experiences with disasters, their perceptions and definitions of risk, the resources at their disposal, their social networks, and hence their social capital and capacity for disaster or risk management. Key informant interviews were held with local government officials, representatives of local councils and development committees, chiefs or their representatives; representatives of farmer groups, cooperatives, and women's groups. Particular emphasis was given to:.
attached as Annex 5.
a) the assessment of the comparative strengths of local institutions (vis á vis higher level institutions) and the actual role they play in managing recurrent natural disasters; b) the interaction/relation and complementarity between informal initiatives, community-based approaches to DRM and the formal government DRM systems in place, and c) local level perspectives and perceptions about recurrent natural disasters and actual institutional preparedness and responses as felt at community level before, during and after a concrete disaster situation. Case study authors were requested to include specific sections in their reports on: a) the context of the selected study sites including a detailed institutional assessment and the nature of the recurrent disaster phenomenon; b) the "story" of the disaster: how the pre/during and post emergency situation was handled, what happened? Who did what how and why? what went well, what went wrong?; c) lessons learned and recommendations on how local organizations could be strengthened and empowered to take - as a key aspect of long-term sustainable agriculture and rural development - a more active role in the prevention, preparedness and management of recurrent natural disasters; and d) recommendations for national and local governments and CSOs in rural areas exposed to recurrent natural disasters on improved or more specific policies that help reduce the vulnerability and negative impacts of risks and disasters for rural communities, and in particular for the poor. The case studies vary according to the types of recurrent natural disaster situations studied, including the slow on-setting phenomenon of drought (e.g. Burkina Faso, Iran, Niger), and of rapid on-setting phenomena including floods (Mozambique) and tropical storms (Honduras, Philippines, South Africa,) and in some case the combination of several phenomena (Argentina, Vietnam). They further differ in that some of them present examples of experiences where community-based disaster risk management approaches go hand in hand or are even part of the government's DRM approaches (Philippines, Vietnam). Others describe situations in which communities were not supported and assisted in their effort to prepare themselves for and cope with disasters (Iran, Mozambique, and South Africa). All case studies will be made available on internet through SD Dimensions (FAO).
Workshop for Comparative Analysis.
Case study authors and/or resource people were invited to share and discuss their key findings with FAO SDAR staff, other FAO technical units and representatives from IFAD and WFP, in a workshop that was held in FAO's Headquarters from the 31 March to 2 April 2004 (see Annex 1 for the workshop agenda and list of participants). To facilitate the comparison between case studies, each study report was analyzed and key issues summarized in an analytical matrix. The matrix was designed in three sections: ! Section 1: describes the case study context (area and population covered, description of the hazard, land tenure and use patterns, livelihood strategies, formal DRM institutional set-up at national and local level) Section 2: summarizes local perspectives and perceptions related to: policies, practices and institutions (formal and informal), key actors and their respective roles, training and capacity-building activities for each phase of the FAO's Disaster Risk Management Cycle.
Section 3: summarizes the case specific recommendations and lessons learnt as indicated by the author.
The participants were asked to consider specifically what is needed on top of standard "day to day" rural development planning in order to ensure the critical distinction between DRM and RD.
FINDINGS AND LESSONS LEARNT General Lessons: Specification of Working Hypotheses.
Case study findings and workshop discussions confirmed the basic assumption that locally organized preventive as well as responsive action to disasters could be very powerful to limit damage and losses, and that they are crucial to complement higher level activities in emergencies (see matrix on page 12). They also confirmed that what is lacking is a good understanding about local experiences and knowledge and concrete guidance on how to strengthen the role of local government and community-based organizations in DRM and improve their ways of communication and active interaction. The data and workshop discussions indicate that local institutions and organizations are key actors with comparative strengths for DRM as outlined in the initial prestudy working hypotheses (page 10). LOCAL institutions derive their strengths from proximity, responsiveness to social pressures and adaptation. However, to be verifiable, these hypotheses should include the following additional considerations: ! The conventional disaster cycle used by FAO (Annex 5) has only limited value for integration between disaster risk management and longer-term development. The focus of the disaster cycle is on the management of the different phases and not on integration of risk into long-term development planning and management. Hazards and disasters are not problems that.
can be solved in isolation. Hazard risk needs to be linked with natural resource management and economic and social resiliency, within a longterm perspective. ! Local institutions need the appropriate frameworks/enabling environment to function. Local actors often act without a mandate from central level. Concrete/effective action at local level requires a mandate for them from central level and a revenue system which also allows for resource mobilization at local level. The central administration/government is the key actor in policy formulation. DRM requires a combination of "top-down" and "bottom-up" approaches to reduce risk and make disaster response and rehabilitation more effective. Effective coordination systems benefit from decentralized governance, once clearly defined roles of local government are in place. Critical aspects include: (i) devolution of responsibilities; (ii) appropriate budget allocations; (iii) institutions at different levels and in different sectors that are mutually supportive (vertical and horizontal coordination); (iv) clear definition of tasks; (v) strong partnerships with civil society and the private sector; (vi) integration with sectoral development plans. The functioning and comparative strengths of local institutions depend upon the type and scale of natural disasters. There is a threshold beyond which local institutions are no longer able to prepare for and respond effectively to a disaster. While recurrent natural disasters are better managed at the local level, exceptional/extreme events also require support from the national/local government and international community. Furthermore, while human-induced components of disaster response imply a focus on institutional capacity-building, some elements of the natural hazard management, in particular agricultural risk adaptation practices, are better managed through conventional technical assistance/transfer of technology practices, thus stressing the important link of DRM to agricultural extension. Another pre-requisite for effective DRM is its integration with natural resource management and long-term rural development, particularly in the areas of land use and watershed management. Natural disasters are often a consequence of inappropriate natural resource management and there is often a clash between local DRM strategies and practices and national development policies strategies; these issues need to be addressed at central government level and require negotiation and participation at local level. Partnerships between local government, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and community groups are more effective and need fostering than single institutions working independently. This is particularly evident in the areas of: natural resource management, financial services and conflict management. Social capital is the key factor ensuring immediate responses to disasters (saving lives and moving people to safer grounds, providing emergency food and shelter) and has a very important role also in the rehabilitation phase (credit, mutual support in reconstruction work), especially when there is no formal system in place. However, spontaneous initiatives related to the prevention and preparedness for disasters and risk are rare. Mitigation measures normally require support from formal institutions. Adaptation strategies to recurrent small-scale hazards are common but extreme events are often perceived as "acts of God" and no preventive measure is taken. All case studies provided evidence that local social capital plays a key role in immediate relief operations. Where there is no official coordinating mechanism the local community carries out all rescue.
and relief functions on the basis of its informal networks. Emergency relief operations can be "used" to facilitate the recognition of the role of local social capital by: a) allocating roles and responsibilities in the distribution of relief goods and provision of relief services; b) identifying policy and legislation gaps; c) providing local and national government support to develop normative frameworks which would capitalize on local informal networks.
3.2 Specific Lessons: Comparative Strengths of Key Actors in DRM.
Building on the initial steps taken in the literature review, the case studies and workshop succeeded in further defining the key actors in DRM, as well as their functions and comparative strengths. Key issues are summarized in Table 1 (see next page).
The Comparative Strengths of Local Institutions in DRM and Lessons Learned (Trends and findings relating to the working hypotheses emerging from the case studies).
Central and Provincial Government is a key actor in: Policy Development " Setting the normative framework for: a) Integration of DRM and NRM b) Land tenure/use patterns c) Devolution of responsibilities to local level d) Participatory processes in polic