FAO INVESTMENT CENTRE OCCASIONAL PAPER SERIES NO. 11 July 2001.
LESSONS FOR PROJECT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION FROM SELECTED RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN ASIA (1990-1999).
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS ROME INVESTMENT CENTRE DIVISION.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
This report describes the results of lessons drawn from a review of Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) from twenty-eight rural development projects that were financed by the World Bank in East and South Asia between 1990 and 1999. The Investment Centre Division (TCI) was involved in preparing these ICRs between 1997 and 1999. The analysis identified commonalities and differences between groups of projects, based on good or poor assessment ratings for different types of interventions. As a result, a range of possible lessons for project design and implementation was identified. Most of the projects (75%) were rated as having a satisfactory outcome and nearly two thirds were rated as sustainable. Actual disbursements averaged 70% of the total loan value. Lessons were identified in terms of good practices for four types of project intervention: (i) (ii) (iv) area-based agricultural development and natural resource management; water resources and irrigation development; institution reform and innovation.
(iii) rural credit and finance; and Results were assessed and categorised under three thematic groupings: (i) (ii) project approach and strategy; analytical requirements; and.
(iii) purpose and scope of monitoring and evaluation. Systemic weaknesses (information gaps and neglected actions) were identified concerning the conceptual bases and scope of ICRs. These related to three main areas: (i) (ii) limited treatment of stakeholder/equity issues and unplanned impacts; inadequate adherence to logical structure of projects; and.
(iii) lack of borrower participation in preparation of ICRs.
A. INTRODUCTION.
Background.
This report presents an analysis of lessons drawn from an independent review of 28 Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) of World Bank-assisted projects, in South and East Asia with which the Investment Centre Division (TCI) was involved between 1997and 1999. The Division had major responsibility for 20 of the ICRs, while the remaining 8 were prepared by the World Bank with TCI participation. All projects were from the South and East Asia/Pacific Region, commencing in 1990, and with the majority being implemented between 1993 and 1999. 1 Drawing and disseminating lessons from experience, by way of review and evaluation processes, is an essential phase in the project cycle. Internalisation of such lessons in the Division's operations, including future ICRs and other review activities, is important to maintaining the comparative advantage of TCI/FAO as a centre of excellence in the areas of agricultural and rural development planning and management. Scope and Focus.
This report is concerned primarily with analysis of the content of the ICRs included in the review. The overall approach is essentially free-ranging, and one of exploring and bringing out what lessons are to be found within the set of ICRs reviewed. There is no predetermined thematic thrust at the outset, and issues emerge, in brainstorm fashion, as the available information allows. Since ICR content is inextricably linked to the ICR process itself, an examination of the latter is also undertaken to provide practical indications as to how any lessons that emerged could be more effectively learned. Specific focus is given to the following: (a) Discerning factors that could have had a positive or negative bearing on project performance; Assessing the implications of these factors for project design (concept, preparation, and appraisal stages) and management (physical implementation, monitoring, communication, review and evaluation); Identifying best practices as well as weaknesses (including neglected steps and information overlooked) associated with project planning, implementation, and review/evaluation activities; Examining the dynamics of ICRs within the overall feedback mechanism of FAO/TCI (including self-learning and communication issues); and.
A further 6 ICRs prepared by the Bank were to have been included in this review, but as these were unavailable at the time of this writing, have now been omitted from the list. Reference is however made on a selective basis to other ICRs of projects in Asia and elsewhere, where appropriate, to reinforce lessons drawn (e.g. Gujarat Rural Roads Project and Maharastra Composite Irrigation Project) .
Lessons for Project Design and Implementation from Selected Rural Development Projects in Asia (1990- 1999).
Exploring ways and means of internalising lessons from project implementation in TCI operations, including administrative and sub-sector aspects.
Conceptual and Practical Issues.
The ICR review exercise is guided by the belief that: - Learning from experience should be an integral part of the evaluation process, and an important input into the design of future development projects and programmes, that could also assist in formulation of sectoral, country and regional policies and strategies. Lessons vary from the summary findings, conclusions and recommendations of specific project evaluations and reviews. They are an attempt to generalise from particular experiences and instances, cause-effects relationships, that could provide guidance with regards to best practices that might be applied in broadly similar situations. Lessons should form part of, and add continually to, the information and knowledge system about a particular topic. They can reinforce, but also challenge or help modify conventional wisdom and accepted norms of behaviour and practice over time.
Using ICRs as the main source of information on project implementation experiences, however, presents a number of practical difficulties: - Firstly, due to the timing of ICRs, that are generally conducted immediately following the implementation phase in the project cycle when development impacts are often incomplete, and some degree of conjecture as to future trends is inevitable. Secondly, despite its overlap with terminal evaluation processes, each ICR is, in procedural terms, a separate exercise, for which responsibility rests ultimately with operational staff of the World Bank. It appears that accountability considerations and the natural affinities and loyalties of the staff members directly involved in project operations poses a potential conflict of interest and possible impediment to objective evaluations. Thirdly, whilst ICRs are meant to be an objective assessment based on all available information, they nonetheless are subject to the professional judgement and perspectives of the authors involved.
ICRs are therefore but one instrument that needs to be corroborated from other information sources, including ex-post evaluations instituted some years after project closure, and other diagnostic and impact studies (such as those being conducted by the Bank's Operations Evaluation Department (OED) see below).
The Institutional Context of ICRs.
ICRs form an important part of the portfolio management and evaluative processes of the World Bank, which has recently undertaken a number of steps to improve development effectiveness of its lending activities, whilst emphasising the need for learning and disseminating lessons from past experience (see Box 1). All ICRs completed are subject to an independent review by OED, in the form of an "Evaluation Summary" containing OED's own performance ratings, as well as comments on lessons to be drawn and the quality of the ICR itself; findings are then entered into a departmental database1.
OED's other evaluation and review processes include performance audits and ex-post impact evaluations of projects on a selective basis, and the conduct of sector impact and country assistance reviews, and thematic and other ad hoc evaluative studies. These are published as a "Lessons and Practices" series and papers on specific development themes.
A "development effectiveness" index incorporating project outcome, sustainability, and institutional development impact ratings has been developed for use as a composite indicator of project performance. Annual Reviews of Development Effectiveness (ARDEs), providing a synthesis of individual evaluations of previous calendar years 3 have been published since 1997.
This database (`Textbase' and Project Information Form) is accessible to Bank staff within its Intranet, but is not generally available to FAO staff and consultants. These include evaluation study reports and OED précis covering specific projects (e.g. the Second Livestock Project, Mauritania), groups of projects (e.g. dairy projects, India) and development themes such as sustainability of agricultural research systems and grassroots organisations for resource management. Most are accessible to the public through the World Bank OED website. These emphasise results-orientation for improved institutional learning and accountability. They also examine strategic dimensions of evaluation results and analyse determinants of project performance at levels of the Bank's country portfolios and individual projects.
Box 1: World Bank: Improving Development Effectiveness and Lesson Learning The World Bank's Portfolio Management Task Force Report i.e. the Wapenhans Report of 1992/93 identified important weaknesses in project feedback mechanisms, due in part to over-emphasis on the mechanics (physical and financial aspects) of implementation and insufficient attention on factors influencing project outcomes. The report led to a range of actions (the "Next Steps") to enhance project performance through focusing on development results and impacts of Bank operations. The need to instil an organisational culture based not on approvals but results, and not the quantity of lending but on the developmental impact of loans and other services, was further endorsed by the Bank's Development Committee Task Force on Multi-lateral Development Banks in 1996. A Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) was set up to act as interface between the Bank's Executive Board and its management hierarchy and to help facilitate implementation of management responses to OED recommendations1. Its review of progress in late 1998 urged Bank management to intensify development of an integrated work programme combining independent and self-evaluation. It stressed the n central importance of stakeholder participation in setting own development goals and designing appropriate M&E systems at various levels, noting that capacity building in evaluation at borrower/country level remains a priority for Bank operations. Meanwhile, a Bankwide ICR Process Working Group with broad representation from within the Bank lamented "the weak incentives within the Bank for effective ICR work, in part because of limited emphasis by management on learning from completed operations." It also noted "the process does nor adequately assure the participation of borrowers, partners and beneficiaries, and lessons are not widely disseminated and learned." Subsequently, the system of ICRs was revised to emphasise their role within the Bank's knowledge management and accountability system, while enhancing borrowers' ability to design, implement and operate projects. New ICR guidelines in mid-1999 (replacing those in use since 1994) are meant to ensure greater development impact and sustainability, reinforcing self-evaluation by the Bank and borrowers, and providing for more intensive learning, including stakeholder feedback on lessons learned.
The present exercise must, as an independent review, look beyond the institutional bounds of the World Bank, and not preclude examining issues that can have lessons for project design and management for the wider development community. FAO/World Bank Cooperative Programme (CP) staff resources, along with those of other specialised departments, form part of the knowledge and information system, formal and informal, and provide an important forum for sharing of experiences, on development planning and management. Given the limitations of ICRs per se as an evaluation device, consideration should be given to the wider issue of how to make information feedback more effective for CP and FAO as a whole.
The success or otherwise of CODE in this regard is not known, but effective communication and interaction between OED and the Operations staff obviously are essential in ensuring lessons learned are put into practice.
B. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH.
Project Logic and Dimensions.
The review methodology recognises the need for a clear distinction between different levels of project objectives and their achievement. These range from the provision of incremental project inputs (such as financial and human resources) for undertaking project activities, via generation of project outputs (e.g. forestry seedlings or rural roads), to the attainment of higher level development objectives (improved farm incomes or environmental improvements). Various assumptions, conditions and risks govern the logical links between successive levels of these objectives. 10. Of particular interest as criteria of a project's success are the higher development objectives and its eventual impacts, planned and unplanned. It is also worth remembering that projects can impact on people directly targeted as well other non-targeted groups, both positively and negatively, which may be on-site and off-site of the designated project area, i.e. existence of externalities. Hence no evaluation is complete without bearing in mind unanticipated impacts and possible externalities on people and the environment. 11. Project impacts can have physical, financial, economic, social, and environmental dimensions. Developments which stem from society's perceived needs, goals and aspirations may additionally be influenced by value judgements (e.g. the desire to eradicate poverty, even if this means a slower rate of economic growth in the immediate term). Attention is therefore drawn to three cohorts of development objectives: efficiency, e q u i t y, and sustainability. In the project context, there may be complementary (win-win) or conflicting (win-lose) situations, hence potential trade-offs between such objectives. Information Inputs 12. In addition to the section on "key lessons learned" within each ICR, statistical tables and text dealing with project operations, events and experiences (from borrower and financier/donor viewpoints) were examined. This was essential as relevant lessons were not always sufficiently highlighted in the ICRs, while some "lessons" listed consisted largely of conclusions or recommendations specific to the project in question, and were set in too narrow a context to be of general relevance and applicability. 13. To help qualify the findings, and to explore perceptions concerning the ICR process itself, contacts were made with individuals (CP staff and consultants) who had been involved in preparation of ICRs (face-to-face meetings as well as remotely). This included present and ex-CP staff not directly involved in the ICRs under review, but had nonetheless undertaken ICR work in the recent past.
A CP staff workshop in May 2000 provided another forum for interchange of experiences and views on the ICRs reviewed and on related project themes and issues. ICR Projects Profile 14. The 28 projects included in this review have initially been grouped into three broad sub-sectoral categories as follows:.
Including Simon Hocombe, William Sorrenson, Guy Evers and José Maria Caballero.
Agricultural or rural area development and services (ARD, 11 projects). Water resource management and irrigation (WRI, 11 projects). Natural resource management and forestry (NRF, 6 projects).
Their main characteristics in terms of investment size, scale, type of components, and ICR performance ratings are summarised below: Investment Size and Scale 15. All but two of the projects had appraisal cost estimates of over US$40m, and six over US$200m each. Actual disbursements of the 28 projects were 30% lower than the appraisal estimate (see table 1). Projects were generally national, provincial/state, multi-state (in the case of India) or regional (e.g. covering a number of watersheds) in scale. Project Components 16. Most projects were multi-component, with activities covering physical delivery of infrastructure, rural credit and financial services, human resource development, institutional development/capacity building, operational system development or reform (e.g. of agricultural research and extension system) and technical assistance. For instance, various ARD and NRF projects included on-farm investments in crop, livestock, trees, or fisheries/aquaculture enterprises, technology transfer, seed multiplication, agro-industrial development, and at times also water resource management/conservancy and irrigation. 17. Given these overlaps, project titles and sub-sectoral groupings may not necessarily reflect the type and range of interventions involved in a given project/ICR. Sub-sectoral labels have only limited value as project typologies, and the use of development themes or type of project intervention is considered more appropriate for lesson-learning purposes. Performance Ratings 18. Each ICR has provided assessment ratings for a range of performance variables. The pattern of good and poor ratings for achievement of project objectives, sustainability, and overall outcome 1, along with how close actual project costs were to appraisal amounts is summarised in table.
Seven projects (25%) had unsatisfactory outcome ratings, and for ten (36%) their sustainability had been rated as unlikely, uncertain or unclear. Five projects (18%) had actual disbursement of funds of less than 50% of appraisal estimates, while disbursements for thirteen (45%) were within 80% of the appraised amount. 19. Besides physical and financial project objectives, many of the projects also had poverty reduction, institutional, environmental, gender, and other wider development objectives as part of the project plan, each of which had an ICR rating (there was however no provision for rating on achievement of "economic" objectives). Table 2 indicates that while the majority of projects (17 out of 28 projects or over 60%) were accorded substantial achievements in physical objectives by the ICRs, this was patchy for other objectives; their incidence being: financial.
Overall outcome ratings available only from within the text in the six ICRs (late 1999 to early 2000) prepared under the new (1999) Guidelines..
(40%), poverty reduction (36%), environmental (32%), and generally less than 25% for other objectives. Six projects (21%) had no substantial achievement ratings for any category of development objective. However, twelve (43%) were judged to have had substantial achievements for institutional development. Analytical Scheme 20. Lessons on project design and management can be gleaned from both successes and failures. To facilitate comparisons, a system of project typology was adopted, based on: a) ICR performance ratings to differentiate between the best and worst in terms of outcomes and sustainability; and b) type of interventions included in the project. 21. Because of the cross-cutting and multi-component nature of development interventions, broad sub-sectoral classifications (i.e. agricultural and rural development, natural resource/forestry, and water resources development/irrigation) are an insufficient project typology. More useful is to identify the type of interventions present in a given project as a basis for comparing "lessons" on good practices or design faults across projects. Cross-linking the findings with those using overall performance rating permits triangulation of the results. 22. The analytical scheme used to assist in review of the ICR documents is given below. Good and Poor ICR Performance Ratings 1 Basis: - - - Projects with best ratings: satisfactory outcome, likely sustainability, and substantial achievement in at least five key development objectives; Projects with poorest ratings: unsatisfactory outcome plus unlikely sustainability or no substantial achievements in any development objective; Projects not accorded likely sustainability rating, i.e. rated unlikely, uncertain, unclear, or mixed;.
Development Theme/Nature of Intervention present in Project Basis: - - - A r e a-b a s e d development or natural resource management/conservation (including watersheds, joint forestry management); Water resources (ground and surface water) and irrigation development/ rehabilitation; Rural finance and credit services, including operation of revolving credit fund by government agencies, financial institutions, or community organisations; Operational s y s t e m reform and/or innovation: agricultural research and extension system, safety assurance system for large dams.
The purpose here is to group the ICRs into manageable sets with common characteristics; criteria used are somewhat arbitrary, as there are any number of possible ways of doing so.
ICR Project Clusters 23. Based on the above, ICRs were categorised into project clusters, with each project within a cluster given an identification number. Projects with best and poorest ratings were mutually exclusive and form clusters A and B, respectively. Those with unlikely or uncertain sustainability rating were grouped as cluster C. Given their poor achievements, some projects in this cluster overlapped with cluster B. Projects clustered by development theme (D, E, F and G) also overlap with one another, in view of the multi-component nature of the projects. The respective identification numbers of each project and the relationship between clusters are set out in table 3.
Type Actual 343 2 46 34 26 139 20 108 78 55 25 245 23 115 249 93 72 120 44 30 17 46 55 159 10 45 263 56 29 PROJECT COSTS ($m) At Appraisal 309 196 85 488 215 25 106 111 59 171 246 95 197 347 126 92 133 39 36 45 46 82 156 18 50 263 64 43 (% of Appraisal) 111.0 125.5 40.0 5.3 64.7 80.0 101.9 70.3 93.2 14.6 99.6 24.2 58.4 71.8 73.8 78.3 90.2 112.8 83.3 37.8 100.0 67.1 101.9 55.6 90.0 100.0 87.0 67.1.
PROJECT NAME.
China China Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Viet Nam Bangladesh Bangladesh Bangladesh India India India India India India India India Nepal Nepal Nepal Pakistan Pakistan Sri Lanka Sri Lanka Philippines Philippines PNG.
Hebei Agricultural Development Henan Agricultural Development Groundwater Development (CAI) National Watershed Mgmt.(CAI) Provincial Irrigated Agricultural development * Yogjakarta Upland Area Development * Agricultural Rehabilitation BWDB Systems Rehabilitation Agricultural Support Services National Minor Irrigation Punjab Irrigation & Drainage Supervision Shrimp and Fish (ILI) Dam Safety (CAI) National Sericulture * Integrated Watershed Dev. (Hills) Integrated Watershed Dev. (Plains) Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development West Bengal Forestry * Sunsari Morang Headworks * Hill Community Forestry Mahakali Irrigation II * Agricultural Research II On- Farm Water Mgmt. III Second Agriculture Extension * National Irrigation Rehabilitation Second Rural Finance (CAI) Second Communal Irrigation Development (CAI) Land Mobilisation *.
ARD ARD WRI NRF WRI NRF ARD WRI ARD WRI WRI ARD WRI ARD NRF NRF ARD NRF WRI NRF WDI ARD WRI ARD WRI ARD WRI ARD.
ALL PROJECTS.
* ICR prepared by World Bank with TCI/CP involvement CAI = Core Accountability ICR; ILI = Intensive Learning ICR (using new World Bank guidelines and format, from late 1999).
RATING BY ICR Outcome Sats X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X HS S S S S S X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X PHY FIN POV INS GNR ENV MAC PBL PVT 'Substantial Achievement' of Objectives PROJECT NAME Actual Project US$ Cost as % of Appraisal > 80% < 50% UnSats X X.
Project sustainability unlikely or uncertain.
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X HS.
China China Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Viet Nam Bangladesh Bangladesh Bangladesh India India India India India India India India Nepal Nepal Nepal Pakistan Pakistan Sri Lanka Sri Lanka Philippines Philippines PNG X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X.
Hebei Agricultural Development Henan Agricultural Development Groundwater Development National Watershed Mgmt. Prov incial Irrigated Agric. Development Yogjakarta Upland Area Development Agricultural Rehabilitation BWDB Systems Rehabilitation Agr icultural Support Services National Minor Irrigation Punjab Irrigation & Drainage Shrimp and Fish Dam Safety National Sericulture Intgr. Watershed Dev. (Hills) Intgr. Watershed Dev. (Plains) Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development West Bengal Forestry Sunsari Morang Headworks Hill Community Forestry Mahakali Irrigation II Agricultural Research II On- Farm Water Mgmt. III Second Agriculture Extension National Irrigation Rehabilitation Second Rural Finance Second Communal Irrigation Development Land Mobilisation.
Key: X = affirmative, where PHY = physical objectives; FIN = financial objectives; POV = poverty reduction; INS = institutional development; GNR = gender and other social objectives ; ENV = environmental objectives; MAC = macro and sectoral objectives ; PBL = public sector management; PVT = private sector development).
(Note that ICR for the Second Rural Finance Project (Philippines) used a four - step rating system consistent with the new 'core ICR' Guidelines. However, it departed from the latter by using the attributes 'highly substantial' and 'substantial' in the scoring (indicated above as HS and S) instead of 'highly satisfactory' and 'satisfactory' used by other core ICRs. This gave the project two highly substantial and five substantial achievements ratings).
Project Name.
Hebei Agricultural Development (Chn) Henan Agricultural Development (Chn) Groundwater Development (Indo).
Project Identification Number * Best and Poorest Rated Project Clusters Clusters with Intervention Type Present in Project A B C D E F G resources and Rural finance and credit Operational system Best Poorest Sustainability Area based development or Water natural resource irrigation system services 3/ development/reform Ratings Ratings Unlikely/ management 1/ development 2/ 4/ Uncertain A1 D1 E1 F1 A2 D2 E2 F2 B1 E3.
National Watershed Mgmt. (Indo) Provincial Irrigated Agric. Dev. (Indo) Yogjakarta Upland Area Dev. (Indo) Agricultural Rehabilitation (Viet) BWDB Systems Rehabilitation (Bang) Agricultural Support Services (Bang) National Minor Irrigation(Bang) Punjab Irrigation & Drainage (Ind) Shrimp and Fish (Ind) Dam Safety (Ind) National Sericulture (Ind) Intgr. Watershed Dev. - Hills (Ind) Intgr Watershed Dev. - Plains (Ind) Tamil Nadu Agricultural Dev. (Ind) West Bengal Forestry (Ind) Sunsari Morang Headworks (Nep) Hill Community Forestry (Nep) Mahakali Irrigation II (Nep) Agricultural Research II ( Pak) On- Farm Water Mgmt. III (Pak) Second Agriculture Extension (Srl) National Irrigation Rehabilitation (Srl) Second Rural Finance (Phi) Second Communal Irrigation Dev. (Phi) Land Mobilisation (PNG).
* Subsumed in any intervention may be physical delivery of infrastructure, provision of agricultural inputs and services, training and capacity building activities, and so on.
Includes watershed management & community forestry/joint forestry management activities. Includes both system development and rehabilitation. Includes operation of revolving fund by government agencies, financial institutions or community organisations. Includes agricultural research & extension, and safety assurance systems for large dams.
C. ANALYTICAL FINDINGS 24. The analyses focused on discerning commonalties and differences amongst various project clusters and possible lessons that may be derived on project design and management. Good practices in the design of specific development interventions, as documented under "key lessons" and elsewhere within the ICRs, were also identified. Significant also is what was not explicitly documented or, where the case, done so largely as an afterthought. Attention is thus drawn to possible gaps in information content and neglected steps in the ICRs where these were apparent. The main findings and observations are summarised below. Performance Ratings and Possible Lessons Pattern of Success and Failure 25. Best and poorest rated projects (clusters A and B, respectively) did not appear to follow any geographical pattern, and each cluster of six projects was distributed over five broadly similar countries. Unlikely or uncertain sustainability project ratings (project cluster C) were found in seven out of ten countries represented; the exceptions were China, Indonesia and the Philippines, where all projects had been accorded likely sustainability ratings. 26. The six best rated projects were accorded substantial achievement ratings for no less than five development objectives (in addition to satisfactory outcome and likely sustainability ratings). All projects in the cluster were rated so for physical, financial and institutional development objectives, five projects for poverty reduction and environmental objectives, and from two to four projects also for macro/sectoral, public sector management, or private sector development. 27. Except for one project where disbursement was in the region of 75% of appraisal estimates, the others all matched or exceeded the appraised amounts. All but one of the six were either sub-national in scope or had area-based agricultural development or conservation amongst the interventions; five had rural credit and finance, and three had some form of irrigation development. 28. The six poorest rated projects, besides all being rated unsatisfactory in overall outcome, either had no substantial achievement rating for any single category of objective or else were not rated as sustainable. Disbursement by project completion was less than 50% of appraised amount in four of the projects, and less than 15% in two (National Minor Irrigation, Bangladesh a and National Watershed Management, Indonesia). All six projects h d either "national" in the project title or were essentially national or multi-provincial (for India, multi-state) in scope. Two had interventions in water resource/irrigation, and two in operational system reform (national agricultural research and extension systems), with one each in commodity development (multistate shrimp and fisheries) and in agricultural development/conservation (country-wide programme). 29. Whilst premature to make generalisations on the pattern of success or failure encountered, given the relatively small number of projects reviewed, the above observations nonetheless suggests that over-ambition in scope, lack of specific area focus, and types of intervention predisposed some projects to poor performance. Both the agricultural research (Pakistan) and extension (Sri Lanka) projects, for instance, battled (unsuccessfully) against well.
established national administrative systems, status quo and mind-sets in attempting to inject new and untested ideas and approaches into existing systems. Design and Management Features 30. Intervention type asides, the way a project is designed and how it is managed can, singly or jointly, influence the course of its implementation and affect its eventual outcome.
Those factors considered to have had a positive or negative bearing on project performance (projects within clusters A and B) have been singled out, and possible lessons for project design and management enumerated. The main findings are summarised in table 4 (detailed descriptions are set out in Annex 1).
Determining causality of project success or failure is often not straightforward, given its multi-variate nature, where factors external and internal to the project could both come into play. Nonetheless, one-way comparison of those project features that are deemed to have relevancy to particular design or implementation issues is a useful starting point.
Possible Lessons.
A) Project Design * Scope and coverage: to be not over-ambitious; a clear geographic area focus; and careful consideration of inter-area e variations in skills and capacities; * Components and products: comprehensive enough to cover key functions and complementary linkages; should facilitate s inclusivity in participation by different socio-economic/gender groups; strategic focus is essential during project identification i.e. well before project design is firmed up; * Technology choice: not pre-emptive, with careful analysis of alternative