Agribusiness Handbooks.
Wheat / Flour.
This publication was prepared by the FAO Investment Centre under the FAO/EBRD cooperation agreement to provide quick technical and economical reference material to EBRD's agribusiness team in sub-sectors where they often work. Focus was given to the Bank's countries of operation in Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, with indicators of technical and economical performance in other regions of the world noted for comparison. The series of handbooks contained in this publication cover specific agribusiness sub-sectors, with information on production and processing techniques, costs and margins, world production, prices and trade trends. Data were collected from a number of official and unofficial sources as indicative information that should be interpreted with caution, and do not imply the expression of any opinion by FAO concerning the economic situation of countries mentioned. (October 1999).
FAO / EBRD Agribusiness Handbooks vol.3 - Wheat / Flour.
1- WHEAT CULTIVATION.
Wheat is grown in most parts of the world, from near-arctic to near-equatorial latitudes. It is unique among cereals since the total area under wheat cultivation world-wide is larger than for any other cereal and the amount of wheat traded internationally exceeds that of all other grains. Furthermore, the protein and caloric content of wheat is greater than in any other food crop. Most wheat is consumed in the form of baked goods, mainly bread. Hence, wheat grains must be milled to produce flour prior to consumption.
Key production parameters.
· Although grown in various areas, wheat is best acclimated between 30 to 60° North and 27 to 40° South latitudes. While high-yield varieties respond best to controlled water conditions, optimal levels of rainfall for rainfed wheats are from 20" to 35" annually, with 4" to 6" falling during the two months prior to harvest. Wheat can be cultivated at elevations ranging from sea level to 10,000 feet. Although well-drained silt and clay loam soils are optimal, a wide range of soil types can be tolerated. Slightly acid soils (6.0 to 6.5 pH) are ideal. An average growing season temperature of 77° F (25°C) is optimal, although a range of 38 to 90° F (3.3 to 32°C) is acceptable. All wheats are annual plants. Spring wheats are planted in the spring, have a short growing season, less than 100 days, and are harvested in the fall. In contrast, winter wheats are planted in the fall, in areas with no excessive freezing. Following germination and development of an extensive root system, growth is halted in winter and revived in the spring. Harvest takes place in early summer. The main wheat types represent all possible combinations of hard and soft, red and white, and spring and winter categories. They all belong to the genus Triticum aestivum, subspecies vulgare. In addition, three other species are significantly represented in commerce; the Triticum durum, compactum and spelta. Average wheat yields range from around 6.0 tons per ha in Western Europe to 3.5 tons in Eastern Europe; with Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia registering yields of slightly more than four tons. Average yields are lower in Eastern Europe mainly because of the smaller size of the farms (less economies of scale), the low quality of seeds and the outdated farm machinery available. In addition, 1996 was a particularly bad year because of adverse weather conditions. The yields in CIS countries (ex: Georgia and Russia) are generally even lower than in Eastern Europe; although 1998 was a particularly bad year, weather-wise, for Russia.
Indicative Yields for the Period 1994-1998 (tons/ha) European Union 1994 1996 1998 5.4 5.9 6.0 China 3.4 3.7 3.7 Eastern Europe 3.3 2.7 3.5 Bulgaria 2.8 1.9 3.0 Romania 2.5 1.8 2.6 Georgia 1.3 1.3 1.3 Russia 1.4 1.4 1.0.
Sources: FAO Statistics. The European Union comprising 15 countries.
Total world production & main producers.
The following table shows the respective areas cultivated and the wheat production in the main producing countries of the word as well as in the European Union as a block. It is worth noting that the relative importance of the producing countries in the total has barely changed since 1994. France is the dominant producer within the European Union with close to 40% of the total production, followed by Germany with around 20%.
Wheat Production in Main Producing Countries.
Country/ region.
Area (million ha) 29.0 15.9 25.0 25.1 10.8 7.9 101.7 215.4 Production (million tons) 99.3 85.6 63.2 60.0 22.9 9.0 187.5 527.5 % Area (million ha) 29.6 16.9 25.5 25.1 12.3 10.9 110.7 231.0.
Production (million tons) 110.6 99.7 62.0 62.1 29.8 22.9 195.6 582.7 % Area (million ha) 30.0 17.2 23.9 25.6 10.8 11.5 105.4 224.4.
Production (million tons) 110.0 103.8 69.4 66.0 24.4 21.8 193.4 588.8 %.
China E.U. US India Canada Australia Others.
World Total.
Sources: FAO Statistics.
In Eastern Europe, as well as in the FSU, increased wheat production will mainly come from yield improvements in the existing largest producing areas. · In Eastern Europe, the wheat areas with most potentials are in Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary. Poland has the largest wheat production but is closer to achieving potential yields ­ i.e. fewer possibilities in terms of improvements. In Romania, wheat cultivation is concentrated on the Moldavian Plateau, the Danube River flood plain, and the Central Romanian Plain. The land is flat and the soils potentially good to very good. The financing by the EBRD of a ship loading facility on the Black Sea cost, as well as the expansion by the WB of the berthing facilities in Constanza, should greatly improve the export possibilities. In Bulgaria, some 30% of the wheat production come from the Dobrogea region of the Danube flood plain, in the SouthEast of the country, where land suitability for wheat cultivation is excellent. It is estimated that wheat exports could double over the next five years. In the FSU, the wheat areas with most potentials are in the black and brown soils of a large belt formed by the central and southern parts of Ukraine plus the Central Chernozen, Povalzhsky, North Caucasus and Urals regions of the Russian Federation. It must be remembered that the federation has a vast territory and yield levels can be very different from one part to another. For instance, the Tatar registers yields of around 3.5 tons/ha whereas the NorthWest has yields of less than one ton/ha. Nevertheless, generally speaking, yields in the producing areas could at least be brought back to their historical levels of the Soviet period.
Key production costs.
For illustrative purposes, it is assumed an average yield of 3.5 tons/ha of winter wheat grown in Eastern Europe under good cropping conditions with irrigation and a sufficient availability of quality inputs. On this basis, it is estimated that the total production cost per ton was in the range of US$ 70 - 100 per ton in 1998, depending on the country, the farm size and the level of mechanization. Generally speaking, the relative importance of the main production costs to the total could be as follows:.
Structure of average variable costs for wheat production Machinery Rental 15-20% Seeds 5-10% Fertilisers 30-35% Sprays 0-5% Water Charges 5-10% Labour 10-15% Others 35-5% TOTAL 100%.
Source: Farm Management Pocketbook - John Nix - September 1998.
The necessary machinery for land preparation ­ and perhaps harvesting ­ could be owned by the farmer or, more often, rented from others. Labour comprises mainly hired manual workers although family members could perhaps substitute for part of it, say 20% of labour cost. Other costs could include a land tax as well as an annual amortization for small farm equipment. Obviously, the US$ equivalent of these costs could vary substantially from one year to another due to the evolution of the national currency in the country considered.
Wheat sale's prices.
The following table shows the FOB prices of the main wheats for international export as well as the overall average FOB price of the various wheats exported by the European Union.
Export (FOB) Prices of Wheat (US$ per ton) U.S. No.2 Hard Winter 1996-97 1997-98 March 1999 181 142 119 U.S. No.2 Soft Red Winter 158 129 107 Argentina Trigo Pan 157 137 118 Average from European Union 190 158 -.
Source: International Grain Council and FAO Statistics.
Eastern Europe ­ taken as a block ­ both exports and imports wheat. The next table shows the overall average export (FOB) and import (CIF) prices for 1996 and 1997. Most of the imported wheat ­ total of 2.5 million tons in 1997 ­ originated from the European Union and Turkey. On the other hand, the exported wheat ­ total of 1.6 million tons and of lower quality ­ was delivered to various European and North African countries. Wheat exports from Eastern Europe are normally sold at a discount over Western Europe, mainly because of the quality risks and higher port/handling charges.
Average Prices of Wheat in Eastern Europe (US$ per ton) Export (FOB) Price 1996 1997.
Source: FAO Statistics.
Import (CIF) Prices 203 173.
In a number of Eastern European countries, the State was still trying in 1997 to set official prices and enforce them through public purchases. For instance, the Bulgarian Government bought large quantities of wheat from producers at $87-134 per ton, depending on wheat quality. In 1998, most attempts at official price setting were abandoned and the private markets began to prevail. Farmgate prices paid by traders ranged from $80 per ton in Bulgaria to $120 in Romania.
Average margins for producers.
The private markets for agricultural produce in the Eastern European and CIS countries are in full evolution and prices as well as profit margins tend to swing from one extreme to another from year to year. Moreover, food aid in some countries ­ for example in Georgia ­ has a depressive effect on prices. On the basis of various crop models available for a number of the countries, it would seem that the gross profit margins in 1998 for wheat producers were generally within the 10-20% range, excluding some parastatals in quasi-monopolistic situations. These margins are not expected to increase in the coming years, both because competition will intensify and, according to most forecasts, Western European wheat prices will not rise.
Other relevant information.
In the CIS countries; Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Tajikistan, as well as remote areas of the Russian Federation, continue to need food aid. In Eastern Europe, the unprecedented exodus of refugees from the Kosovo Province to the surrounding countries also necessitate largescale food aid. If not properly handled, the supply of food aid could have a depressive effect on domestic prices and discourage national production. On the other hand, a number of large exporting countries, such as Hungary, are facing restrictive policies from their neighbors on the basis that their markets are flooded with cheap grains. Tariff and non-tariff barriers in importing countries could become the single most important obstacle to export growth in the Eastern European and FSU countries.
2- PROCESSING INTO FLOUR.
Process description.
Most wheat is consumed in the form of bread or other baked goods that use flour as main ingredient. Flour is produced by milling, a gradual reduction process involving cycles of breaking, sifting, sorting and crushing the wheat kernels. In primitive milling operations, pairs of stones were used to reduce the grain to flour or meal. This process was revolutionized when grinding by rollers came into large-scale use in the late 1800s. The development in the.
1960s of impact milling (with high-speed grinders) enabled further grinding of flour particles and the use of air classification (with swirling air tunnels) allowed the separation of flour particles that are too fine for sieving. A single flour could then be adapted to meet a variety of needs. Flour mills vary in capacity from 50 tons of wheat per day to 2,000 tons, although there are mills of lower or higher capacity. The latter are normally operated on an industrial basis, located close to a supply source (port or collection areas) and equipped with silos for storage. Since flour quality depends to a large extent on the requirements of individual consumers, there is no internationally recognized set of standard grades. In Eastern Europe, grading is by mineral (ash) content. The lower the ash content, the purer the flour. For instance, Bulgaria has three official grades of flour: Type 500 (ash content of 0.5%), Type 700 (0.7%) and Type 1500 (1.5%). Principal determinants of flour quality include: protein, moisture and ash content, color, particle size, uniformity and favorable raising/elasticity characteristics. Much of the world production of wheat is used to make aerated breads, in part because wheat contains proteins of which gluten is essential to bread making. When wheat flours are in short supply, breads can be made from composite flours, up to 20% of total content ­ ex: a combination of wheat flour and rye, barley, bean or potato flours.
Conversion factors from raw material.
Theoretically, a flour yield of 83% is possible but more common are yields between 72 and 77% (on a clean wheat basis). This can be increased to 90% if whole-wheat flour is produced i.e. if only the coarsest brans are removed. Factors affecting the yield include the size and shape of the kernels, the thickness of the bran and wheat hardness. Soft wheats have higher flour yields. For instance, in Bulgaria, typical extraction rates are between 60% for small village mills to 75% for large-scale (industrial) ones. It must be remembered that wheat bran, the main by-product from milling, can also have a commercial use ­ mainly as animal feed ­ and therefore has a market value in addition to wheat.
Key production/processing costs.
For illustrative purposes, the following table shows a breakdown of the main costs involved in the production of wheat flour at a typical mill in France, a dominant producing/exporting country (see 2.4). The comparable costs in Eastern Europe and CIS countries should eventually approximate this breakdown as the mills established become more active and competitive.
Production Costs for Wheat Flour Base price/cost of wheat plus cleaning Cost of clean wheat plus milling costs (see hereafter) Cost of flour: before adjustement for extraction after adjustement for extraction 1/ minus sales of by-products Flour cost/price at mill gate.
US$/100kg 20.8 1.8 22.6 3.0 25.6 33.7.
Milling Costs Labor and related charges Management/administration/office charges Energy costs Taxes and duties Amortization of equipment/materials Insurance Maintenance and repairs Others TOTAL.
in % 40.2 33.1 7.5 6.5 6.0 3.2 2.5 1.0 100.
Source: L'Association nationale de la meunerie française 1/ Extraction rate is 76%. N.B.: US$1 = 6FF.
Wheat flour prices.
There are no international markets for wheat flour and therefore no internationally set prices. The European Union is, by far, the main world producer/exporter (see later) and France the dominant exporter in the Union. In December 1998, the selling price of wheat was about $110 per ton (bulk) in Rouen/France. At the same period, the price of wheat flour (bagged) was $150-155 in Antwerp/Belgium ­ i.e. 1.38 X Wheat price. This ratio is officially fixed and derived from a European Union's decision that, for all marketing purposes, 0.73 tons of flour should equal one ton of wheat with 0.600% ash in dry substance. At the receiving end, the average import (CIF) price of wheat flour in Eastern Europe was around $181 per ton in 1995, $230 in 1996 and $210 in 1997. At the domestic level in these countries, the wheat supply to the mills is normally achieved through direct purchases from farmers, cooperatives and/or traders; there are no nation-wide markets. For instance, in the case of Bulgaria, the selling price of flour in 1998 varied from $176 per ton for Type 1500 to $203 for Type 500 (see 2.1). Flour imported into Bulgaria is subject to an import duty of 12% and a customs charge of 0.3%.
Average margins for processors.
In Western Europe, mainly due to strong competition, the gross profit margin on wheat processing into flour is a maximum of 7%. In the Eastern European and CIS countries, cost accounting is still new and, consequently, clear/reliable cost data are highly fragmented when not contradictory. In most of the countries, there is evidence that small private mills are gradually taking business away from the existing ex-state (partly privatized) large mills. The latter group complains that the former have an unfair advantage because they often simply offer a service ­ i.e. milling in return for a charge, usually levied as a percentage of the wheat milled (ex: 15%). Consequently, the small mills frequently avoid the payment of the VAT, which is normally in the 20-25% range. It is estimated that the gross margins in Eastern European countries are generally well above 20%, suggesting a likely need for more transparent and stronger competition.
World production & main processors.
As indicated in 2.4, the European Union is, by far, the main world producer/exporter of wheat flour with 6.2 million tons in 1996/97. Algeria, Yemen and Libya are the main world importers. As a group, the FSU countries imported 1.2 million tons or 12% of the total. Georgia, Russia and Azerbaijan were the main recipients in this group. In the case of Georgia, around 10% of the 360 thousand tons imported in 1996/97consisted of food aid.
Main Exporting & Importing Countries of Wheat Flour in 1996/97 (`000 tons, wheat equivalent).
European Union Turkey U.S.A. Argentina Canada Australia Others World Total.
Algeria Yemen Libya North Korea Brazil Hong-Kong Vietnam Georgia Albania Sudan Russia Others World Total.
Source: FAO Statistics. Amounts include non-commercial shipments.
Other relevant information.
The world market for wheat and wheat flour is relatively stable at 100 million tons (wheat equivalent) per year, with flour accounting for about 10% of the total. But the market is evolving gradually in terms of quality requirements, under the combined effects of i) higher levels of mechanization in the mills and bakeries and ii) the privatization of the importers. Quality now often commands a substantial premium and the market for flour is becoming segmented by types/varieties. Consequently, exporters must be prepared, more and more, to provide strict guarantees concerning the specificity/quality of their products. Noise and dust pollution is commonly associated with flourmills. Investments in sound attenuation and air filtration are necessary although they add to the establishment costs of mills. There is a tendency for mill owners ­ including in Eastern European countries (ex: Romania) ­ to integrate vertically as a way of gaining economies of scale; i.e. to invest downstream of flour production, mainly in bakery. Proper/efficient management and accounting become then even more crucial than in the case of carrying out a single business, and are reported to be lacking. Moreover, in a number of these countries, the taxation system (ex: VAT) is quite confusing and needs to be improve (mainly made more transparent) before serious private investments can take place.
