<title>Agroforestry in the West African Sahel (1984)</title>
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT FOR ARID AND SEMIARID REGIONS
Edited in 1984
NOTE FROM THE LIBRARY FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CD-ROM 1.1 EDITORS: THIS BOOK HAS BEEN PUBLISHED IN 1984. IT IS INCLUDED ON THE CD-ROM FOR ITS HISTORICAL VALUE AND EXAMPLES OF WHICH MANY STILL APPLY TODAY. OF COURSE SOME SCIENTIFIC ASPECTS OR POLICY PROPOSALS COULD BE -PARTLY- OUTDATED TODAY DUE TO THE RAPID SCIENTIFIC EVOLUTIONS. WE REFER TO MORE RECENT STUDIES FOR DETAILS RELATING TO MORE RECENT FINDINGS.
Advisory Committee on the Sahel Board on Science and Technology for International Development Office of International Affairs National Research Council United States of America
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Exploitation of natural riches necessary to humanity's material welfare must not damage our ecosystem as its equilibrium is vital to mankind. The African man knows this well for he has signed a pact with Earth and Nature for many a millennium.
His Excellency Mr. Abdou Diouf
President of the Republic of Senegal
Statement on conservation
IUCN Bulletin 1982
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE SAHEL
LEONARD BERRY, Graduate School of Geography, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA, Chairman
EDWARD AYENSU, Office of Biological Conservation, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., USA, Vice Chairman
MOUNKEILA Assistant Director, Forest Service, Ministry of Rural Development, Niger
FRANCIS LeBEAU, Agricultural Consultant, Crystal Springs, Mississippi, USA
FRED WEBER International Resources Development and Conservation Services, Boise, Idaho, USA
STUDY STAFF, BOARD ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
CAROL CORILLON, Writer/Research Associate
JEFFREY GRITZNER, Professional Associate
CONTRIBUTORS
JOHN RAINTREE, Senior Research Scientist, International Council for Research in 4 Agroforestry Nairobi, Kenya
JAMES THOMSON, Natural Resources Management Consultant, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
HANS-JURGEN VON MAYDELL, Institute for World Forestry, Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany
<section>Preface</section>
The Advisory Committee on the Sahel was created in 1978 by the Board on Science and Technology for International Development, at the request of the U. S. Agency for International Development. The committee's work has focused on environmental rehabilitation and development in the Sahel.
In an effort to formulate a long-term environmental strategy for the Sahel, the committee conducted two studies under its current 18-month grant: one on environmental rehabilitation in the West African Sahel (see National Research Council 1983) and one on agroforestry in the West African Sahel. This report provides an overview of agroforestry in the Sahel today, the basic problems that are encountered in the current practice of agroforestry, and the opportunities that are available to donors such as the Agency for International Development, to promote agroforestry in the region.
"Agroforestry" or, more properly, agro-silvo-pastoralism, is a new term for the old practice of growing woody plants with agricultural crops and/or livestock on the same land. Unlike people in many areas of Africa, rural Sahelians have long practiced agroforestry. Agricultural crops such as millet, sorghum, maize, cowpeas, and groundnuts are often grown by Sahelian farmers under a park of Acacia albida (apple-ring acacia, or gag), precisely because the farmers realize that they will reap better harvests when they plant their crops in close proximity to A. albida stands. Indeed, the answer to the Hausa riddle, "Where does the growing season go during the dry season, and the dry season go during the growing season?"--"Into the Acacia albida"--reflects the intimate relationship between this tree and the agricultural systems of the region. Other species, such as Acacia senegal, are similarly valued.
There is ample evidence that traditional agroforestry is a very efficient system. However, although studies on the symbiotic relationship existing among trees and crops and animals have been undertaken over the last several decades (for example, research at the Agricultural Research Center at Bambey, Senegal, on the benefits of Acacia albida was carried out as early as the late 1930s), why this system of intercropping is so beneficial and works so well is not fully understood.
Although more research on agroforestry is needed, certain generalizations can be made. Vegetative cover and biological diversity are not only essential to the maintenance of a stable environment, they are also important to the maintenance of stable agricultural systems. While monocultural cropping can be extremely productive, it requires complex management, heavy input of fertilizer to replace the continual drain of nutrients, and careful attention to outbreaks of disease or predation which can destroy an entire crop. Mixtures of species, however, can produce a variety of products, can better assure food sufficiency, and are much more resistant to disease and moisture stress than are simpler systems. Moreover, the complex root structure of the diverse species that constitute agroforestry systems assists in retrieving nutrients from deep in the soil, holds moisture, and reduces erosion.
While agroforestry is a way of life to the Sahelian agriculturalist, from the Groundnut Basin in Senegal to the Waday region of Chad, development experts are still divided on what works best, what direction future efforts should take, ant what basic problems and potential solutions exist. The differences in opinion appear to be due to the diversity that exists across the Sahel, not only in the physical environment but also in traditional use patterns and--a point often overlooked--government policies, efforts, laws, and regulations, and their enforcement. It is therefore not surprising that various specialists have arrived at different and sometimes conflicting conclusions, depending on their particular field of expertise and where they have gained their experience. The report reflects these differences and attempts to give a balanced overview of an emerging field of study.
In order to gain a broad understanding of what agroforestry is and how it can be used in the Sahel, we felt it was important to look at the theory and principles on which it is based and its practical application. The following people contributed to this effort.
HANS-JURGEN von Maydell of the Institute for World Forestry was asked to describe the potential for agroforestry in the West African Sahel and to recommend tree and shrub species appropriate for agroforestry systems in the region. James Thomson, a natural resources management consultant, contributed background information on social and institutional factors to be considered in designing and implementing agroforestry projects. John Raintree of the International Council for Research in Agroforestry provided a systematic approach to project identification, which appears as Appendix B. In preparing this report, the committee has drawn heavily on the material provided by these experts.
A draft of this report served as a resource document for a regional agroforestry workshop held in Niger in May-June 1983. The comments and observations of several participants in the workshop are reflected here, The contributions of J. D. Keita of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and Marilyn Hoskins of Virginia Polytechnic Institute, were particularly helpful.
This study has also benefited from the knowledge and experience of others familiar with the Sahel. Committee members Fred Weber and Francis LeBeau enriched the content of our meetings and the final report with the practical insights of some 40 years of experience with environmental and agricultural issues in the Sahel. Robert Fishwick of the World Bank, consulting geographer Peter Freeman, George Taylor II of the Agency for International Development, Jeff Romm of the University of California at Berkeley, and Peter Ffolliott of the University of Arizona provided valuable comments on earlier drafts of the report. Finally, we would like to acknowledge the contributions of the many Sahelians and representatives of regional organizations and international assistance agencies whom we consulted in the course of this study.
In evaluating and synthesizing these diverse opinions and experiences, we relied greatly on the knowledge and analytical skills of our staff members, Jeffrey Gritzner and Carol Corillon, who contributed to both the substance and quality of this report. We were also assisted in many ways by others. Michael G. C. McDonald Dow attended our meetings and made important intellectual contributions bashed on his years of experience in the Sahel. Alverda Naylor willingly and capably performed the many clerical tasks necessary for the completion of the study. We are indebted to Sherry Snyder for her perseverance and diligent efforts in editing the report. Cheryl Bailey typed various drafts, and Irene Martinez prepared the final version for publication.
Leonard Berry
Chairman
Advisory Committee on the Sahel
<section>Overview</section>
Traditional systems of agroforestry in the Sahel represent highly sophisticated approaches to food production in regions characterized by extremely variable precipitation, high temperature, often nutrient-poor soils, a variety of crop diseases, and crop predators such as granivorous birds, rodents, and locusts, which can dramatically reduce harvests.
Traditional Sahelian agroforestry systems are structurally arrayed in such a manner that leaf area indices are relatively high, resulting in correspondingly high photosynthetic efficiency and biomass production. Many of the traditionally important grain crops in the region, such as sorghum and millet, are C4-pathway crops, which are capable of converting very high light intensities into growth more efficiently than is possible in exotic C3 crops such as wheat and rice.
These systems of agroforestry are also efficient in locally modifying temperatures and in intercepting rainfall, facilitating infiltration, and maintaining satisfactory soil moisture levels. This, among other benefits, reduces moisture stress in plants and regulates soil temperature fluctuations and soil-water relationships, thereby assuring the survival of critical soil organisms such as nitrogen fixing rhizobial bacteria. Perennials contribute to the enrichment of the agricultural systems through nutrient cycling and help control wind and water erosion. The use of Acacia albida in traditional Sahelian systems is illustrative of the important contributions made by woody perennials to agricultural production in the region.
In the past, Sahelian agricultural systems had greater crop diversity. This diversity resulted in higher levels of assured food availability, because the differing requirements of the various crops and the selectivity of most crop diseases and predators prevented the magnitude of losses that can occur in the less complex mono cropped systems. The range of products, in addition to food, included fodder, fuel, gum, resin, tannin, and medicinal products. Because the annual and perennial crops included in agroforestry systems characteristically are harvested at different times, labor inputs are distributed over longer periods.
In many areas of the Sahel, shifts to mono cropping and open-field cultivation have resulted in lower potential productivity, reduced ground water recharge, disruptions of soil ecology and nutrient cycling, and increased soil erosion. Because these shifts in cultivation practices have been accompanied by widespread environmental degradation in the region and the loss of native plants and animals that have traditionally served as alternative sources of food in the event of crop failure, rural Sahelian populations have become progressively less self-reliant and more vulnerable to natural hazards, such as drought, and to economic adversity.
This report provides an overview of traditional Sahelian production systems and explores approaches by which modern science and technology can complement the knowledge and experience of rural Sahelian populations in developing more dependable, resilient, and socially acceptable agricultural systems.
<section>Chapter 1: Desertification in the Sahel</section>
"Sahel" has become a synonym for environmental degradation and the desperate struggle for survival in a region losing its carrying capacity through a series of severe drought years and the destructive impact of human activity on natural resources, a process commonly termed desertification. In this case, desertification, or desert encroachment, does not refer to the southward extension of the Sahara Desert but to the formation and expansion of desert like patches around cities, villages, wells, and other centers of concentrated activity.* In this report, the term "Sahel" is broadly applied to the semiarid Sudano-Sahelian zone. Areas receiving between 400 and 750 mm of precipitation are emphasized.
CLIMATE
While water deficiency can be addressed by instituting a variety of more environmentally sound water use and conservation practices, it remains, nevertheless, the key limiting factor for life in the Sahel.
Rainfall distribution patterns are highly irregular in time and space. The rainy season generally lasts from July to October, with an average of 24 rainfalls, 10-12 of which occur in August. Rainfall intensities range from 5 mm to over 50 mm per event. While 5 mm of rainfall are considered effective for wild and cultivated plants, 20 mm or more are required to produce the surface runoff essential for filling,temporary and permanent water holes and replenishing ground water reserves. Figures 1 and 2 show mean annual precipitation and associated vegetation types in the Sahel.
The climate is further characterized by high diurnal temperature fluctuations and low relative humidity. During the "cool" dry season, from November to February, daytime temperatures often peak above 38°C and fall to 12°C during the nighttime, with relative humidity averaging 15-25 percent during the day and 40-50 percent at night. During the "hot" dry season, from March to mid-July, temperatures commonly exceed 43°C during the day and drop as low as 17°C at night. During the rainy season, from July to October, temperatures range from 35°C during the day to 22°C at night, with relative humidity from 95 to 60 percent. Thus considerable moisture is lost through evaporation. In addition, the harmattan--a dry northeasterly wind--occurs frequently from November through February, causing considerable desiccation and wind erosion.
IMPACT OF HUMAN ACTIVITY
In addition to the effects of climate on the Sahel's fragile environment, man and livestock also play major roles in desertification. Even where an ecological balance exists among man, animals, and the surrounding natural vegetation--as existed throughout the Sahel a few generations ago--extensive deterioration will generally occur when population pressures exceed a critical level. As a result of a growth rate of 2.6 percent, the population has almost doubled in the last 20 years. By the end of this century, the present population will have doubled again.
With increases in human populations have come increases in herds of cattle and small ruminants and changes in the traditional land use patterns of various ethnic groups. Herders, who once were predominantly nomadic, tend to settle around permanent sources of water in villages and even in towns. They remain with their herds in the northern part of the Sahel throughout the year, whereas formerly they migrated southward to more favorable pastures during the dry season. A network of deep wells, powered by diesel engines, has tapped fossil ground water resources to make water available throughout the year in many areas where it was not previously assured. The net result has been a rapid increase of herds of cattle and small ruminants (Figure 3). As many as 20,000 head of livestock are often concentrated within a few kilometers around wells. The locally available vegetation on which they depend has already been over exploited, degraded, impoverished, and, in fact, has largely
disappeared, leaving desert like "islands" around the wells.
The destruction of the herbaceous or grass layer, as a result of overgrazing and trampling by herds, marks the beginning of desertification. Plants die and their roots no longer hold the thin topsoil, which is washed or blown away. Fine clay particles spread over bare patches during the short rainy season, causing surface hardening and sealing. Seeds cannot penetrate these hardened surfaces.
FIGURE 3 Cattle herds have increased rapidly in the Sahel, and in many areas their numbers now exceed the carrying capacity of the pasturelands. IFC/WORLD Bank Photo by K. M. Ibrahim)
Frequently these patches are covered by stagnant water for extended periods during the rainy season. Because of the destruction of the topsoil cover and loss of organic matter, rains are no longer absorbed where they fall but drain toward lower lying areas, causing the slow but certain death of trees and shrubs due to lack of water or, where it accumulates, to waterlogging. In some areas, the process of degradation continues until the ability of the soils to retain water is almost completely lost.
Even where there is little wind, terrain is flat, and soils are too sandy to cause runoff, continuous farming of the same fields will eventually deplete the soils to such an extent that the land will have to be abandoned or revegetated unless specific steps are taken to maintain or increase soil fertility. While the revegetation of barren flats is extremely costly, fencing off endangered areas for 3-5 years during the initial phases of degradation can lead to an astonishing recovery of the vegetative cover.
Advanced farming technology can also accelerate degradation. For example, the removal of stumps, indiscriminate and more complete land clearing, and the use of machinery for deep plowing or frequent pillage expose ever larger areas of land to wind and water erosion. The introduction of cash crops such as cotton requires more thorough land clearing and places higher nutrient demands on the soil. Mechanized transport (even bicycles or donkey carts) permits local farmers to reach more land and makes possible the transport of firewood or charcoal over longer distances. Livestock improvement activities require more grazing resources, and irrigated agriculture requires more water.
A final cause of degradation is migration. People of the Sahel and Sudan are mobile by tradition. During the last few decades, however, there has been a steady movement from rural lands toward central settlements, causing rapidly increasing pressure on natural resources in the vicinity. Firewood has been drastically over exploited within a range of about 100 km around many capital cities, resulting in a severe energy crisis. Moreover, many young people are leaving the Sahel to try to make a living in urban centers along the Nest African coast. This exodus is severely draining the area of capable manpower and is reflected in a reduction in the numbers of agricultural workers in the Sahel.
RESOURCE CONSERVATION MEASURES
The concept of carrying capacity is useful in looking at development or conservation issues since the limits of the available natural resource base cannot be ignored. It is encouraging that a margin still exists between actual and potential production capacities and that locally appropriate resource management options can be pursued through changes in land allocation and land use. When examining resource conservation measures, the following objectives should be considered:
· Providing people with adequate supplies of basic goods and services
· Conserving those resources that still exist
· Increasing the region's long-term sustained carrying capacity.
Long and often disappointing experience has conclusively shown that any conservation activity, to be applicable, must be understood and accepted by the local population. Without the willingness of villagers to cooperate and eventually integrate whatever technique is introduced into local farm and land use practices, any idea, regardless of how valuable it might be, simply will not take hold. Because it is the rural, local people who ultimately decide the feasibility of any new idea, the following criteria must be taken into account.
First, the intervention must be technically sound and must focus on such factors as the limited amounts and irregularity of rain and the periodic occurrence of drought years. Rainfall, though infrequent and irregular, is often a direct result of violent, local convectional storms of short duration and high intensity. Under such circumstances even small watersheds or catchment areas yield sharp, high peak flows. Spillway capacity of improvement efforts has to be large, as these short, high-volume flows carry unusually large amounts of sediment, which can quickly destroy inadequately designed water control structures. Terraces intended to control water erosion must accommodate such flows, or they will rapidly wash out. Rainfall quantities and distribution patterns, compared with those of temperate zones, are extremely erratic. Mean annual precipitation is little more than a general indicator. Rainy seasons that are above or below average are frequent (Katz and Glantz 1977).
Second, investments in agricultural development activities must be appropriate to local skills, techniques, and tools. Projects relying on heavy equipment, expensive commodities, and outside technical assistance require such a large capital outlay that there is little chance the project can be replicated or continued by the local people once outside help has ceased.
Third, proposed activities will almost certainly require some changes in and adaptation to the existing local socioeconomic framework. Increased production and higher returns are not the only criteria used in calculating whether a new idea or technique is worthwhile to all concerned. In fact, local farmers may be more interested in protection against "downside risks" than in a chance to gain higher returns.
Fourth, to be successful from an institutional point of view, the interventions considered should be compatible with the existing political thought in the region of concern.
Finally, cultural values, including those dealing with traditional patterns of tenure and use of land and natural vegetation, are deep-rooted and reflect generations of experience. Modifying animal herding practices in ways that appear minor to outside project designers may well be the focal point of resistance on which an entire scheme may founder. Cultural attitudes and inflexibility may prove insurmountable in many other ways: restrictive definitions of the role of women, reluctance to abandon seasonal migration, traditional views of land tenure, or open grazing rights can pose serious obstacles to an otherwise well-designed conservation project.
Conservation measures, within these practical limits, are outlined below; agroforestry and related efforts are underlined. (For specific agroforestry techniques, see Chapter 4.)
1. Increased soil fertility
a. Introduction of Acacia albida or other leguminous treesinto farm fields
b. Cover crops, farm management (rotation)
c. Manure, compost, residue
d. Tree crops, combined with agricultural crops (Taungya)
2. Revegetation
a. Access and use control b. Seed bed treatment, direct seeding, planting c. Fire management
3. Erosion control
a. Wind
(1) Shelterbelts/live fencing
(2) Sand stabilization, dune fixation
b. Water
(1) Contour planting/farming to control sheet erosion
(2) Vegetation strips
(3) Infiltration ditches, berms, terraces
(4) Bank and slope protection to reduce channel erosion
(5) Small check structures, gully plugs
(6) Small dams to slow surface runoff.
4. Conservation of surface water
a. Micro-catchments
b. Water spreading, water harvesting
c. Reservoirs, ponds
LAND USE PLANNING
Land use planning involving the integration of agriculture, animal husbandry, and useful trees and shrubs can take several courses. Production can be undertaken concurrently and continuously on the same tract of land; systems of alternating or rotating land use can be employed; or production activities can be geographically separated so that use pressures are distributed over a larger area. All of these variations are elements of traditional Sahelian land use strategies (see Chapter 2). Specific future strategies and emphases will naturally vary depending on local needs and preferences. Nevertheless, the key is to balance overall land use so that total economic returns and social benefits are maximized in the short and long runs.
While land use planning is a useful tool, traditional cultural values often govern the way land is used, owned, or transferred by individuals, families, tribes, ethnic groups, or entire nations. In many areas of arid and semiarid Africa, retaining current land use patterns, in the face of increasing demographic pressures and notions of progress, is leading to resource destruction. The "first come, first served" approach to the exploitation of common goods such as rangeland or indigenous trees interferes with conservation efforts, requiring the introduction of access control and use regulations. If land and soil resources are to produce, on a sustained-yield basis, more than they do now, basic readjustments of present use patterns and beliefs must be made.
Changes in land use based purely on resource management logic are unacceptable to most societies, where the first priority has been and still is the survival of the clan or tribe. Seasoned by generations of experience with recurring, devastating droughts, local farmers and herders feel they cannot afford to abandon their current strategies, particularly when they believe no other options are available. Farmers and pastoralists do not destroy their environment out of indifference or carelessness: currently, they have no other options for existing or for surviving periods of drought.
However, more productive land use patterns could be adopted if governments and regional agencies shared the risks. Considering the above constraints, the best that one can expect is that a more "rational," balanced approach to land use can be established gradually, beginning with low-risk, small-scale demonstration projects, which might serve as examples of how things could work. Such demonstrations might include:
. Small watersheds with well-planned conservation measures; controlled, multipurpose use of fuel wood and forage; surface water development
. Agroforestry projects that use land in a balanced manner to serve several local needs (stable farm soils, fuel, fodder)
. Small, well-identified grazing areas with the necessary vegetation and water reserves restored to help small, well-managed herds survive the next drought.
Unfortunately, only a few incomplete (and expensive) demonstrations have actually been carried out in the field so far.
Numerous large-scale land use schemes have been tried, with very mixed results. Group ranching, with or without herder cooperatives, in East Africa is one example. Results, judging by the slow adoption rate by the local herders, are inconclusive.
Large-scale irrigation projects are being constructed in the mayor river basins at current (1982) initial costs of over $10,000 per hectare. Although "poor" herders and farmers are being resettled, the rupture of family ties, abandonment of traditions, and exposure to different life-styles have increased divorce, suicides (practically unheard of before), and mental illness. Social tension, political unrest, and the incidence of diseases such as malaria and schistosomiasis have increased (Bodley 1975).
These experiences suggest that, in spite of knowing what logical and systematic land use measures could stem and possibly reverse resource degradation, there is currently no acceptable answer as to how--at the same time--to meet basic social and cultural needs, which are often closely tied to traditional land use patterns,
Carefully planned, sensitive schemes throughout Africa have attempted to bring about the necessary changes with a minimum of social tension and disruption. While insufficient progress has been made thus far to say that real changes are on the way, encouraging examples do exist.
. In Senegal and in Chad, pastoralists have cooperated in government-sponsored efforts and private initiatives to revegetate open rangeland. Traditional herders have planted trees in open spaces of the grass steppe, strictly on a voluntary basis and without compensation.
. In the Ngong hills of Kenya, local farmers now construct infiltration ditches and gully plugs and plant trees on their farmland to provide additional erosion protection. This initiative was based in part on a recently compiled "District Environmental Profile."
· In Niger, in the vicinity of a project where, with the help of the American private voluntary organization CARE, over 250 km of shelter belts have been planted in the last 6 years, villagers are putting pressure on the local administrators to help them carry out a similar project around their own fields.
Similar projects have been undertaken in other parts of arid and semiarid Africa. Subtle change is possible; some approaches do work. These limited success stories show, however, that new land use techniques must recognize, consider, and work within the basic social, economic, and cultural frameworks of the people involved. Agroforestry would appear to be almost uniquely capable of integrating these diverse environmental, social, and economic variables into coherent, stable systems of production.
<section>Chapter 2: Traditional Land Use Systems</section>
ENERGY FLOW AND PRODUCTIVITY IN TRADITIONAL SAHELIAN AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS
In determining the potential productivity and sustainability of an agricultural system, it is often useful to analyze the energy flows that connect the farmer with his crops and livestock. Energy flow, as used in this report, refers to the transformations and sequential dependencies of solar energy as it passes through the food chain.
Solar energy is the ultimate source of all life on earth. The basic source of energy for man is the chemical energy derived from food. The ultimate source of this food is vegetation. In energy analysis, this vegetation is termed "primary production." It is based on the capacity of plants to transform solar energy into chemical matter through photosynthesis. Man exploits solar energy by eating plants or the animals that eat plants. This relationship is often expressed 'in terms of the following unidirectional energy flow: primary production (vegetation) > herbivore (livestock) >carnivore (man), with subsequent recycling through decomposers such as bacteria and fungi (Bayliss-Smith 1982).
The amount of solar energy available for primary production is a function of geographical position. This energy is conventionally measured in joules (J). One joule equals 0.239 calories. A larger unit, megajoules (MJ), is often used to describe inputs of solar energy. One MJ equals 239 kilocalories, Approximately 10.5 MJ/day are required in human diets to maintain basic metabolic processes and regenerate tissue. In the Sahel, the annual input of solar radiation is on the order of 0.63 MJ/cm2--much higher than inputs in humid tropical or temperate regions.
Only a relatively small proportion of incoming solar energy, 1 J/cm2/hr, is converted into chemical energy as a result of photosynthesis by plants. Because photosynthesis is inefficient in its use of solar energy, it is necessary for farmers to increase vegetative cover and to arrange it in such a way that its foliage can achieve optimal productivity. The amount of foliage is often measured through the leaf area index--the total leaf area (in cm2) per unit of soil surface (in cm2). Experiments with many crops have shown that a considerable amount of solar radiation is wasted by falling in the gapsbetween leaves and between plants (Bayliss-Smith 1982). Too much plant cover can also be harmful because many leaves will be shaded and will therefore function inefficiently.
Although variation in leaf area index, availability of water and nutrients, and other factors will account for most differences in crop performance, the efficiency of photosynthesis is also influenced by the proportion of visible light that can be converted into carbohydrate by different plants. These differing capabilities relate to the so-called C3 and C4 pathways fo