<title>Environmental Change in the West African Sahel</title>
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT FOR ARID AND SEMIARID REGIONS
Edited in 1984
NOTE FROM THE LIBRARY FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CD-ROM 1.1 EDITORS: THIS BOOK HAS BEEN PUBLISHED IN 1984. IT IS INCLUDED ON THE CD-ROM FOR ITS HISTORICAL VALUE AND EXAMPLES OF WHICH MANY STILL APPLY TODAY. OF COURSE SOME SCIENTIFIC ASPECTS OR POLICY PROPOSALS COULD BE -PARTLY- OUTDATED TODAY DUE TO THE RAPID SCIENTIFIC EVOLUTIONS. WE REFER TO MORE RECENT STUDIES FOR DETAILS RELATING TO MORE RECENT FINDINGS.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was established by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and of advising the federal government. The Council operates in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy under the authority of its congressional charter of 1863, which establishes the Academy as a private, nonprofit, self-governing membership corporation. The Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in the conduct of their services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. It is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. The National Academy of Engineering and the Institute of Medicine were established in 1964 and 1970, respectively, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences.
This report has been prepared by the Advisory Committee on the Sahel, Board on Science and Technology for International Development, Office of International Affairs, National Research Council.
Funds for this study were provided by the Office of Sahel and West Africa Affairs, Bureau for Africa, Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C., Grant No. AFR-0929-G-SS-1104-00.
Second printing, June 1984
Third printing, August 1984
Fourth printing, April 1986
Funding for this printing was provided by a grant from the International Foundation.
Copies available from:
Board on Science and Technology for International Development
National Research Council 2101 Constitution Avenue,
N.W. Washington, D.C. 20418 USA
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE SAHEL
LEONARD BERRY, Graduate School of Geography, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA, Chairman
EDWARD AYENSU, Office of Biological Conservation, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., USA,Vice Chairman
MOUNKEILA GOUMANDAKOYE, Assistant Director, Forest Service, Ministry of Rural Development, Niger
FRANCIS LeBEAU, Agricultural Consultant, Crystal Springs, Mississippi, USA
FRED WEBER, International Resources Development and Conservation Services. Boise. Idaho. USA
STUDY STAFF, BOARD ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
CAROL CORILLON, Writer/Research Associate
JEFFREY A. GRITZNER, Professional Associate
CONTRIBUTORS
EDMOND BERNUS, Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre-Mer (ORSTOM), Paris, France
KARL BUTZER, Departments of Geography and Anthropology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
ROBERT FISHWICK, Western Africa Regional Office, World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
SHARON NICHOLSON, Graduate School of Geography, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA
WOLF RODER, Department of Geography, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
<section>Preface</section>
In 1968 a major drought struck the West African Sahel. By the early 1970s, the tragic dimensions of the event had gained worldwide attention; some 25 million people faced hunger and disease as well as social and economic dislocation. Despite ambitious international relief efforts, death rates in the region rose substantially. Losses of the more poorly adapted forms of livestock, particularly cattle, were substantial, and the resource base of the region was severely degraded.
How typical was that drought? What is the nature of Sahelian climatic regimes? How do Sahelian ecosystems function, and what caused the ecological imbalances throughout the region? To what extent is human activity, rather than climatic fluctuation, responsible for the widespread degradation of Sahelian ecosystems? How are essential ecological processes and genetic diversity in the Sahel most effectively restored?
Sound development planning in the Sahel requires that these questions be thoughtfully examined. Sustainable development and environmental stability-the twin goals of the governments of the region and technical and economic assistance efforts-require that project decisions be based on scientifically sound analysis. It is also clear that development projects must be reconciled with environmental and social realities in order to build on the strengths of existing systems and achieve positive ecological and socioeconomic results.
The Advisory Committee on the Sahel (ACOS) was organized by the Board on Science and Technology for International Development in 1978 at the request of the Agency for International Development (AID) to formulate a long-term strategy for environmental rehabilitation and development in the Sahel. This study was undertaken by ACOS at the request of AID's Office of Sahel and West African Affairs to provide a better understanding of environmental change in the West African Sahel and to serve as a resource for the identification of measures that would help restore critical ecological processes and thereby increase sustainable production in the areas of dryland farming, irrigated agriculture, forestry and fuelwood, and animal husbandry.
To interpret environmental change, the committee called upon acknowledged experts in the environmental and social history of the Sahel region. They were asked to conduct independent studies or prepare papers on particular topics judged to be of critical importance by the committee. Their individual and collective contributions to this study are acknowledged below.
Karl Butzer of the University of Chicago prepared a paper that appears as Chapter 1, Late Quaternary Environmental Change in the Sahel. Sharon Nicholson of Clark University contributed a study that served as the basis of both Chapter 2, Climate and Man in the Sahel During the Historical Period, and Appendix B, the Climatology of Sub-Saharan Africa. Chapter 3, The Impact of Human Activity on Sahelian Ecosystems, was a collaborative effort by Edmond Bernus of ORSTOM and Jeffrey Gritzner of the BOSTID staff. The discussions in Chapter 4 reflect the experience of the committee members, and that of invited experts Robert Fishwick of the World Bank and Wolf Roder of the University of Cincinnati, who participated in the final meetings of the committee. Appendix A, Shelterbelt Establishment in the Drylands of West Africa, is based on a study jointly undertaken by Robert Fishwick and Fred Weber. All committee members have reviewed and support the report as a whole.
The committee greatly appreciates the contributions made by other individuals to this report. Comments by George Taylor II and Dayton Maxwell of AID's Office of Sahel and West African Affairs were very helpful in relating the report to AID needs. Representatives of AID, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, the Department of State, the World Bank, and other interested organizations attended the committee meetings and provided information and observations that proved very useful to the committee in preparing this report. Jean Maley of the French Office d' la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre-Mer (ORSTOM), Michael Watts of the University of California at Berkeley, F. Kenneth Hare of the University of Toronto, and William Clark of the Institute for Energy Analysis provided valuable criticisms and suggestions on various drafts of the report.
In addition to the invaluable support of our staff, Carol Corillon and Jeffrey Gritzner, we were also assisted in many ways by others. Michael G. C. McDonald Dow attended our meetings and made important intellectual contributions based on his years of experience in the Sahel. Alverda Naylor willingly and capably performed the many clerical tasks necessary for the completion of the study. The report was edited by Sherry Snyder. Cheryl Hailey assisted with the design and artwork. Irene Martinez typed various drafts and prepared the final version for printing.
Because of the critical importance of agro-silvo-pastoral systems to Sahelian economies, and the potential importance of better integrated production systems to rehabilitative strategies, the committee has prepared a companion report, Agroforestry in the West African Sahel. The report further explores many of the concerns and suggestions contained in Chapter 4.
Leonard Berry
Chairman
Advisory Committee on the Sahel
<section>Introduction</section>
An inadequate understanding of Sahelian climatology, environmental history, and ecosystem function has consistently hindered the formulation and successful implementation of environmental and agricultural projects in the Sahel. Millions of dollars in donor assistance have been ineffectively spent, and Sahelian populations are increasingly vulnerable to economic adversity and natural hazards. In this study the Advisory Committee on the Sahel has attempted to clarify the environmental history of the region and provide needed baseline information for the formulation of projects to rehabilitate Sahelian ecosystems and promote sustainable agricultural and livestock production.
A paleoenvironmental review and historical analysis were employed to assess the nature of environmental change in the Sahel: the long-term characteristics of the region were determined by examining the evidence provided by stream deposits, fossil sands, and lake beds and their related, abandoned shorelines. This evidence, which is presented in Chapter 1, reveals that little significant long-term climatic change has occurred in the Sahel during the last 2,500 years, although rapid short-term changes are characteristic of the region. The nature of Sahelian climatic regimes is touched on in Chapter 2 of the report and is treated in greater detail in Appendix B.
Chapter 2 also discusses the interaction of climate and man in the Sahel by examining the rainfall characteristics to which human activities must be adapted. The chronicles of medieval geographers and historians, the journals of early European travelers, the archaeological record, and other sources reveal that rainfall in the Sahel is generally low, unevenly distributed, and highly variable. Drought is an inherent feature of the region. These records indicate that major droughts, persisting for 12-15 years, evidently occurred in the 1680s, the mid-1700s, in the 1820s and 1830s, the l910s, and since 1968. Generally arid conditions characterized the period from 1790 through 1850, and comparatively minor droughts apparently occurred in the 1640s, 1710s, 1810s, the beginning of the twentieth century, and the 1940s. Relatively wet periods occurred during the ninth through thirteenth centuries, the sixteenth through eighteenth centuries, from 1870 to 1895, and during the 1950s. In
all development planning in the Sahel, high levels of climatic variability and inevitable drought should be accepted as being "normal."
In examining the impact of human activity on Sahelian ecosystems, it has become evident that man's role in transforming the region's environment has been significantly underestimated. As discussed in Chapter 3, ancient and medieval societies had a substantial impact through activities such as setting bush fires, producing charcoal for local needs, and in connection with trans-Saharan trade, iron smelting, and the establishment of settlements on easily destabilized sites. In modern times, many of these same activities, often on a larger scale, as well as activities associated with development and modernization, have caused further environmental degradation.
A more complete knowledge of Sahelian environments and the historical impact of human activity on Sahelian ecosystems allows development planners greater appreciation of the nature, causes, and spatial extent of environmental degradation. This knowledge permits planners to better assess the biological potential of the Sahel and identify specific measures that would help restore essential ecological processes and contribute to the development of more stable and productive agro-silvo-pastoral systems. It also allows planners to distinguish between destructive and environmentally sound activities in the Sahel and to combine historical analysis with modern ecological knowledge to develop useful guidelines for project design. Chapter 4 identifies research programs and other measures that would enhance current knowledge of Sahelian ecosystems and promote environmentally sound development activities.
Shelterbelts have proved effective in supporting higher crop yields and provide fuelwood, building material, and other products of importance to Sahelian populations. They also support wildlife populations, and thereby increase the availability of bush meat and help reestablish the role of wildlife in seed dispersal. Appendix A briefly discusses successful examples of shelterbelt establishment in the drylands of West Africa. Appendix B amplifies the material presented in Chapter 2, providing a more detailed and somewhat more technical description of sub-Saharan climatic regimes.
<section>Environmental profile</section>
Sahel (Sahil) is an Arabic term signifying coast or border. In this report the area referred to as the Sahel is a zone approximately 200-400 km wide, centered on latitude 15°N in sub-Saharan Africa. Although examples of environmental change from various regions of this extensive zone are used in this report, the focus of the study is the West African Sahel (Figure 1). Within West Africa, several Sahelian enclaves are found beyond the strict limits of the zone; for example, in the Adrar des Iforas, the Aïr, and in the southwestern Tibesti highlands. Within the Sahel, the interior delta of the Niger River and Lake Chad are atypical of the region as a whole.
Since the initiation of international efforts to combat the effects of drought in the arid and semiarid zones of West Africa in the 1970s, the term "Sahel" has been more broadly applied to non- Sahelian regions of the member states of the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS). The states include Cape Verde, Senegal, The Gambia, Mauritania, Mali, Upper Volta, Niger, and Chad. In these states, the Sahel proper covers approximately 2 million square kilometers, constituting 27 percent of Senegal, 39 percent of Mauritania, 40 percent of Mali, 7 percent of Upper Volta, 50 percent of Niger, and 32 percent of Chad.
Recent research on the long-term climatic characteristics of the Sahel indicates that the region was repeatedly subject to change during the Late Quaternary. For example, wind-driven sand encroached far into the present Sudanian and Guinean zones to the south of the Sahel between 20,000 and 12,000 years ago (B.P.), while between 9000 and 5000 B.P. the rivers of the region had greater discharge and the lakes substantially greater volumes. The climate of the Sahel has been relatively constant during the last 2,500 years. It has been characterized by short- to medium-term oscillations toward drier or more humid conditions (Figure 2), with rapid, highly variable climatic change occurring within these more predictable fluctuations.
Variation in precipitation from year to year is also a characteristic of the Sahel; successive years of severe drought are often followed by years with torrential rains. The Sahelian drought that began in 1968 falls within the norm of at least six earlier periods of low rainfall verified since 1400 A.D. In addition to secular, short-term droughts, some researchers believe that major droughts occur cyclically in the Sahel at intervals of approximately 30 years.
Although precipitation varies with latitude and local conditions, it is generally restricted to a period of 3-5 months. Storms are frequently violent in nature, and the rain is often erratically distributed-both in terms of when and where it falls-with variability increasing from south to north within the Sahel. The rainy season is followed by an extended, unrelieved dry season.
In some regions of the Sahel, precipitation variability is partially compensated for by groundwater reserves. The most important regional aquifer is the Intercalary Continental found in Niger and in northern Mali. Another important aquifer is the post-Eocene Terminal Continental. This formation is largely associated with the Adrar des Iforas in Mali, southwestern Niger, various areas north of the Niger River, and Senegal. The same aquifer apparently exists in southeastern Mauritania, but it is too deep for practical exploitation. Similarly, erratic rainfall in the western Chadian Sahel is compensated for by the northerly trending subsurface discharge of Lake Chad, a major body of water fed largely by the Chari and Logone rivers issuing from the Central African highlands. The Sahel is also traversed by two major rivers, the Senegal and the Niger, whose sources are in the highlands of Guinea.
normal). (Source: Nicholson 1982)
Most of the Sahel lies below 400 meters in elevation. Its surface is largely composed of worn, folded Precambrian rocks. These formations are characteristically aligned from northeast to southwest, with the alignment reflected in the limited relief of the region. The soils of the region range from ferruginous tropical soils in the south, to brown tropical dryland soils and weakly developed sandy soils on shifting and stabilized sands in the north.
The modern Sahel has often been described as a transitional zone-a territory in which an enriched Sahara and an impoverished Sudan meet in a hybrid no-man's land lacking its own characteristics. This view has been challenged by Theodore Monod, Edmond Bernus, and others who have studied the region. They view the Sahel as an ecoclimatically autonomous region largely defined by its highly variable precipitation and its characteristic seasonal therophyte ("summer prairie") vegetative communities.
There are no universally accepted delimiting criteria or terms for the various climatic and vegetation zones of West Africa. For the purposes of this report, the Sahel is defined as a zone roughly bracketed by the l00 and 500 mm isohyets. It is described as containing three phytogeographical divisions: the northerly Sahelo-Saharan zone (grass steppe), between the 100 and 200 mm isohyets; the Sahel proper (tree steppe), between the 200 and 400 mm isohyets; and the southerly Sudano-Sahelian borderlands (shrub savanna), extending to the 500 mm isohyet. The Sahel is bounded to the north by the Sahara Desert, and to the south by the Sudanian zone (wooded savanna). Finally, the Guinean zone (woodland) extends from the Sudanian zone to the Gulf of Guinea. Most zones contain coastal subregions (such as the Senegalese Coastal Sahel) and are commonly referred to in combination (for example, the Sudano-Guinean zone)-sometimes to describe a transitional area between zones, perhaps more
often to group zones as a matter of convenience.
The Sahelo-Saharan zone has relatively few trees; examples include Acacia ehrenbergiana, A. tortilis, and Balanites aegyptiaca. Sparse grass such as Panicum turgidum is found on dunes. The Sahel proper is more heavily vegetated. Characteristic species include Acacia ehrenbergiana, A. laeta, A. nilotica, A. senegal, A. tortilis, Balanites aegyptiaca, Maerua crassifolia, Salvadora persica, Zizyphus mauritiana. Annuals such as Aristida adscensionis, A. funiculata, Panicum laetum, and Schoenefeldia gracilis are found on silty soils; Aristida mutabilis, Cenchrus biflorus, and Tribulus terrestris are found on sandy soils. The vegetative cover increases in the Sudano-Sahelian zone, reaching 10-12 percent on sandy soils and over 60 percent on silty soils. Andropogon gayanus and Zornia glochidiata are representative grasses of the Sudano-Sahelian zone; representative trees include Acacia al , A. seyal, Adansonia digitata, and Combretum glutinosum.
<section>Late Quaternary Environmental Change in the Sahel</section>
One of the more catastrophic and well-documented recent famines occurred during the severe drought that struck the southern Saharan borderlands in 1968. Relatively little attention has been devoted to whether this drought was unique, with its impact increased as a consequence of recent changes of land use patterns and population growth, or whether it was but another example of severe and recurrent environmental stress in the area. A paleoenvironmental review, which places the drought in a historical context, can address this question.
No other region of Africa has as conspicuous a record of environmental change as the semiarid and subarid zones along the southern margins of the Sahara, between the Senegal and Nile rivers. This record is best expressed in great expanses of active or immobilized sand dunes on the one hand, and dry lake beds on the other. Such evidence is not unique to the Sahel, but nowhere else in Africa is the surface record of ancient climates so extensive.
Three basic categories of evidence can be examined: (1) stream deposits, exposed in well-studied river valleys and in the offshore sediment cones of the principal rivers (fluvial record); (2) fossil sands, in vegetated dunefields and as struck by cores beneath Lake Chad or in the deep sea (the dune record); and (3) lake beds and related, abandoned shorelines found in the major tectonic depressions, as well as in the swales between fixed or active dunes (the lake or lacustrine record). This primary record is complemented by a number of paleosols, by fossil pollen, and by lake microorganisms such as diatoms. The timing of the mayor events has been reasonably well determined by an unusually large number of dates based on radiocarbon measurements. The emphasis of the discussion is on the amplitude and wavelength of environmental change, not on paleoclimatic reconstruction or interpretation. Appendix B provides a detailed discussion of the Sahelian climatic regimes.
The Fluvial Record
In the Senegal River valley the datum for Late Quaternary events is provided by gravelly alluvium, 2 m above the modern floodplain, related to a relatively high world sea level before 31,000 B.P. (Michel 1973, Beaudet et al. 1976). The sea level later fell, and the river was able to remove much of this gravel infilling and cut down into its bedrock floor, suggesting periodically strong floods. Eventually, however, the lower valley was drowned by dunes advancing southwestward out of the Saharan fringe, building up sand forms with a relief of 30 m and extending out onto the edge of the continental shelf; the Senegal River was unable to reach the coast at this time. Later, a deep red soil, indicative of a complete vegetative mat and intensive biochemical weathering, developed on these dunes while the Senegal and other rivers once again cut through the dunefield to reach the sea. During the period between 5000 and 4000 B.P. a rising sea level flooded into the new Senegal Delta,
and the reduced river gradient favored sandy alluviation as much as 250 km upstream. Sea level then dropped a little and, from 3000-1650 B.P., was again slightly higher, resulting in development of a series of beach ridges along the delta, while the river had a regime similar to that of today.
This picture of alternating drier and wetter conditions is paralleled farther south in central Sierra Leone (latitude 8°N), where dating is somewhat more precise (Thomas and Thorp 1980). In this wetter environment, broad swampy valleys with poorly defined channels were flooded by high and protracted monsoonal runoff from before 36,000 until about 20,500 B.P. A subsequent absence of sediments and organic matter indicates drier conditions without forest. River discharge increased about 12,500 B.P., first eroding bedrock, then depositing gravelly alluvium increasingly interbedded with swamp clays, by 9000 B.P. About 6000 B.P., river activity had stabilized and soils began to develop on the uplands. Renewed, increasingly swampy deposition is indicated from 3300-1750 B.P. and during the last 900 years or so.
This pattern is pinpointed in deep-sea core M-12345, off the Senegal Delta, where windborne sands and dust with Saharan pollen were deposited between 16,300 and 12,500 B.P., after which river discharge contributed abundant sediment, with tropical pollen, particularly during several millennia after 8600 B.P. (Sarnthein et al. 1982). A similar pattern is indicated in core KW-31 off the Niger Delta, where discharge was very low between about 20,000 and 15,000 B.P.; thereafter, flow increased markedly and, with brief fluctuations, remained high until about 4000 B.P. (Pastouret et al. 1978).
At about the same latitude (8°N), the White Nile appears to have been deprived of Ugandan runoff between about 25,000 and 12,500 B.P., so that a body of still, saline water was ponded up in the lower White Nile floodplain (Williams and Adamson 1980). Subsequently, massive White Nile floods built up silts to 4 m above the modern floodplain until 11,400 B.P., when discharge again declined and dunes were able to move across the valley onto the east bank. Stronger floods resumed by 8400 B.P., and local watercourses became more active than they are today. Relatively high discharge is identified in the later record around 7000, 5500, 3000, 2700, and 2000-1500 B.P. The Blue Nile record and that of the combined Nile drainage below the Atbara confluence (Williams and Adamson 1980, Butzer 1980a) mainly reflect trends in upland Ethiopia and are peripheral to the present discussion.
Preliminary evaluation of the fluvial indicators reviewed here points to an exceptionally dry climate in the Sahel between about 20,000 and 12,500 B.P., when the area evidently was an extension of the Sahara. Subsequently, conditions have been relatively moist but subject to considerable variation. The details of this later variability are only poorly resolved in the fluvial record.
The Dune Record
Taken together, the windborne sands of the Sahel and the record of increasing and decreasing stream activity help date the expanse of immobile and vegetated dunefields or sand sheets so common in much of the Sahel (&rove and Warren 1968, Mabbutt 1977, Mainguet et al. 1980, Talbot 1980). In northern Nigeria today, such dunes are well developed in areas with as much as 750 mm of rainfall, although few active sand fields can now be identified in areas with more than 150 mm. This suggests that desert conditions extended an average of 3° latitude farther south than is the case today. But such extreme aridity has not been experienced during the last 12,500 years.
Dust of Saharan origin first became abundant off the coast of Senegal during two protracted episodes between about 7.5 and 5.5 million years ago (Sarnthein et al. 1982). After 2.5 million years, windborne dust fluctuated considerably but generally remained quite prominent, suggesting an arid Sahara comparable to that of the present day. Deep cores under the Chad Basin record a dominance of clays, lake diatomites, and alluvial sands from the late Oligocene or early Miocene until the end of the Pliocene (Servant and Servant-Vildary 1980). Thereafter, windborne sands are dominant but repeatedly interbedded with lenses of lake deposits.
The dune sands and windborne dust thus serve to document the development of the Sahara Desert at the onset of the Quaternary period, some 2 million years ago. As interwoven with marine, stream, and lake deposits they indicate a relatively dry climate, as a deteriorating vegetative cover repeatedly allowed windborne Saharan sands to advance into what is now a savanna environment. The last major advance of dunes and sandfields, across a belt up to 500 km wide, predates 12,500 B.P. Latitudinal shifts since about 7000 B.P. have been comparatively limited in extent.
The Lake Record
The distribution of dry lake beds in the Sahel and even in parts of the Sahara is quite remarkable and provides the most detailed record of climatic fluctuations during the past 12 millennia. The best-studied record, serving as a key indicator of Sahelian climate, is that of the Chad Basin (Servant 1973, Servant-Vildary 1978, Servant and Servant-Vildary 1980, Maley 1981, 1982).
During the last millennium, Lake Chad has had a seasonally fluctuating surface area of 10,000-20,000 km², with a mean depth varying from 3-7 m. Situated some 500 km northeast of the modern lake are two lower depressions, the Bodélé and Djourab, which are separated from the lake by a low divide. Overflow from Lake Chad into these depressions can occur when the lake level rises above the +4 m shoreline (around 286 m above sea level). The highest shorelines, however, are at +40 m, revealing the former presence of a great inland body of water of about 350,000 km², about the size of the modern Caspian Sea. This extensive "Paleo-Chad" was primarily fed by the discharge of the Chari and Logone rivers, which rise in the forested highlands of Central Africa between latitudes 6° and 10°N, as well as by precipitation falling elsewhere within the Lake Chad Basin. Despite its vast surface of evaporation, the Paleo-Chad maintained various high levels from 7500 to about 5000 B.P. and not
only supported a substantially higher water table throughout its basin but probably also indirectly fed innumerable seepage lakes between the dunefields to the west and north and major aquifers that extend beyond the basin.
The history of Lake Chad episodes first acquires detail with intermediate to high levels about 30,000-20,000 B.P. During the first lacustrine phase-about 30,000-26,000 B.P.-the associated diatoms were of montane or high-latitude environments, but the pollen data indicate a desert vegetation with very few tropical taxa. Later-about 25,000-20,000 B.P.-the "cool" diatoms persisted but in association with several tropical species; the pollen indicate a strong increase in tropical elements and a corresponding decline of desert taxa.
During the period of maximum aridity between 20,000 and 13,000 B.P., the southern Chad tributaries were characterized by perennial discharge and, after 17,000 B.P., by a major extension of swampy floodplains. North of the lake, lacustrine deposits, mainly of saline facies, reappear between 13,000 and 12,500 B.P. and probably reflect in part a rise in the water table, fed from a southerly source. Between 12,500 and 9200 B.P. several modest lacustrine phases were interrupted by several dry interludes between 12,400 and 9400 B.P. A rapid rise of the lake to an intermediate level began about 9200 B.P., lasting until about 8500 B.P. From about 12,500 until 7000 B.P. the diatom fauna indicates cool waters and oligotrophic conditions. After a fall of the lake level to its modern position around 7400-7000 B.P., the Paleo-Chad maximum was achieved at +40 m, fluctuating below this high level until 5200-5000 B.P. The associated diatoms indicate temperatures similar to those of today,
with eutrophic waters. After a long and important regression centered about 4000 B.P., a last high lake level is dated between 3500 and 3000 B.P. Subsequent levels fluctuated around those of the last millenium.
Palynological study of various lacustrine sedimentary sequences (Maley 1981) shows that Sahelian forms began to slowly replace desert shrub after 12,500 B.P., gaining dominance by 10,100 B.P. At this time the 12 verified Sahelian taxa included 5 tree species. Nonetheless, until 7000 B.P., tree pollen account for only 7 percent of the available spectra. Thereafter tree pollen increase rapidly, and around 5000 B.P. they exceeded nonarboreal types, clearly documenting a tree-savanna. This matches the sedimentary record, 