<title>Aquaculture and schistosomiasis</title>
Proceedings of a network meeting
held in Manila, Phillipines
August 6-10, 1991
Board on Science and Technology for International Development
National Research Council
<section>Preface</section>
Inland aquaculture has been vastly underdeveloped in the tropics and subtropics and now there are high hopes for its future expansion to benefit farmers and consumers of aquatic products. The prospects of generating food and profit from well-managed waters are exciting and responsive to the normal developmental trends of high population growth, overstretched natural resources, and environmental degradation. There are, however, serious biotechnical, socioeconomic, and environmental constraints to aquaculture development. Aquaculture, like agriculture, has environmental costs and risks, including the possibility of increased transmission of waterborne diseases to those who work on fish farms and to others who use, or live near, the waters used for, or influenced by, aquaculture. Where fishponds and associated watercourses provide good habitats for the aquatic snail intermediate hosts of schistosomes, the risks of increased transmission can be great, especially in Africa.
Therefore, there is a need for increased interaction among researchers working in support of aquaculture development and among those working in public health, disease control, sanitation, and environmental conservation. These proceedings describe an attempt at such interaction by the juxtaposition of researchers in aquaculture and schistosomiasis in a network meeting that provided an opportunity for presentations, discussion, and interaction of mutual benefit to the attendees.
The aquaculture contributions show the diversity of current research in progress. This reflects the rather backward status of aquaculture science compared with agricultural science. Aquaculturists have yet to develop a well-founded science akin to agronomy and will need many years to build that science from a combination of disciplinary, specific problem-oriented, and broader systems research, including intersectoral studies with such groups as agriculturalists and foresters. The contributions of schistosomiasis research are also wide ranging and reflect the many imaginative approaches toward lessening or eliminating its continuing toll on the human population.
It is hoped that these papers and the accompanying recommendations on future work and research priorities will be seen as modest but useful steps toward supporting the safe and sustainable expansion of aquaculture in developing countries and the effective control of schistosomiasis. Much more research is needed and this will require an increased commitment of resources.
The International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), as the newest center to be accepted for membership in the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), welcomed the opportunity to host this network meeting and looks forward to being of further service to assist similar efforts involving researchers for development who have diverse backgrounds but work toward interdependent objectives.
Roger S.V. Pullin
Director, Aquaculture Program
ICLARM
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
The staff of the Board on Science and Technology for International Development deeply appreciates the assistance of Kenneth T. MacKay, Jay L. Maclean, Roger S. V. Pullin, and Belen Acosta, International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), Manila, for hosting the network meeting and for the arrangements that made this meeting a success.
We also extend special thanks to Patrick Carney, George T. Curlin, James McVey, and Gary Pruder for providing important contributions through their role as external expert reviewers for this proceedings.
The Office of Research, U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), is gratefully acknowledged for their support of the network meeting and the publication of this proceedings.
National Research Council Staff
Bruce A. Harrison, Senior Program Officer and Scientific Editor
E. Griffin Shay, Senior Program Officer and Scientific Editor
F. R. Ruskin, Editor
Maria Griener, Assistant Editor
Yauthary Keo, Program Assistant
Mary Frances Schlichter, Program Assistant
How to cite this report:
National Research Council. 1992. Aquaculture and Schistosomiasis: Proceedings of a network meeting held in Manila, Philippines, August 6-10, 1991. National Academy Press. Washington, D.C.
<section>Introduction</section>
The idea of mixing aquaculture and schistosomiasis researchers in a single meeting was prompted by the need to emphasize the importance of the interface between these two fields. A network meeting was held in Manila, Philippines, from August 6 to 10, 1991, and involved U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) grantees working in aquaculture or schistosomiasis. The meeting was organized and sponsored jointly by the Board on Science and Technology for International Development (BOSTID), National Research Council, Washington, D.C., and the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), Manila, and was funded by the Office of Research at USAID. The participants' grants were funded through USAID's Program in Science and Technology Cooperation (PSTC) or the U.S.-Israel Cooperative Development Research (CDR) Program. The meeting consisted of two days of grantee presentations of individual research projects and two days of visits to field research
sites in nearby areas.
The 25 papers presented during the meeting are included here. One additional paper is included from a grantee who could not attend the meeting. The 15 aquaculture papers cover a wide field of topics, ranging from three on technology, four on propagation, two on nutrition, and four on DNA and genetics, to two on ecology and the environment. Likewise, the 11 papers on schistosomiasis cover diverse topics, including four on immunology, two on epidemiology or biology, and four on biocontrol. None of the papers address both aquaculture and schistosomiasis (except for Loker et al., in passing), because the grants did not overlap both study areas. However, the participants formulated and compiled a list of 35 recommendations relevant to future research, including four that specifically propose work involving both study areas.
Aquaculture, an ancient human practice, has become an increasingly important farmer-oriented industry for protein production in many countries, both developing and developed. The technologies required for large- and small-scale farm aquaculture of major or supplemental crops of various fish species, frogs, crayfish and prawns, and mollusks are now in place and are being widely distributed. The development of these technologies has not come about spontaneously, but as a result of three basic trends: (1) the need for more protein production to feed the growing human population; (2) increased pollution in, or destruction of, many of the world's natural fishery habitats and the subsequent decline in fish populations; and (3) poorly managed or unmanaged harvest systems that have permitted the overexploitation of natural fisheries. Realistically, a slowing and reversal of these trends will require considerable education, policy and managerial changes, effort, and time. Thus,
aquaculture technology will continue to grow at a rapid rate and it should be anticipated that many other aquatic species will be "domesticated" and disseminated for mass production of protein.
One of the main organizations involved in the enhancement of fisheries techniques and aquaculture is the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management. Currently, there are several ICLARM regional centers in the Eastern Hemisphere that have been very successful in initiating small-farmer-oriented aquaculture programs based primarily on various cichlid species. One of these centers is located in Manila. Accordingly, the participants of this network meeting had the opportunity to visit the Freshwater Aquaculture Center and the Freshwater Fish Hatchery and Extension Training Center at Central Luzon State University and to learn about the project in Genetic Improvement of Farmed Tilapias.
The parasitism of humans by schistosomes is almost certainly more ancient than the development of aquaculture and is still a major public health problem in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Schistosomiasis is one of the six priority vector-borne diseases targeted for control by the World Health Organization. The disease (also called bilharziasis) is caused by any one of five species of the genus Schistosoma that parasitize humans through direct contact in water. At present, it affects an estimated 200-250 million people in approximately 75 countries, primarily in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East. Schistosomiasis normally has a low mortality rate; however, it is typically chronic, extremely debilitating, and causes a very significant loss in work productivity. Thus, the annual impact of lost work in some developing countries with high prevalence rates can amount to hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars.
Human schistosomes develop through a complex life cycle involving freshwater snail intermediate hosts. The stage infecting humans develops in the snail and is released into the water, where it swims until it dies or comes in contact with, and penetrates, human skin. Once in the human the parasite migrates, matures, and develops large numbers of eggs, some of which pass out in the urine and/or feces. If the eggs are deposited in fresh water, another stage of the parasite hatches and swims around until it locates and infects the snail intermediate host. Only a select few species of snails actually function in the intermediate host role, and most are specifically susceptible to only one or two of the schistosome species. Thus, the schistosome cycles are dependent on: (1) an infected human (in Asia other animals can also serve as vertebrate hosts for the parasite, and these enhance the transmission of parasites to humans); (2) the depositing of eggs into fresh water and their
hatching; (3) the location and infection of the correct snail species and further development of the parasite for release into the water; and (4) human skin exposure in water to the infective stage of the parasite that came from the infected snails, and a subsequent infection.
Why the concern about schistosomiasis when efforts to develop a vaccine are progressing well and a medication, praziquantel, is now available for treatment of the disease? Although these developments are promising, and in the case of praziquantel very successful, the disease is continuing to spread and case numbers are increasing annually. There is also some evidence of praziquantel resistance developing in the parasite. Furthermore, there is no realistic expectation that the eventual vaccine will be available, costwise, to many infected rural populations in tropical countries. It is imperative, therefore, that non-vaccine control methods and programs be continued and public awareness and education enhanced through local sources.
As mentioned earlier, schistosomiasis is a tropical and subtropical disease that primarily affects rural populations. In this scenario the focus for infection is continued contact with water through activities such as fishing, farming (for example, rice culture), bathing, washing clothes and cooking utensils, personal hygiene, and recreation. Thus, water development projects in developing countries where the disease occurs offer likely sources for new foci or epidemics of the disease. The need for increased education and local awareness about schistosomiasis is particularly important when considering the current water resources situation. Many of the countries with high prevalence rates of this disease are the same countries experiencing serious water shortages. And, wherever water occurs there are usually large concentrations of humans, which encourages the transmission of waterborne disease. Recently, a number of the countries experiencing such water shortages have
embarked on large-scale dam projects and irrigation schemes. Sadly, most have resulted in large-scale schistosomiasis epidemics in the settlers who come to work the newly habitable lands. These water development schemes are also the very same areas where aquaculture efforts are likely to be initiated; often the persons involved in these projects, like the other settlers, are unaware of the risk of schistosomiasis.
When considering this problem, there are at least four future trends that seem certain: (1) human populations in most developing countries will continue to increase at a rapid rate; (2) freshwater resources will become increasingly scarce, which will result in more water development projects in developing countries; (3) aquaculture will become increasingly important in developing countries as a source for protein and will be linked to the water development projects; and (4) waterborne diseases such as schistosomiasis will continue to spread so that large-scale epidemics will be a common public health problem in humans associated with water development projects. Therefore, the meshing of aquaculture and schistosomiasis researchers in a network meeting seems timely and has resulted in an increased awareness on both sides of the interrelatedness of the two fields. Hopefully, this meeting will inspire future research efforts that encompass both aquaculture and the study of
schistosomes and schistosomiasis.
<section>Recommendations</section>
During the four-day network meeting, the 25 USAID aquaculture and schistosomiasis grantees intermingled well and participated in a vigorous exchange of information and ideas. Their wide range of expertise enhanced the development of a list of recommendations. On the last day they formulated and compiled a total of 35 recommendations for future research in both fields. These recommendations are listed below and are divided into priorities for three categories: (1) the aquaculture and schistosomiasis interface, (2) aquaculture; and (3) schistosomes and schistosomiasis. Of particular importance are the four recommendations involving the aquaculture and schistosomiasis interface. These recommendations stress the need for future coordinated efforts that will consider both nutrition and waterborne diseases in promoting human health.
I. Priorities At The Aquaculture And Schistosomiasis Interface
1.Develop common goals and interaction among aquaculture, public health, engineering,ecology, and environmental workers in planning, constructing, and monitoring water development projects such as aquaculture, potable water sources, dams, irrigation, and chemical and organic waste effluent ponds.
2.Develop and use preliminary public health risk assessment methods before initiating projects that involve water development, such as aquaculture, potable water sources,dams, irrigation, and chemical and organic waste effluent ponds.
3.Ensure that those involved in aquaculture projects are educated in the risks and dangers of schistosomiasis and other waterborne diseases, as well as in the methods for preventing their transmission.
4.Promote and conduct the search for and use of molluscivorous fish and crustacean species that could play an important role in snail control, and potentially be of aquaculture value.
II. Priorities For Aquaculture
Resource Allocation
1.Resource allocation in aquaculture should be studied through modeling of various systems including integrated farming. Subsistence farming could be examined with and without an aquaculture component to identify and predict inputs and outputs, and to project expenses and income. Protocols could be developed for individual farmers based on their resources.
2.More information is needed on micronutrients in fish nutrition. This would be useful to commercial producers in optimizing their yields and to subsistence aquaculturists in allowing the most effective use of available feeds.
Conservation of Genetic Resources
3.Increase research on indigenous species that have been neglected in research and introductions. Research is also needed on remediation in aquaculture as, for example, in the elimination of harmful introduced species. The reintroduction of species that were displaced by unsuitable introductions should also be examined. The reproductive biology of crustaceans, mountain stream fishes (e.g., mahseer), and slow maturers are all worthy of study.
Aquaculture and the Environment
4.The interrelationships of aquaculture and the environment need to be quantified. Although there are aquaculture systems that are environmentally benign or beneficial, the potential exists for negative impacts from disease vectors, pesticide residues, and the like. These risks should be assessed and minimized. The effects of industrial and agricultural pollutants on aquaculture can be severe. More information is needed on the tolerances of various species to pollutants.
Miscellaneous
5.The suitability of marine fish species for farming should be investigated. Reduced profitability in the shrimp farming industry seems likely and substitute crops should be identified. Integrated culture of fish with shrimp should also be investigated.
6.Increase understanding and predictability of ecological processes in eutrophicated lakes and reservoirs to enhance water quality and fish protein production.
III. Priorities For Schistosomes And Schistosomiasis
Control
1.Promote and increase efforts to control schistosomes in a sustainable way using integrated pest management techniques directed at the host snail. Such techniques could combine a number of disciplines (e.g., herbal extracts, molluscivorous fish and crustaceans, pond and stream modification, chemicals, competitive or predator snails, competitive trematodes, snail repellent aquatic plants).
2.Increase the search for, and research efforts directed toward, new biological control agents or organisms of the host snails (e.g., microbial pathogens, Endod, Marisa, Thiara, Helisoma, Echinostoma).
3.Develop cheap, deliverable community-based biocontrol methods.
4.Monitor the resistance of snail hosts to chemical control compounds.
5. Develop slow release compounds targeting cercariae and miracidia that have little or no effect on non-target organisms.
6. Develop methods to destabilize snail habitats and eliminate or reduce host snail populations.
7. Conduct ecotoxicological studies of molluscicidal plants to ascertain their safety and toxicity.
8. Develop practical sanitation techniques and safe water supply systems for rural populations.
Treatment and Disease Prevention
9. Understand the basic aspects of granuloma formation and regulation.
10. Understand the basic aspects of fibrogenesis, resorption, and fibrosis.
11. Develop an anti-pathology vaccine.
12. Develop quantitative non-invasive methods for assessing liver function and pathology.
13. Develop quantitative specific tests for antigens in humans (field ready, rapid, for use in rural areas where microscopes are not available).
14. Increase studies of patient treatment failure and incipient drug resistance of the parasites.
15. Develop alternative drugs for treating schistosomiasis.
Basic Parasitology
16. Support more research gathering information about the taxonomy and biology of schistosomes and their snail hosts (in Africa, South America, and Southeast Asia) and how they might be influenced by massive deforestation and the construction of new dams and irrigation schemes.
Design and Planning
17. Develop strategies separating control and prevention, based on the premise that "control" = treatment + snail control + containment of spread through environmental modification, whereas "prevention" = vaccines, antipenetrants, protective clothing, prophylactic drugs, and behavior modification.
18. Determine rate-limiting points in disease transmission.
19. Develop rapid techniques for surveying water sites (including aquaculture sites) to determine if they are transmission foci (determine if snails or people are infected).
20. Develop methods for determining the cost/benefits of community-level schistosomiasis control, and determining how the benefits of control programs can continue after the formal intervention has concluded.
Vaccine Development
21. Identify relevant conformational antigens.
22. Develop non-invasive measures of resistance.
23. Understand mechanisms of immune regulation.
24. Determine influence of genetics and gene usage.
25. Address how the vaccine will be delivered and what will be the optimum mode of
vaccination.
<section>Presentation: Aquaculture</section>
<section>Technology</section>
<section>Aquaculture Technology Research For Smallholder Farmers In Rural Malawi</section>
R.P. Noble And B.A. Costa-Pierce
International Center for Living Aquatic Resources
Management (ICLARM)-GTZ Africa Project
Zomba, Malawi
Abstract
In order to develop aquaculture systems and technologies relevant to the maize-based farming system in rural Africa, the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) is conducting farmer-participatory research in Malawi. This involves farmer-researcher interaction throughout the aquaculture program, thus enabling researchers to: (1) assess farmers' agroecological resources and the extent of their traditional agricultural knowledge to provide information on the constraints to adoption of aquaculture; (2) develop on-station research to test technologies relevant to rural farmers and their farming systems; and (3) monitor and evaluate, in collaboration with farmers, the performance and impact of new technologies and integrated agriculture-aquaculture models on farming systems.
The research process involves a continuing transfer of information and ideas between farmers and researchers so that research agendas can be adjusted to meet changing needs as indigenous aquaculture systems evolve.
Malawian aquaculturalists generally have one pond of approximately 300-400 m² in which they polyculture Oreochromis shiranus and Tilapia rendalli, sometimes with Cyprinus carpio. Yields from fish ponds are low (1 t/ha/yr). The major pond input is maize bran, which is used for human and animal food and is scarce during the rainy season.
On-farm bioresource assessments have shown that there are agricultural residues such as maize stover (2.5 t/ha/yr), grasses (>4 t/ha measured at the end of the wet season) and wood ash (400 kg/farm/yr), which could be used as pond inputs. Experiments have demonstrated that application of napier grass and maize bran together can improve fish yields up to 3 t/ha/yr. Wood ash from household cooking fires can improve water fertility and raise pH.
Low-cost technology transfer is accomplished by showing farmers a "basket" of technologies at the research station where they are encouraged to critically assess the available technologies. Farmers who have seen and critically evaluated these technologies are more likely to adopt them. In a farmer survey, 76% of those who had visited the research station were using more than one technology compared with only 32% of a control group. Using the "shopping basket" approach to technology transfer has resulted in rapid adoption of rice-fish culture. This has never been practiced in Malawi before. Farmers achieved rice yields of 2-2.4 t/ha/yr and fish yields of 1.5-2.4 t/ha/yr from rice-fish ponds. Farmers who usually grow only one crop of rice per year are now starting second crops during the dry season.
Introduction
Aquaculture has not been adopted widely in rural Africa, primarily because the technology has no traditional base in smallholder agriculture. Most rural households operate outside the cash economy, and thus have little expendable income to purchase the feeds and fertilizer that make aquaculture economically viable.
Malawi's population is 8.2 million (NSO 1987), of which 80% are directly involved in agricultural production. The International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR 1982) stated that smallholder farming accounted for 84% of the agricultural GDP. However, only 25% of that contribution entered the cash economy in the early 1980s. Current figures are not available, but demographic and economic indicators suggest there has been little change since ISNAR's report.
Malawi government policy has favored estate development rather than smallholder agriculture, resulting in further limitations on participation in the cash economy (Kydd and Christiansen 1982, Peters and Herrera 1989). Malawi's high population growth (3.7% per annum, NSO 1987) further exacerbates this situation and is leading to a shortfall in food supply among rural communities.
Production of smallholder food crops has been falling since the mid-1970s. This reduction has been due to increasing shortage of arable land. Average per capita landholdings are expected to decline to 0.26 ha by the year 2000 in Malawi (World Bank 1989). With such severe land constraints it will be necessary to use marginal lands and improve the utilization of existing land.
Fish is the major source of animal protein for human consumption (60-70%, Satia 1989) but is quickly becoming a scarce and expensive food commodity in Malawi. Msiska (1985) noted that between 1972 and 1984, per capita consumption of fish fell by 53 %, from 17.9 kg to 9.5 kg per year. Malawi's lake fisheries have reached their productive limit in terms of fish supply (60,000-70,000 t/yr) and cannot meet the demands of a rapidly growing population (Msiska 1985). The Malawi government is now attempting to expand smallholder aquaculture to help relieve the shortfall in fish supplies and raise rural incomes.
The introduction of aquaculture to farmers in Malawi started in the early 1950s but has not been particularly successful. This is reflected in the low production figures for the 1980s of approximately 100 t/yr for the whole country, just 0.1% of capture fisheries production (Balarin 1987).
Kalinga (1991) suggests that lack of capital, suitable fish species and feeds, appropriate management techniques, and extension capacity all contribute to Malawi's poor performance in aquaculture. Balarin (1987) suggests that the lack of an integrated development approach is also a major problem.
Aquaculture projects often fail to address the problems and needs of smallholder and subsistence farmers and too often treat aquaculture as a stand-alone enterprise in the farming system. For example, many aquaculture projects in Malawi have presented farmers with technological packages designed to operate only as an independent commercial operation (GOPA 1987).
With farm sizes of usually less than 1 hectare, many Malawian farmers are operating at, or close to, subsistence and have very low cash incomes. Under these circumstances, they cannot afford
to purchase the formulated feeds and chemical fertilizers that are demanded by commercial aquaculture. Therefore, such technology packages will only be appropriate for a very small, restricted group of households with relatively high incomes.
If aquaculture is to have a wide impact on nutrition, farm incomes, and rehabilitation of resource systems in rural Malawi, it is necessary to have flexible aquaculture technologies that fit into a wide range of traditional farming practices and farm resources.
Aquaculture Research
In 1987, ICLARM, funded by Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), initiated a farmer-participatory research project with the Malawi Department of Fisheries (FD), the objective being to develop aquaculture technology appropriate for rural Africa (ICLARM and GTZ 1991). The target group of research efforts are rural smallholder farmers with access to, or tenure rights over, water resources.
Studies are directed toward integrating aquaculture technologies into the smallholder maize-based farming systems. This is achieved by continual farmer-researcher interaction throughout the research program, thus enabling researchers to:
- Assess the agroecological resources of farmers and the extent of their traditional agricultural knowledge, thus providing information on the constraints to adoption of aquaculture;
- Develop on-station research to test technologies relevant to rural farmers and their farming systems; and
- Monitor and evaluate, in collaboration with farmers, the performance and impact of new technologies and integrated agriculture-aquaculture models on farming systems.
A report of the ICLARM-GTZ/FD collaborative research program is presented in Costa-Pierce et al. (1991).
On-Farm Bioresources Assessments and Current Status of Aquaculture
A large survey of farmers practicing aquaculture in Zomba District, Southern Malawi, was conducted to establish baseline data on pond sizes, number of ponds per farm, species of fish reared, etc. Table I summarizes this information.
A smaller survey of farmers was carried out to establish cropping and land use patterns. Biomass and production of crop and weed residues were measured wherever possible. Livestock wastes were estimated for some farms, as well as inputs of agricultural residues into fish ponds. Tables 2, 3, and 4 show land use patterns and availability of crop residues.
Data from bioresource assessments established that certain materials were often underutilized and had the potential for use in ponds. These were maize stovers, fallow land grasses, and wood ash from household cooking fires.
TABLE 1 Vital Statistics of 209 Smallholder Fish Ponds on 128 Farms in Zomba District, Malawi
Quartiles
Mean
Median
Pond area (m²)
338 (SE=34)
Total area of land under ponds on each farm (m²)
537 (SE=80)
Pond number/farm
1.8 (SE=O. 1)
Total number of hatchery ponds: 36 (17%)
Total number of production ponds: 173 (83%)
For example, maize stover production was 2.5 t/ha/yr, all of which was composted directly into the ground. There were enough stovers on farms for a proportion to be converted to high-quality compost as a pond input. Therefore, one potential research study was to look at the suitability of converting maize stover into a high-quality compost for use as a pond input.
Fallow land grasses and weeds were in relative abundance. The values in Table 4 are end-ofseason biomass, so turnover rates and grass production could be increased by cropping grass regularly for use as a pond input. Edwards et al. (1988) has shown that fish yields can reach as high as 5-6 t/ha/yr with vegetation as a sole pond input.
Availability of grass and its use by most farmers as a pond input for growing Tilapia rendalli (macrophytic feeder) led to studies of grass as a direct feed (Chikafumbwa 1990). The most common food input for fish ponds is "madeya" (maize bran), which is seasonally scarce. Maize bran is also sometimes used as food for humans in periods when maize meal is scarce. Therefore, grass has the potential to be a cheap substitute and possibly a more suitable food source for a macrophytic feeding fish such as T. rendalli.
TABLE 2 Pattern of Land Use Areas (ha) on 10 Smallholdings with Fish Ponds in Zomba District, Malawi
Mean
Standard Deviation
Range
Holding size
Crop land
Fallow land
Total pond area
TABLE 3 Average Production of Maize Residues on Farms with Fish Ponds, April-May 1989
Local Maize
Hybrid Maize²
kg/ha/yr
kg/farm
kg/ha/yr
kg/farm
Stovers
Sheaths
Cobs
Bran
'Sample of 17 farms
²Sample of 3 farms
Farmers' ponds are nutrient poor in the Zomba district of Malawi. The main cause is the low nutrient status of the underlying ferrous soils and the resulting acidic waters, which lead to very low fertility (alkalinities 5-10 mg/1). Wood ash is a resource that is discarded in most households and has been demonstrated to improve the pH of pond waters and act as a phosphorus source (Jamu 1990). More than 400 kg wood ash/farm/yr was produced on the few farms that were sampled, and most was unutilized.
In the examples just noted, it is obvious that there are materials on farms that could be used as potential feeds and fertilizers in ponds. These on-farm assessments provide researchers with information that enables them to rank research objectives and also establish personal contact with farmers. This interaction helps sensitize farmers to the research program and the importance of their role in helping researchers to adjust their study objectives.
Farm Management and Integration
Coupled with the resource assessment above, farmers were asked to explain their calendar of agricultural activities and why these activities were organized in a particular way. Figure 1 shows a seasonal calendar for a fa