<title>Vetiver Grass A thin green line against erosion</title>
National Research Council
National Academy Press Washington, D.C. 1993
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Board on Science and Technology for International Development
National Research Council
National Academy Press Washington, D.C. 1993
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competence and with regard for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Frank Press is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Stuart Bondurant is acting president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Frank Press and Dr. Robert M. White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
The Board on Science and Technology for International Development (BOSTID) of the Office of International Affairs addresses a range of issues arising from the ways in which science and technology in developing countries can stimulate and complement the complex processes of social and economic development. It oversees a broad program of bilateral workshops with scientific organizations in developing countries and conducts special studies. BOSTID's Advisory Committee on Technology Innovation publishes topical reviews of technical processes and biological resources of potential importance to developing countries.
This report has been prepared by an ad hoc advisory panel of the Board on Science and Technology for International Development, Office of International Affairs, National Research Council. Support for this project was provided by the Division of Environment of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (The World Bank), the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Office of the Science Advisor of the Agency for International Development Grant No. DPE-5545-AOO-8068-00.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 92-050175
ISBN 0-309-04269-0
<section>Panel on vetiver</section>
NORMAN E. BORLAUG, Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de
Maiz y Trigo Mexico City, Mexico, Chairman
RATTAN LAL, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
DAVID PIMENTEL, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
HUGH POPENOE, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
NOEL D. VIETMEYER, Vetiver Study Director and Scientific Editor
MARK R. DAFFORN, Staff Associate
<section>Staff</section>
F.R. RUSKIN, BOSTID Editor
ELIZABETH MOUZON, Senior Secretary
BRENT SIMPSON, MUCIA Intern
MICHAEL McD. Dow, Acting Director, BOSTID
<section>Contributors</section>
I. P. ABROL, Department of Soils, Agronomy, and Agroforestry, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi, India
EDITHE ALEXANDER, Stanthur and Company, Ltd., Castries, St. Lucia
CHARLES H. ANTHOLT, Agriculture Division, Asia Technical Department, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
ERIK ARRHENIUS, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
JACQUES BARRAU, Laboratoire d'Ethnobotanique-Biogeographie, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France
CLIFFORD BELLANDE, CARE-Haiti, Port-au-Prince, Haiti
MICHAEL BENGE, Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C., USA
PAT BOYD, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Glenn Dale, Maryland, USA
TOM BREDERO, The World Bank, Antananarivo, Madagascar
ROBERT CHAMBERS, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
GEOFFREY P. CHAPMAN, Wye College, University of London, Wye,
Near Ashford, Kent, UK
GABRIEL CHARLES, Ministry of Agriculture, Castries, St. Lucia
CAROL COX, Ecology Action, Willits, California, USA
SEIWYN DARDIANE, Director of Forests, Trinidad and Tobago
KITTIE DERSTINE, Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
MEL DUVALL, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA
H. A. ELWELL, Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Borrowdale, Harare, Zimbabwe
V. GIBBERD, E. M. I. Soil and Water Conservation Project, Ministry of Agriculture, Embu, Kenya
M. GRASSI, Instituto de Botanica, Fundacion Instituto Miguel Lillo, San Miguel de Tucuman, Argentina
JOHN C. GREENFIELD (The World Bank, retired), Kerikeri, New Zealand
RICHARD G. GRIMSHAW, Agriculture Division, Asia Technical Department, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
BRUCE HANSEN, Herbarium, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA
R. M. JARROLD, MASDAR (UK) Ltd., Finchampstead, Berkshire, UK
EMANUEL L. JOHNSON, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland, USA
MAURICE JONES, Vetiver Grass Stabilization cc, Management Agricultural Services, Howick, South Africa
R. S. JUNOR, Soil Conservation Service, New South Wales, Chatswood, New South Wales, Australia
W. DORAL KEMPER, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Beltsville, Maryland, USA
T. N. KHOSHOO, Tata Energy Research Institute, New Delhi, India
MATHIEU KUIPERS, CORDECO-MACA, Cochabamba, Bolivia
GERALD R. LEATHER, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Frederick, Maryland, USA
GILBERT LOVELL, Southern Regional Plant Introduction Station, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Griffin, Georgia, USA
WILLIAM S. LUCK, Miami Beach, Florida, USA
WILLIAM B. MAGRATH, Environmental Policy Research Division, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
MICHAEL MCGAHUEY, Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C., USA
MIKE MATERNE, Soil Conservation Service, U.S Department of Agriculture, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
RAMIRO MATOS MENDIETA, Colegio Real, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Peru
D. E. K. MILLER, New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Palmerston North, New Zealand
STANDLEY MULLINGS, Stanthur and Company, Ltd., Castries, St. Lucia
ALAN NORDMEYER, Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Research Institute, Ministry of Forestry, Christchurch, New Zealand
CALEB O. OTHIENO, Tea Research Foundation of Kenya, Kericho, Kenya
KENNETH PIDDINGTON, Office of Environment, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
C. SITAPATHI RAO, Agriculture and Rural Development Area, Administrative Staff, College of India, Bella Vista, Hyderabad, India
JOHN (MARC) SAFLEY, JR., Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., USA
CINDY SCHEXNAYDER, Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
W. CURTIS SHARP, National Plant Materials Laboratory, Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., USA
HOLLY SHIMIZU, U.S. Botanic Gardens, Washington, D.C., USA
JAMES SMYLE, Agriculture Division, Asia Technical Department, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA
S. SUBRAMANIAN, Soil and Water Management Research Institute, Naidu Agricultural University, Thanjavur, India
ANTHONY TANTUM, Vetiver Grass Stabilization cc, Management Agricultural Services, Howick, South Africa
PAUL P. S. TENG, International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos, Philippines
PAT THURBON, Department of Primary Industries, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
PAUL TRUONG, Soil Conservation Research, Department of Primary Industries, Indooroopilly, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
ARNOLD TSCHANZ, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Hyattsville, Maryland, USA
LY TUNG, Farm and Resource Management Institute, Visayas State College of Agriculture, Pasay City, Philippines
GORO UEHARA, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA
J. J. P. VAN WYK, Research Institute for Reclamation Ecology, Potchefstroom University for Christian Higher Education, Potchefstroom, South Africa
RAY WEIL, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
PETER WELLE, CARE Haiti, Port-au-Prince, Haiti
P. K. YOON, Plant Science Division, Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia, Experiment Station, Kuala Lumpur, Selangor, Malaysia
<section>Preface</section>
For developing nations, soil erosion is among the most chronic environmental and economic burdens. Many of these nations are in the tropics, where in just a few hours torrential downpours can wash away tons of topsoil from each hectare. Many others are in the drier zones, where swirling winds and flash floods (sometimes from rains so distant they are unseen) can be equally devastating.
By these processes, huge amounts of valuable soil are being lost every day. Worse, the soil accumulates in rivers, reservoirs, harbors, estuaries, and other waterways where it is unwelcome, terribly destructive, and impossibly costly to remove. Erosion is thus a double disaster: a vital resource disappears from where it is desperately needed only to be dumped where it is equally unwanted.
Despite much rhetoric and effort, little has been accomplished in overcoming erosion, at least when viewed from a worldwide perspective. One major reason is that there are few if any solutions that are cheap, appealing, long lived, and suitable for easy adoption over the vast expanses of the Third World that need protecting. Now, however, there may be one.
In the eyes of at least some viewers, a little-known tropical grass, vetiver, might at last offer one practical and inexpensive solution for controlling erosion simply, cheaply, and on a huge scale in both the tropical and semiarid regions. Planted in lines along the contours of sloping lands, vetiver quickly forms narrow but very dense hedges. Its stiff foliage then blocks the passage of soil and debris. It also slows any runoff and gives the rainfall a better chance of soaking into the soil instead of rushing off the slope. Although there has not been much experience with this process to date, the deeply rooted, persistent grass has restrained erodible soils in this way for decades in Fiji, India, and some Caribbean nations.
At least in this limited practice, vetiver appears truly remarkable. The grass itself seems not to spread or become a pest. Terraces rise as the soil accumulates behind the hedges, converting erodible slopes into stabilized terraces where farming and forestry can be conducted, safe from the evils of erosion. Farmers and foresters benefit not only by keeping their soil, but by having flatter land and more moisture for their plants. Countries benefit by having cleaner rivers, unspoiled estuaries, and more water and less silt in their reservoirs.
At present, however, no one knows for sure whether these experiences represent a practical possibility for solving the world's worst erosion problems. The purpose of this report is to make a judgment on this point: to assess vetiver's promise and limitations and to identify any research that may be necessary before this grass can be deployed rationally, widely, and without undue environmental risk. In other words, our particular purpose is to evaluate the ecological advantages and potential risks in employing a grass that may eventually benefit watersheds, forests, and farms throughout the world's warmer zones.
This book, it should be understood, is neither a monograph on vetiver nor a field guide for its use. It is, instead, a scientific audit of the safety and effectiveness of the plant as used for erosion control. Basically, the book reviews existing research and experiences with the grass. It has been compiled from literature, from personal contacts, from site visits, and from information mailed in by specialists in an array of disciplines: environment, agronomy, forestry, soil science, engineering, and others. Many contributors had little or no knowledge of vetiver itself; they served as "devil's advocates." We hope that this exhaustive process has produced an independent, unbiased evaluation that will help scores of countries and organizations judge whether or not to use this plant in their own programs.
The report has been produced particularly for nonspecialist readers such as government ministers, research directors, university students, private voluntary organizations, and entrepreneurs. It is intended primarily as an economic development document. We hope it will be of particular interest to agencies engaged in development assistance and food relief; officials and institutions concerned with environment, agriculture, and forestry in tropical countries; and scientific establishments with relevant interests.
This study is a project of the Board on Science and Technology for International Development (BOSTID), a division of the National Research Council, and is prepared under the auspices of BOSTID's program on technology innovation. Established in 1970, this program evaluates unconventional scientific and technological advances with particular promise for solving problems of developing countries (see page 158). The report continues a series describing promising plant resources that heretofore have been neglected or overlooked. Other titles relating to vegetative improvements for tropical soils and environment include:
· Tropical Legumes: Resources for the Future (1979)
· Leucaena: Promising Forage and Tree Crop in Developing Countries (second edition, 1984)
· Mangium and Other Fast-Growing Acacias for the Humid Tropics (1983)
· Calliandra: A Versatile Small Tree for the Humid Tropics (1983)
· Casuarinas: Nitrogen-Fixing Trees for Adverse Sites (1983)
· Firewood Crops: Shrub and Tree Species for Energy Production, Volumes I and 11 (1980 and 1983, respectively)
· Sowing Forests from the Air (1981)
· Neem: A Tree for Solving Global Problems (1992).
Funds for carrying out this vetiver study were made available by the following organizations:
· The Office of the Science Advisor of the U.S. Agency for International Development;
· The Environment and the Agriculture and Rural Development departments of the World Bank; and
· The Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Additional funds for printing the report were contributed by the International Tropical Timber Organization as well as by the following departments of the World Bank: Agriculture and Rural Development, Environment, External Affairs, and Asia Technical. The following World Bank country divisions also contributed: South Asia, East Asia, Latin America, and Africa.
How to cite this report: National Research Council. 1993. Vetiver Grass: A Thin Green Line Against Erosion. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
<section>Foreword</section>
Soil erosion is a quiet crisis, an insidious, largely man-made disaster that is unfolding gradually. In many places it is barely recognized; the soil moves away in such small increments from day to day that its loss is hardly noticed. Often the very practices that cause the greatest losses in the long term lead to bumper crops in the short term, thereby creating an illusion of progress.
Yet erosion is inexorably undermining the economic security of most countries. The changes it brings are chronic and irreversible: lost land; reduced productivity on farms and in forests; floods; silted harbors, reservoirs, canals, and irrigation works; washed-out roads and bridges; and destroyed wetlands and coral reefs, where myriad valuable organisms would normally breed and prosper.
And erosion is literally costing the earth. The soil it carries off now totals 20 billion tons a year worldwide. That represents the equivalent loss of between 5 million and 7 million hectares of arable land. Some of this loss is alleviated by converting forests into farms, so that erosion indirectly also leads to deforestation.
The problems are worst in the warmer parts of the world. There, swelling populations, poor land management, vulnerable soils, and hostile climates add up to a lethal combination that fosters erosion, bringing with it environmental degradation, falling crop yields, rising deforestation, erratic water supplies, and an ever-expanding prospect of dry and dusty rangelandstoo lacking in soil for crops or even livestock.
Soil erosion is getting worse. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, it has increased 20-fold in the last three decades as more and more people are forced to move out of the good bottomlands and onto the fragile hillsides. More than one-third of Africa, for example, is threatened with desertification. The world's forests are disappearing 30 times faster than they are being planted. Hillsides stripped of their protective covering of vegetation are rapidly eroding, depositing huge amounts of silt into downstream reservoirs and river valleys. Floods are becoming more frequent-and more severe.
A few facts demonstrate the crisis:
· Morocco has to install the equivalent of a new, 150-million cubic meter reservoir every year just to keep pace with the sediment that is filling up its existing dams.
· Zimbabwe, it is estimated, would have to spread US$1.5 billion worth of fertilizers merely to compensate for the natural nutrients now being swept away by wind and rain every year.
· China loses more than 2 billion tons of soil a year, just from the Loess Plateau. Most is deposited in the Yellow River. And it takes 3.5 billion cubic meters of water to flush every 100 million tons of soil to the sea-water that could be used for productive purposes.
· U. S. farmers must add 20 kilograms of nitrogen fertilizer for every centimeter of soil lost per hectare, just to maintain productivity. Indeed, each year the United States loses $18 billion in fertilizer nutrients to soil erosion.
To avert the global environmental disaster being brought on by soil erosion, it is imperative to take action quickly and on a vast scale. Unfortunately, previous efforts to tackle the problem worldwide- especially in the Third World-were rarely successful over any extensive area. For one thing, some of the conventional techniques employed today are enormously expensive. For another, they rarely generate widespread farmer support-indeed, the farmers often object so vehemently that they have to be threatened with fines or prison to assure compliance. And, wherever the farmers are unmotivated, even the most effective systems soon decline and fall into decay and disuse.
It was with this grim scenario in mind that the staff of the NRC became intrigued by the ideas of two World Bank agriculturists, John Greenfield and Richard Grimshaw. These two had an entrancing vision: a little-known tropical grass called vetiver, they proposed, could provide the answer to soil erosion in the world's warmer regions-and it could do so in a way that would appeal to millions of farmers, landowners, politicians, and administrators. In their eyes, local people would at last be motivated to protect their land and therefore create the solution rather than the problem.
Greenfield and Grimshaw's concept, as well as the reasons behind it, are described in the next chapter. Subsequent chapters highlight the findings of the NRC panel, whose task was to assess the underlying truth of the vetiver idea and to project its promise into the future.
Noel D. Vietmeyer Study Director
<section>Introduction</section>
In 1956 John Greenfield was handed a problem: to grow sugarcane on the hills of Fiji. With all the flat land fully used, his company had resolved to expand production up the slopes.
The trouble was that the hillsides on that Pacific island nation were too dry for sugarcane-one of the thirstiest of crops-and the soils were too erodible. Putting cane fields on the slopes could be disastrous to the company, the cultivators, and the country.
Everyone but Greenfield's boss knew that there was no chance of farming those lands without bringing on devastating losses of soil. Even Greenfield thought so, but he is a persistent, no-nonsense sort, and he set about testing all kinds of methods in the hope that one of them just possibly might work.
One of the methods involved bulldozing broad dirt barriers (bunds or berms) along the contours. That was the standard process for controlling erosion in the commercial croplands of most parts of the world. Another method involved a coarse grass called vetiver (Vetiveria zizanioides), the use of which was virtually unknown.
Greenfield located the vetiver plants growing beside a nearby highway. He had his work crews dig them up, break off slips, and jab the slips side by side into the soil to form lines across the hillsides. It seemed pretty hopeless to expect lines of grass just one plant wide to stop the movement of soil, but he had heard that something similar had been successful in the Caribbean before World War II.
The vetiver slips quickly took root and grew together to form continuous bands along the contour. To everyone's surprise the runoff that normally poured off during tropical storms was slowed down, spread out, and even held back behind the "botanical dams." It took hours to seep through one of the dense walls of stiff stalks (eventually about a meter wide), only to be checked again by the next one down the slope. In consequence, most of the moisture had no chance to rush into the streams below; instead, it soaked into the slopes where it had fallen. More importantly, though, the soil was prevented from leaving the site; it settled out of the stalled runoff end lodged behind the grass walls.
The full significance of this eluded him until the area was hit by one of the highest intensity storms in Fiji history: 500 mm of rain fell in just 3 hours. Water poured over the top of the vetiver hedges "like a tidal wave," but the plants remained in place, undamaged, and unbreached. Of greater consequence, however, was the fact that the water did not start cutting gullies because the bands of vegetation both robbed it of its force and kept it spread evenly across the slopes as it had fallen.
Greenfield's bulldozed earthworks, on the other hand, did not fare so well. Water built up behind them until the weakest spot could hold no longer. Then, the whole dammed-up body of runoff cascaded through the breach, gashing jagged gullies into the erodible slopes below.
After that experience there was little question about which system to pursue. Indeed, the vetiver hedges succeeded so well at both stopping erosion and increasing soil moisture that sugarcane production quickly expanded out of the flats and up the slopes. Some was produced on grades as steep as 100 percent (45°) and without obvious soil loss. Greenfield's boss was right-it could be done!
Greenfield eventually went on to other projects in various countries and spent a long career advising agricultural programs throughout the tropics. In 1985, the World Bank sent him to India as part of an effort to improve productivity in the rundown, rainfed farming areas of four states. In this region, making up much of central India, thousands of small subsistence farms were being ravaged by erosion. Their soils were scarred, thinned, and so quick to dry out that if the rains were interrupted-even briefly-the crops quickly died. When he saw the situation, Greenfield thought of vetiver; if it could benefit a remote Pacific island, perhaps it could benefit India as well.
He described the vetiver concept and related his former experiences to Richard Grimshaw, his new boss in India. It was an opportune time: the project was not working well; the subsistence farms were still eroding and their yields were still low and woefully unreliable. Grimshaw had Greenfield return to Fiji to make a video showing what had happened to his hillside hedges.
To Greenfield's satisfaction, his old grass strips on the northern shore of Fiji's main island were still standing, still protecting the slopes, and still producing excellent sugarcane crops despite three decades of almost complete neglect. Moreover, no one was concerned about erosion-the fact that it had even existed there had been forgotten.
However, the slopes no longer looked as they had when he started. They had been transformed into terraces. Tons of silt had built up behind each line of grass. The area now was composed of strips of flat land behind grassy banks up to 2 m tall.
Back in India, Greenfield's videotape was a big hit, and Grimshaw agreed to give vetiver a try. The plant is native to India (where it is normally called "khus" or "khus khus"), and samples were readily obtained from Karnataka State. A huge nursery-covering 8 hectares- was established near Bhopal, and Greenfield and his colleagues went out to persuade farmers to plant hedges across their sandy, red, eroding land. (The videotape helped immensely, especially because the farmers on Fiji had vividly narrated their experiences in Hindi.)
After 4 years-3 of them involving some of the severest droughts on record-the results were so promising that vetiver seemed like a major breakthrough.
In Maharashtra State, lines of the grass trapped 25 cm of silt in 2 months. On the notorious black soils of Karnataka, silt started forming behind a 3-month-old hedge, and the soil loss dropped from 11 tons per hectare to 3 tons per hectare. On the experimental farm at Sehore University, the average silt buildup behind vetiver lines during the rainy season was 10 cm. Some hedges accumulated as much as 30 cm of soil in a year.
What is more, vetiver held back more than just soil. The moisture that normally gushed off the land in flash floods was also trapped-or at least slowed down. There was no way to measure the exact amount; however, plenty of anecdotal information attested to vetiver's remarkable ability to hold runoff on the slopes. On one droughty Indian catchment, for instance, farmers found they could grow mango trees for the first time. In several villages, the water level in the wells rose dramatically after vetiver hedges were put in. In Gundalpet, for example, farmers had water at 8 m depth; wells in nearby villages were dry down to 20 m. On lands in Andhra Pradesh that had been abandoned 12 years earlier as being too dry for farming, farmers put in vetiver and successfully grew millet and castor once again. In several places, farmers with vetiver lines got a harvest where their neighbors got only crop failures. None of this, it should be noted, was due to vetiver alone. It was the
combination of the grass and the contour farming, which it induced and stabilized, that jointly made the difference.
One of the most unexpected successes was on black cotton soils. These "vertisols" cover 10 million hectares of central India and could be a major source of food, but their physical properties are such that they can be used for only a fraction of the year. During the rainy season, when farming should be most productive, they are too sticky even to walk on. Barriers such as berms or bunds to worsen the waterlogging. Vetiver, however, allowed excess water to pass through and didn't upset the drainage. Greenfield noted that, after rain, farmers could walk right up to a vetiver hedge, but couldn't get closer to a berm than 40 m. He was so impressed that he predicted vetiver grass would be the answer for bringing India's vertisols into year-round production, resulting in immense benefit to the nation.
Although initially the project staff almost had to force their planting materials onto the farmers, soon the farmers were clamoring for it. Several states-including Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, and Gujarat-also initiated their own vetiver projects. The main constraint to the wider adoption of the method quickly became a lack of nurseries to keep up with the demand for planting materials.
Ironically, after about 4 years of effort, agriculturists in Karnataka stumbled over the fact that many farmers in a particular part of their own state had been using vetiver hedges all along. In fact, throughout the four southern states, people had employed steps of this grass for at least 100, and maybe even 20O, years. However, they used them primarily to denote the edges of farms. Investigation showed that where the boundaries crossed slopes the hedges held back soil on the upper side. Recognizing the significance of this, a few of the more astute farmers had intentionally planted vetiver across the middle of their slopes. But this was the exception; by and large, the grass's environmental benefits lay unappreciated.
As all these results became apparent, Greenfield, Grimshaw, and most of the other observers became extremely excited. If this little-known grass could benefit some of the worst areas of central India, surely it could benefit other parts of the world. Indeed, here was something that might underpin millions of farms and forests, not to mention watersheds, rivers, reservoirs, harbors, highways, bridges, canals, and other facilities affected by erosion. Perhaps the whole face of the tropics might be changed for the better by the narrow strips of this grass. Perhaps at last there was a way to keep soil on the hills where it was needed and out of the waterways where it was not. More importantly, perhaps it offered a sustainable method of moisture conservation, a means of "drought-proofing" previously vulnerable rainfed areas.
St. Vincent's Vetiver
The following is adapted from John Greenfield's report of a trip to inspect the use of vetiver on the Caribbean nation of St Vincent in 1989. He arrived at a time when a large-scale erosion control scheme using bulldozers and expensive terracing, to be financed with foreign capital, was being proposed to the people there.
Vetiver grass was introduced to St. Vincent as the major soil conservation measure more than 50 years ago. It was used primarily in the sugar industry to stabilize fields of sugarcane, but found its way all over the island as a stabilizer of road cuttings, driveways, pathways, and tracks along hillsides. Whoever introduced the system did an excellent job, as virtually all the small farmers put their vetiver-grass plantings on the contour. This, together with the resulting contour farming, has saved St. Vincent from the ravages of soil erosion.
Throughout St. Vincent, I stopped to talk to farmers, and the general consensus was, "surely you haven't come ail this way to tell us about khus-khus (as it is called locally); we have known how good it is for over 50 years!"
I drove up the leeward coast of St. Vincent with the government official responsible for soil conservation, Mr. Conrad Simon of the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Agriculture. We visited one of the old sugar plantations (now 