<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Sixteenth Session Rome, 6-25 November 1971</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Council committees
November 1871-November 1973
Programme committee
Members
First Alternante
G. Bula Hoyo (Colombia)
K. Ando (Japan)
M.A. Bajwa (Pakistan)
First Alternate
E. Bucluman (Roumania)
H.J. Kristensen (Danemark)
R.W. Phillips ( United States of America)
Second Alternate
K.. Prased (India)
B. Shaib (Nigeria)
A.S. Tuinman (Netherlands)
Third Alternate
S. Haidar (Lebanon)
FINANCE COMMITTEE
Chairman
Members
First Alternate
F. Shefrin (Canada)
Miss Marina de Barros e Vasconcelios (Brazil)
First Alternate
A. Lochen (Norway)
P. Byrnes ( United States of America)
Second Alternate
Ju In Song (Korea, Rep. of )
E. Luhe (Germany Fad. Rap. of)
G. WEILL (France)
Third Alternate
J. Murenga (Kenya)
COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
Australia
Italy
Morocco
United Kingdom
Ecuador
Japan
Pakistan
OTHER COMMITTEES
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE METHODS OF WORK OF THE COUNCIL
Argentina
Indonesia
Nigeria
United States of America
Egypt
New Zealand
Norway
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON INCREASING THE PRODUCTION AND USE OF EDISLE PROTEINS
Brazil
France
Iran
Sierra Leone
Canada
India
New Zealand
UN/FAO INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE FOR THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
Australia
*Ghana
*Mexico
Togo
*Canada
Hungary
*Netherlands
*Trinidad and Tobago
Danmark
*India
*New Zealand
Turkey
Egypt
*Indonesia
Pakistan
*United Kingdom
*France
Irland
Peru
*United State of America
*Germany, Fed Rep of
Kenya
Sweden
Uruguay
*Elected by FAO Council
<section>2</section>
II. Report of the conference of FAO - Corrigendum
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Please insert "(Res. 2/73)" immediately after "International Agricultural Adjustment".
PARAGRAPH 132, RESOLUTION 3/73
Please alter the second part of operative paragraph 2 to read:
''...authorizes the Director-General to invite interested non-member States which are members of the United Nations, any of its...''
APPENDIX B. JAPAN
Please replace the present entry by the following:
JAPAN
Delegate
Makoto SAITO
Adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry President of the Japan FAO Association
Tokyo
Alternate
Chohei NAGATA
Counsellor
Embassy of Japan
Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Katsuhiro ICHIOKA
Director
Specialized Agencies Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Alternate
Yasuo GOTO
Director, International Economic Affairs Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
Tatsuo SAITO
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Alternate Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO
Rome
Associate
Yoichi YAMAGUCHI
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Rome
Associate
Seiji SHINDO
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
Shoji SUNAGA
Senior Officer
International Cooperation Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Tokyo
Associate
K. NANAO
Officer, Economic Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Adviser
M. EDAHIRO
Executive Director of the
Japan FAO Association
Tokyo
APPENDIX E
Please alter the second part of the title to read:
"... AND TO RULE XXVII GRO".
<section>3</section>
III. Introductory
A. The late Lord Boyd Orr
B. The late Maurice Gemayel
C. In memoriam
D. Seventh McDougall memorial lecture
E. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1970 and 1971
A. The late Lord Boyd Orr
1. The Conference paid tribute to the memory of the late Lord Boyd Orr, first Director-General 2 of FAO (1945-1948), who had tied in June 1971, and unanimously adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 1/71
Tribute to Lord Boyd Orr
THE CONFERENCE,
Having learned with deep sorrow of the death of Lord Boyd Orr, the Organization's first Director-General,
Recalling the dynamic role he played in alerting the world to the urgency on the international scene for actions to provide adequate food and purchasing power for people with inadequate resources wherever they were,
Recognizing the outstanding service which he rendered to the Organization during his tenure of office not only by his leadership in developing programmes to combat hunger and poverty, but also by inspiring the Organization with a vision of service that has never dimmed,
Appreciating his dedication to efforts to ensure and secure peace by removing the injustices of hunger and poverty wherever they existed, for which he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949, ant thus 0a contribution to humanity at large,
1. Wishes to have a copy of this resolution sent to Lord Boyd Orr's widow, Lady Boyd Orr;
2. Expresses the deep sense of loss of the Organization at the passing of a worldwide figure who made such a significant contribution to human welfare;
3. Decides to create a new and permanent FAO activity dedicated to the memory of Lord Boyd Orr;
4. Requests the Council at its Fifty-Ninth Session to take action as appropriate to implement such a permanent and continuing memorial to Lord Boyd Orr.
(Adopted, 25 November 1971)
B. The late Maurice Gemayel
2. She Conference paid tribute to the memory of the late Maurice Gemayel of Lebanon, Independent Chairman of the Council from 1965 to 1969, who had died in October 1970.
C. In memoriam
3. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members named below, who had died in the service of the Organization since its Fifteenth Session in November 1969:
Name
Title
Duty Station
ACOCK, A.
(Australia) Economist (World Food Programme),
Economic Analysis Division Rome, Italy
EL DEEB, Z.
(Egypt) Documents Clerk, Regional Office
for the Near East Cairo, Egypt
BELLI, L.B.
(Canada) Animal Health Officer, Animal
Production and Health Division Bogota, Colombia
GEMMA, Miss A.
(Italy) Secretary, Economic Analysis
Division Rome, Italy
GERBER, R.
(Germany, P.R. of) Rural Institutions Officer,
Rural Institutions Division Santiago, Chile
IRIARTE, J.
(Spain) Translator/Reviser, Publications
Division Rome, Italy
JANSSEN, A.C.
(Netherlands) Director, Conference, Council
and Protocol Affairs Division Rome, Italy
MCCUBIN, H.
(United Kingdom) Project Officer, World Food
Programme Taipei (Taiwan)
MCLEAN, C.W.
(Canada) Regional Economist, Economic
Analysis Division Washington D.C.,
U.S.A.
PADMINDRA, U.
(Thailand) Stock/Customs Clerk, Regional
Office for Asia and the Far East Bangkok, Thailand'
PALADINI, A.
(Italy) Guard, Administrative Services
Division Rome, Italy
PRICE, W.
(United Kingdom) Technical Officer, Agricultural
Services Division Zaria, Nigeria
REYNOLDS, Miss E.
(United Kingdom) Publications Officer,
Publications Division Rome, Italy
ROCHE, D.
(France) Forestry Officer Fez, Morocco
BARON, P.
(France) Drilling Mechanic, Land and Water Development Division Zinder, Niger
CHEN, I-gok
(China) Agricultural Statistician,
Statistics Division Maseru, Lesotho
COCHEME, J.A.M.
(United Kingdom) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Rome, Italy
DAVEY, P.L.H.
(United Kingdom) Chief, Applied Nutrition Branch,
Nutrition Division Rome, Italy
DELLA VIDA, Miss M.L.
(Italy) Operations Clerk, Rural
Institutions Division Rome, Italy
FONS, A.
(France) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Oran, Algeria
GERARD, P.
(Belgium) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production
and Protection Division San'aa, Yemen Arab Rep.
GODDARD, J.
(Canada) Forestry Officer, Forestry
Department Chisombo, Zambia
HUSSEIN, H.
(Egypt) Regional Statistical Adviser
Statistics Division Cairo, Egypt
LEBLOIS, A.
(France) Agricultural Officer, Plant Production and Protection Division Algiers, Algeria
MENNESSON, P.L.
(France) Animal Production Officer, Animal
Production and Health Division Phnom Fenh, Khmer
Republic
NIELSEN, Miss A.H.
(Denmark) Associate Expert (Food Consumption
Surveys), Nutrition Division Lusaka, Zambia
PEISSEL, G.
(France) Director, Division of External
Relations and General Services,
World Food Programme Rome, Italy
RABSON, Mrs M.
(United Kingdom) Secretary, Forest Industries and
Trade Division Rome, Italy
SIGURDSSON, G.
Rep.(Iceland) Master Fisherman, Fisheries Department Hodeida, Yemen Arab
TENTONI, R.
(Italy) Dairy Officer, Animal Production
and Health Division Rome, Italy
WILLIAMSON, J.Q.
(United Kingdom) Project Manager, Forestry
Department Santiago, Chile
ZWANKHUISSFN, Miss T.
(Netherlands) Agricultural Services Officer,
Regional Office for Africa Accra, Ghana
D. Seventh McDougall memorial lecture
4. The seventh in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, wee delivered by Norman E. Borlaug (U.S.A.), 1970 Nobel Peace Prize winner. 1
E. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1970 and 1971
5. The Chairman of the Conference presented the B.R. Sen Awards for 1970 to Pierre Alfred Lusyne (Belgium) and for 1971 to Solon Lovett Barraclough (U.S.A.). These annual awards, created under Conference Resolution 33/67, go to the FAO field officers who have contributed most to the progress of the country or countries to which they have been assigned. Mr. Lusyne had served as a fisheries training expert in India, Pakistan, Korea (as Project Manager), Peru, Indonesia and Mexico. Mr. Barraclough had served as Project Manager and Rural Institutions Officer in Chile.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
B. Appointment of the general committee and credentials committee
C. Adoption of the agenda
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
E. Admission of observers
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
6. The Council nominated, and the Conference elected I.M. Sinclair (Australia) as Chairman of the Sixteenth Session of the Conference.
7. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
T.P. Singh (India)
A.J. Mair (United States of America)
R. Gobe (Cameroon)
B. Appointment of the general committee and credentials committee
8. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
Colombia Japan
Egypt Nigeria
France Venezuela
Hungary 
Members of the Credentials Committee
Bulgaria Malta
Ecuador Nicaragua
Ethiopia Tunisia
Jordan Vietnam, Rep. of
Malaysia
C. Adoption of the agenda
9. The Conference adopted the Agenda set out in Appendix A to this Report.
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
Right of Reply
Verbatim Records
Verification of Credential
Voting Rights
Informal Meeting of Non-Governmental Organizations
10. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council, as amended by the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council and by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
11. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendation to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II ant III of the Agenda.
12. In accordance with Rules VII-1 and XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the Organization, the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council had nominated the following chairmen of the Commissions:
Comission I: Thiam (Senegal)
Comission II: H.J. Kristensen (Denmark)
Comission III: F. Hedina Ascensio (Mexico)
13. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 of the General Rules of the Organization, also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I:
J.C. Vignaud (Argentina)
S. Haidar (Lebanon)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II:
H.O. Semega-Janneh (The Gambia)
S. Sarmiento (Philippines)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III:
Soageng Amat (Indonesia)
M. Häkkänen (Finland)
14. The Conference agreed with the recommendation of the Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council that it appoint a Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission I, to inform the Commission of the salient points made by ministers and heads of delegation in their general statements. On the proposal of the General Committee, it appointed E.R. Woods (New Zealand) as Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission.
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
15. The Fifty-Sixth Session of the Council had recommended the establishment of a Resolutions Committee similar to that which hat functioned during the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Sessions of the Conference. The Conference concurred with this recommendation, and agreed that this Committee should comprise the Chairman of the Programme Committee, Finance Committee and CCLM, together with four members of the General Committee. The following four members were selected by that Committee:
Egypt Nigeria
Japan Venezuela
16. The Conference agreed to the proposal of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee should elect a chairman from among its own members.
17. The Conference approved the functions and method of operation of the Resolutions Committee, as well as the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in document C 71/17-Sup.1.
18. The Conference, however, concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that the functions to the Resolutions Committee as specified in paragraph 3 of document C 71/17-Sup.1 be amended to read as follows:
"The functions of the Resolutions Committee are to examine all draft resolutions, whatever their origin, before they are submitted to the Commissions or the plenary of the Conference for approval, unless the General Committee decides otherwise, and where desirable to revise or consolidate them, or recommend that the substance be incorporated in the text of the report.''
19. The Conference also decided that the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in paragraph 4 of the same document, be reviewed by the Council at a future session.
Right of Reply
20. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its three previous sessions to the effect that, when a delegate wished to reply to criticism of his Government's policy he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so.
Verbatim Records
21. Under FAO rules, verbatim records were kept of the Conference Plenary and Commission meetings, and the right of delegates to suggest corrections to the records was specifically mentioned (Rule XVIII-2 GRO).
22. The definition of ''corrections", and the procedure for having them inserted in the verbatim records, were the same as those adopted by the Fourteenth Session of the Conference.
Verification of Credential
23. The credentials of delegations of 119 Member Nations, including those of five newly admitted Member Nations, were found in order. The credentials of one delegation were found invalid. Five Member Nations did not send a delegation to the Conference.
24. The credentials of the Permanent Observers to FAO of the Holy See were found satisfactory,
25. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule III.2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
Voting Rights
26. The Conference recalled that under the terms of Article III-4 of the Constitution, a Member Nation which was in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization had no vote in the Conference if the amount of its arrears equalled or exceeded the amount of the contributions due from it for the two preceding calendar years. The Conference might, nevertheless, permit such Member Nations to vote if it was satisfied that the failure to pay was due to conditions beyond the control of such Member Nations.
27. The Conference noted that one Member Nation was in arrears in the amounts referred to above, and had therefore forfeited its right to vote.
Informal Meeting of Non-Governmental Organizations
28. An informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Sixteenth Session of the Conference was convened on Monday 8 November 1971 under the chairmanship of Tom S. Bavin (International Federation of Plantation, Agricultural and Allied Workers), who had been nominated by the Fifty-Seventh Session of the Council.
E. Admission of observers
Applicants for Membership
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
Applicants for Membership
29. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization hat been decided upon. These applicants were Bahrain, Fiji, Maldives, Oman, Qatar and Swaziland. The Conference confirmed the Director-General's action.
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
30. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, ant invited the representatives of these organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in an observer capacity.
31. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII.3 of the General Rules of the Organization, the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) address the Plenary of the Conference, and that statements by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) be inserted in the verbatim records of the general discussion.
<section>5</section>
V. PART I. Major trends and policy questions in food and agriculture
A. World situation and outlook
B. Perspective study of world agricultural development (PSWAD) and international strategy for the second development decade
C. World food programme
D. Second world food congress
E. Report of the FAO special committee on agrarian reform
A. World situation and outlook
Salient Features of the World Food and Agricultural Situation
Commodity Problems
Fishery Problems
Salient Features of the World Food and Agricultural Situation
a) Salient Features
b) Conference Discussion
c) Contents and Structure of "The State of Food and Agriculture"
a) Salient Features
32. The Conference noted the salient features of the world food and agricultural situation in 1970 and 1971, as reported in The State of Food and Agriculture 1971, and the up-dating information supplied by the Secretariat:
(a) World agricultural production, which in 1970 had risen by 2 percent, was likely to have increased in 1971 by between 4 and 5 percent.
(b) Production in the developing countries had continued to increase throughout the period, though unevenly as between regions and countries. It had, moreover, slowed down somewhat in 1971 compared with 1970, when it had risen by 3 percent. This reflected a smaller increase in Latin America and even certain setbacks in some countries in the Far East. The Near East and Africa, on the other hand, fared better than in 1970, though drought in some parts of both regions had caused serious food shortages.
(c) The progress in food and agricultural production in recent years had been faster in the Far East than in other developing regions, owing largely to the introduction of more advanced cereal production techniques in a number of countries. The Far East, in fact, was the only developing region which had shown a substantial increase in per caput production levels since 1967; in all other developing regions, the per caput production had either remained unchanged or fallen.
(d) The acceleration of cereal production in several countries of the Far East, and in a few developing countries elsewhere, had brought them undoubted benefits. But the basis of this improvement remained narrow, both geographically and in terms of commodities.
(e) In the developed countries, production had on the whole remained stable between 1968 and 1970, largely because of efforts in a number of countries to restrict output in response to the renewed accumulation of surplus stocks. These efforts had subsequently been relaxed, in some countries, following the easing of the stock situation in 1970. This, together with generally favourable weather, had led to a steep increase, by some 7-8 percent, in the agricultural production of the developed market economy countries in 1971. These developments showed the ability of the developed countries to make fairly flexible adjustments in their production in response to changes in the demand/supply situation, but were also evidence of the strength of the various factors in the developed countries, such as advanced technology, legislative actions and policy, supply management, and affluence, which in combination tended to push production up. While the continued rapid technological
progress in their agriculture was a positive feature from the global point of view, it tended to restrict the opportunities for other countries particularly in developing regions, to expand their production of certain commodities for export.
(f) The value of agriculturalexports had risen unusually steeply in 1970, and, although those from developed countries had risen most, a number of developing countries too, especially in Latin America and Africa, had made substantial gains. The increase had, however, been due mainly to short term factors which by 1971 had largely spent themselves. A return to a slower rate of growth was therefore likely to have taken place in the current year. Even in 1970, moreover, the international prices of manufactured goods had risen faster than those of primary agricultural products exported by developing countries.
(g) The interacting changes in production and trade in 1970 and 1971 further stressed the importance of agricultural adjustments being made within an agreed international framework with a view to better ascertaining the direction in which adjustments were likely to be needed, increasing stability of agricultural prices and production, and providing opportunities for development of production patterns reflecting comparative advantages. The short and medium-term prospects for dynamic adjustments were, however, reduced by the unpromising outlook for concessional development aid, despite the increased commitments of a number of smaller donor countries; by the recent convulsions in the international monetary economy, and the related United States temporary import surcharge; by the possible deflationary effect on other industrial countries of the trade adjustments the United States was seeking; and by the prospective enlargement of the European Economic Community.
b) Conference Discussion
33. The Conference was in broad agreement with the assessment of the situation. In particular, many delegates drew attention to the fact that, while some progress had been made in a number of countries with the introduction of a more advanced cereal production technology, the per caput level of output in developing regions had generally risen too slowly, if at all. Much greater efforts than hitherto were therefore necessary, by both the developing countries themselves, and the developed countries, as well as the international community, if agricultural production growth was to be accelerated to the growth rate of a minimum of 4 percent a year envisaged under the Second UN Development Decade. Priority areas singled out included provision of inputs, investment in irrigation and other land improvement, increased credit to farmers, improved and expanded education, and research. With regard to research the Conference noted the recent initiatives by FAO together with UNDP and
IBRD, to sponsor international research efforts, and the bilateral support to research by some countries. Attention was also drawn to the important role of population policies in efforts to solve the food problem of developing countries.
34. Several delegates stressed that the basic development goal was not merely to increase production, but also to advance the social welfare of the population, and better guarantee social justice and human dignity. Some delegates pointed out that, unless carefully implemented, plans for technological improvement in agriculture could (for instance through inappropriate mechanization of operations) result in increased unemployment and further maldistribution of incomes and wealth.
35. Many delegates thought it unlikely that the developing countries would be able to make the required effort in this area, and more generally to reach the objectives spelled out in the strategy for the Second Development Decade, unless more development assistance were provided for the purpose by the developed nations. In this connexion, attention was drawn to the loan conditions of some international financing institutions, which made their lending activities less suitable for agricultural development. A few delegates stressed in particular the need to provide aid in the form of agricultural requisites.
36. Attention was drawn by some delegates to the fact that natural calamities remained an ever present threat and an obstacle to economic growth. One delegate proposed that FAO should examine the possibility of establishing an emergency fund, or a system of agricultural insurance on an international basis.
37. In taking note of the reduction and even disappearance of surplus stocks of some agricultural products-though not rice-in the developed countries, a number of delegations pointed out the paradox whereby many developed countries had to cut down their output, while the majority of developing nations had difficulty in sufficiently accelerating their agricultural production. While stressing the importance of food aid, some delegates also mentioned the importance of using it in a way that did not hurt the growth of agricultural production in the recipient countries. One delegate drew attention to the positive step represented by the Council resolution on usual marketing requirements and hoped it would find support among Member Nations. Delegations from some developed countries said that, partly as a result of spontaneous economic and social changes, partly in response to policy measures taken by their governments, the volume of their agricultural production had ceased or was
about to cease growing. Some delegations also stressed the problems their governments faced in trying to stabilize production, because of the heavy costs involved and the complicated social and economic considerations which had to be taken into account. One delegation referred to the readjustment measures introduced recently by his country, in consequence of the marked deterioration of the market situation of some of the country's principal export commodities.
38. As regards developments in trade, a number of delegations stated that the recent developments made clear that the basic trends and tendencies in world agricultural trade had not changed. This was particularly true as regards the tendency for the prices of agricultural products to deteriorate relative to those of manufactured goods, including agricultural machinery, fertilizers, pesticides and other manufactured inputs. Intensified efforts to solve the trade problems were therefore necessary. In this connexion, some delegates expressed a view that the commodity-by-co city approach to trade problems was likely to remain the most effective. Other delegates drew attention to the potential benefits which developing countries would derive from intensified trade among themselves, particularly within regional integration schemes. Some delegates pointed out that meat production was a promising potential export industry in many developing countries, but its progress was hampered
by slow progress in the eradication of animal diseases, by import restrictions on grounds of meat hygiene, and by lack of international action to promote meat-production and exports from developing countries. The potential contribution of forest products exports was also stressed. Delegations from some land-locked countries drew attention to the special problems created by their geographical position, as regards both exports and imports, including those of agricultural requisites.
39. There was a general feeling that the closely linked problems of production and trade could be best solved in an international framework under which countries were better able to take account of the repercussions of their production decisions on each other, to plan their production and trade policies within a longer time perspective, and share the burden of adjustment more equitably. Support was expressed for the Director-General's proposal to make International Agricultural Adjustment a major theme of the Seventeenth Session of the Conference, to be held in 1973. Some delegations drew attention to the forthcoming Third UNCTAD Conference in 1972, and to the need for FAO to prepare carefully for it so as to he able to contribute to its success.
40. In a reference to the recent new elements of uncertainty in international trade, the view was expressed that developing countries should be more closely involved in the negotiations which were being carried out with a view to overhauling the international monetary system. Some delegated from both developed and developing countries voiced their concern about the potentially harmful impact on their trade of the enlargement of the European Economic Community (EEC). Delegates from present and prospective member countries of the EEC demonstrated that EEC was a dynamic trading area whose agricultural imports from outside countries had increased rapidly and expressed their conviction that this increase would continue. Other delegates claimed, however, that EEC imports from developing countries had not increased as much as those from developed countries and therefore there was need to facilitate larger imports from these countries. Attention was drawn to the negotiations now in
course with the Latin American governments on relations with EEC.
c) Contents and Structure of "The State of Food and Agriculture"
41. The Conference noted that since 1969 The State of Food and Agriculture had been prepared in two versions, a preliminary one which reached governments relatively early in the year, and a final one which was more up-to-date on developments in the current year and contained more definite information on the preceding year for reference purposes. It was agreed that these arrantements functioned well and should be continued. The Conference also noted with satisfaction the improvements in the quality of the report in recent years, as regards the timeliness and width of its coverage, and the analytical contents. In particular, the Conference welcomed the inclusion for the first time in the final version of the The State of Food and Agriculture 1971 of preliminary indicators of the level of agricultural production in the current year in each of the regions and the world as a whole.
42. Suggestions were made for increased emphasis on a number of aspects, including domestic agricultural policies, in particular structural policies; levels of consumption in individual countries; levels of and changes in farm incomes; rural employment and unemployment; relations between product and input prices, and national and international prices; terms of trade, both internationally and between the agricultural and other sectors; share of agriculture in GDP and population; and agricultural production inputs, including sail improvement. It was also suggested that, in order to throw light on the sources of supply, analyses should be prepared showing levels of per caput consumption in different countries and regions, together with information on production and trade, including trade within regions and bating areas. It was felt that the coverage of China should be expanded and improved in the future. As regards the structure of the report, some delegates suggested that it
might be useful to start the report with a section dealing with the various factors which condition the progress of production, rather than with a report on changes in production itself. Some delegates also suggested that more emphasis should be given to international trade, including data on its volume, and to the relationships between changes in production and trade.
43. It was recognized that, in order to improve the re