<title>Taking population seriously</title>
Frances Moore Lappé
Rachel Schurman
A Food First Book
The Institute for Food and Development Policy
San Francisco
Copyright © 1988, 1990 The Institute for Food and Development Policy.
All rights reserved.
First published in 1988 by the Institute for Food and Development Policy as "The Missing Piece in the Population Puzzle," Food First Development Report No. 4, September 1988.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN: 0-935028-53-6
Design: Constance King
Cover Design: Susan Galleymore
Typesetting: Access Typography
Printing: West Coast Print Center
FOOD FIRST
The Institute for Food and Development Policy (FOOD FIRST) is a nonprofit research and education center, which, since its founding in 1975, has been dedicated to identifying the root causes of hunger, poverty, and environmental degradation in the United States and around the world. Financed by thousands of members, with modest support from foundations and churches, FOOD FIRST speaks with a strong, independent voice, free of ideological formulas and vested interests.
In over 50 countries and 20 languages, FOOD FIRST provides a wide array of educational tools - books, articles, films, and curricula for elementary schools and high schools - to lay the groundwork for a more democratically run society that will meet the needs of all.
For more information about Food First publications, please write or call:
The Institute for Food and Development Policy
145 Ninth Street
San Francisco, CA 94103
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
Our colleagues at the Institute for Food and Development Policy deserve our special thanks for their excellent counsel and careful assistance in the development of this analysis: Walden Bello, Medea Benjamin, Marilyn Borchardt, Becky Buell, Joseph Colt fins, Kevin Danaher, Andrea Freedman, Susan Gallymore, Audee Kochiyama-Holman, Marshall McComb, and Ann Kelly. We also appreciate the research assistance of Heidi Beirich and Michele Mattingly.
Many others with special knowledge in this field also provided valuable comments and criticism. Our special thanks go to Will Alexander, Leon Bouvier, John Caldwell, Ansley Coale, Phillips Outright, Joel Dirlam, Joan Gussow, Betsy Hartmann, V. Parker Mauldin, Thomas Merrick, Alberta Palloni, John Ratcliffe, Robert Repetto, and Bernard Schurman. Of course our gratitude in no way suggests that our reviewers agree with our analysis.
<section>The population puzzle</section>
What do you see in this picture?
If what you see is a population "explosion," you are not alone. That's precisely what biologist Paul Ehrlich dubbed these trends in his eye-opening 1968 book, The Population Bomb. Population growth rates in the third world are historically unprecedented. The world population has doubled since 1950, with 85 percent of that growth occurring in the third world.
But what set off the population bomb? What problems does it present ? And how can we defuse it to help bring human population into balance with the natural environment? In the past twenty years, this graph of population trends has become almost a "Rorschach test" in which people have seen strikingly different answers to these critical questions.
In this report, we briefly critique several current interpretations of the population puzzle and point beyond them to an emerging alternative framework for understanding - one that incorporates unmistakable historical lessons.
We first consider the perspective of the biological determinists - those who see human population overrunning the carrying capacities of their ecosystems. We suggest why this view has been largely discredited and describe a milder version that dominates public perceptions of the population crisis is that growing numbers of people are overwhelming finite resources; the answer is obvious - reduce births.
Over the last two decades a much more useful analysis has emerged among social scientists, replacing both of these narrow views. It describes the realities of poverty and premature death that keep birth rates high. While we incorporate many of its invaluable insights here, we must dig substantially deeper to seriously confront the population problem.
In this report we seek to probe beneath the descriptive social perspective in order to examine the relationships of social power - economic, political, cultural - that influence fertility. We construct what we call the power-structures perspective, referring to the multilayered arenas of decision-making power that shape people's reproductive choices or lack of them. We use this framework to show how the powerlessness of the poor often leaves them little option but large families. Indeed, high birth rates among the poor can best be understood, we argue, as a defensive response against structures of power that fail to provide, or actively block, sources of security beyond the family. From this perspective, rapid population growth is a moral crisis because it reflects the widespread denial of essential human rights to survival resources - land, food, jobs - and the means to prevent pregnancy.
It follows from our power-structures perspective that far-reaching economic and political change is necessary to reduce birth to many children. Social arrangements beyond the family - jobs, health care, old-age security, and education (especially for women) - must offer both men and opportunity. Most important, the power of women must be augmented through expanded opportunities for both men and women. At the same time, limiting births must become a viable option by making safe and acceptable birth control devices universally available.
In seeking solutions to the population problem, we examine critical lessons from the handful of third world countries that have been exceptionally successful in reducing fertility. In each, we find our thesis reinforced: far-reaching social changes have empowered people, especially women, and provided alternative sources of income, security, and status to child bearing.
Humanity ignores such lessons at great peril. Unless we are honestly willing to confront the roots of people's powerlessness, we cannot hope to halt population growth in the future - with dire consequences for human well-being and for the biosphere itself. But the consequences are immediate as well: unwillingness to address the social roots of high fertility leads almost inexorably, we argue, to coercive, even hazardous population control strategies, jeopardizing the goal of enhanced human well-being.
Moreover, lacking an approach that addresses the problem of social power, we can expect no relief to the misery of hunger and the stress of environmental decline, regardless of success in cutting birth rates.
Finally, we challenge everyone alarmed about rapid population growth to be fully concerned not just about its impact on humanity but on nonhuman life as well.
Learning the Population Lingo
Reading the population literature, it's easy to become confused by technical terms. We hope a simple explanation of some of the more commonly used terms can help.
Crude Birth Rates. The crude birth rate, or CBR, literally measures the number of live births for every thousand women. The C1NR refers to a country as a whole or to a particular subgroup within a country. "Crude" refers to the fact that it does not take into account the age structure of a population, which greatly affects the number of births in any given year. For example, if two countries have the same number of people, but one has twice as many women of childbearing age, it will have a much higher crude birth rate. For this reason, the CBR is not directly comparable across countries, or even across time. It is often used by demographers when better measures are lacking.
Total Fertility Rates. This rate, often abbreviated as TFR, can be thought of as the average number of children that a woman will have over her reproductive lifetime. It is hypothetical in the sense that it does nor represent the lifetime experience of any particular woman or group of women, but represents a composite measure. The TFR is calculated as the sum of birth rates specific to each age group of women and assumes that each cohort's fertility will hold during the lifetime of the "hypothetical woman."
Population Growth Rate. The population growth rate is the rate at which a particular population is growing each year. It is calculated relative to a base population size (say, the population size in the preceding year), and reflects the effects of births, deaths, and migration. The current growth rate in the United States is about 1.0 percent per year.
Replacement Level. A population that is at replacement level will exactly replace itself over the course of a generation with no growth and no decline. In the industrialized countries, replacement level usually corresponds to a TFR of 2.1; in other words, each woman would bear two children, one to replace herself and the other to replace her mate. (The additional .1 births is necessary to offset a small number of infant deaths and childless women. ) In the third world, replacement levels are somewhat higher - about 2.5 - because of the higher infant death rates.
<section>The population debate</section>
<section>What set off the population explosion?</section>
The widely accepted explanation of what tripped the population wire in the third world is that a rapid drop in death rates occurred without a parallel drop in birth rates. With more people living longer, but as many babies still being born, populations began to grow fast.
While a similar shift was typical of the first stage of a transition to slow population growth in the now industrial countries, what has happened in the third world is different. The mortality decline there has been sharper than that which occurred in Western Europe and the United States, and it happened against a backdrop of higher initial birth rates.^1
What accounts for this sharp drop in deaths? Here, demographers hardly agree. Some point to the introduction of vaccines, antibiotics, and pesticides from the industrial countries; others stress improvement in education, sanitation, and nutrition.
And why haven't birth rates declined, too? They have, but not nearly enough to prevent rapid population growth in most third world countries.
But don't be too alarmed, many population experts tell us. It is only a matter of time before a decline in birth rates will mimic the decline in death rates. The world's population will thus level off or plateau, they predict, about a century from now at about 10 billion, double the world's current population.^2
We're not so sanguine. While death rates may be brought down, at least somewhat, by imported technologies or public health initiatives, birth rates are not so easily affected. They reflect intensely personal choices in response to a host of economic, social, and cultural forces. Until the forces underpinning high birth rates start to change, we doubt that it is possible to predict the timing of a human population plateau.
Some demographers share our concern. "Forget plateaus," says population specialist Phillips Cutright. Such projections are likely to be "wishful thinking," he warns.^3 And recent data confirm Cutright's skepticism. Global population is growing faster than expected because many of the most populous nations - China, India, Pakistan, Egypt, and Iran to name a few - are not following the expected pattern of a smooth and continuous fertility decline.^4
<section>Population: what's the problem?</section>
To make our own analysis most clear, let us begin with a brief outline of the main schools of thought concerning the nature of the population problem. We present three alternative perspectives and then our own.
More people - no problem perspective. To some, population growth is no threat at all. To the contrary, it may actually contribute to economic development and higher living standards.
Julian Simon, author of The Ultimate Resource, is perhaps the heat-known advocate of this position. Writing in Science, Simon argues that in industrial countries, additional people stimulate higher productivity.^5 Growing populations in third world countries also "have a positive net effect on the general standard of living," apparent only in the long term.^6 Simon and his supporters marshal largely historical evidence. If improvements in technology and productivity have surpassed growth in population so far, why not indefinitely, they ask.
While Simon's view is not widely accepted, his influence can be easily detected in recent mainstream pronouncements on population. In 1986, a report by the National Academy of Sciences downplayed population as a problem, stating that "concern about the impact of rapid population growth on resource exhaustion has often been exaggerated."^7
In our view, Simon's perspective must first be rejected on ethical grounds. It implies that the impact of population growth can be judged solely as to how it affects human well-being, ignoring any responsibility toward the integrity of the larger ecosphere. Second, its presumption that population growth isn't a problem because of infinite human ingenuity to discover replacements for any depleted resource is blind to the fact that the natural world is a delicate, interacting system, not merely an emporium of separate, replaceable parts. Simon fails to consider the possibility that our efforts to support ever larger numbers is destroying that delicate environmental balance. Because we reject this perspective's first premises, we do not examine it in depth.
People-versus-resources perspective. The much more widely held view, that which has shaped popular understanding since the 1960s, stands Simon's position on its head: people are pitted against finite resources and we're fast overrunning the earth's capacity to support us. In fact, current environmental degradation and hunger suggest that in some places we've already pushed beyond the earth's limits.
This conceptualization of the problem came vividly into popular consciousness with Paul Ehrlich's The Population Bomb, first published in 1968. Ehrlich convinced many people that fast-growing populations meant that we had reached the earth's limits to feed people. Ehrlich wrote:
The battle to feed all of humanity is over. In the 1970's the world will undergo famines - hundreds of millions of people are going to starve to death in spite of the crash programs embarked upon now.^8
In Famine 1975, published the year before Ehrlich's book, William and Paul Paddock warned that catastrophe was imminent.^9
By the 1980s, emphasis within the people-versus-resources perspective was less on the danger of humanity simply running out of land to feed itself than on the destruction of the environment by expanding populations. Ehrlich's underlying assumptions have continued to hold sway in the popular consciousness. Perhaps the most widely read expression of this view today comes from the Worldwatch Institute in Washington D.C. In a 1986 Worldwatch publication, Lester Brown and Jodi Jacobson describe the threat of continuing high rates of growth:
Our contemporary world is being divided in two by demographic forces.... In the... half where birth rates remain high, rapid population growth is beginning to overwhelm local life-support systems... leading to ecological deterioration and declining living standards.^10
According to Brown and Jacobson, in many third world countries, this process is already well under way.^11
An extreme version of this perspective is found in the work of biologist Garrett Hardin. He takes the answer to the question "What is the population problem?" a further step toward strict biological determinism. As the influential economist Thomas Malthus argued in the early nineteenth century, Hardin claims that our biology drives us to reproduce at a rate faster than our resources can sustain. Without government policies to prevent it, we are destined to overrun our resource base, with hunger the tragic outcome.^12
For Hardin, of immediate concern is not the threat of global food shortage, but population caused food shortages at the national and local levels. In his view, the populations of some countries have already overrun their biological "carrying capacities." To Hardin, Ethiopia's repeated famines clinch his case.^13 His views are now echoed by some hard-line environmentalists, like Earth First! founder Dave Foreman.
This extreme neo-Malthusian view is generally discredited. But a soft-pedaled version - still posing people against resources as the essential problem - captures considerable media attention and dominates the popular understanding of the problem today.
Much of our prior work, especially Food First and World Hunger: Twelve Myths, is a refutation of this still-influential resources-versus-people perspective. We demonstrate the illogic of seeing population as a root cause of hunger when in so many cases population density and hunger are not demonstrably related. China, for instance, has only half as much cropped land per person as India, yet Indians suffer widespread and severe hunger while the Chinese do not. Sri Lanka has only half the farmland per person of Bangladesh, yet when effective government policies kept food affordable, Sri Lankans were considerably better fed than Bangladeshis. Costa Rica, with less than half of Honduras' cropped acres per person, boasts a life expectancy - one indicator of nutrition - fourteen years longer than that of Honduras, and close to that of the industrial countries.^14 And Cuba, which leads the third world in life expectancy, low infant mortality rates, and good nutrition, has a
population density similar to Mexico's, where hunger is rampant.
This lack of a clear link between population density and hunger (highlighted in table 1) is a strong rebuttal to the people-versus-resources conception of the problem. Many other factors beyond sheer numbers obviously determine whether people eat adequately; among them are whether or not people have access to land to grow food, or have jobs providing them with money to buy it.
The same simplistic formulation must be rejected when it comes to environmental destruction. An obvious example is the ecological havoc now being wrought in the Brazilian Amazon. The slash and-burn agriculture of Brazilian peasants often gets the blame. But if land in Brazil were not the monopoly of the few - with 2 percent of the landowners controlling 60 percent of the arable land - poor Brazilians would not be forced to settle in the Amazon, destroying the irreplaceable rain forest. And surely the logging and cattle ranching, also destroying rain forests, reflect not population pressure but market demand for meat and wood by better off consumers, largely in the industrial countries.
The social perspective. Fortunately, over the past two decades, an outline has emerged of a strikingly different answer to the question, "What is the problem?" It draws on the research of scores of anthropologists, sociologists, and economists. This newer perspective has taken hold in such varied institutions as the World Resources Institute, the Population Reference Bureau, the UN Fund for Population Activities, and the World Bank. In the 1980s, some from the food-versus-resources perspective, including the Worldwatch Institute, have acknowledged the findings of the social scientists.
The social perspective takes a look beneath the threat of populations overrunning resources to ask why third world populations are growing so fast, pointing to a complex interaction of economic, social, and cultural forces that keeps third world fertility high. They include the low status of women, the high death rates of children, and the lack of old-age security.
This perspective presents a powerful challenge to the people-versus-resources view in which growing populations deplete per capita resources, leading to hunger and environmental degradation. In the social perspective it is the realities of poverty that lead to both rapid population growth and hunger. High fertility becomes an effect more than a cause of poverty and hunger.
The power-structures perspective. Building on the previous work of the Institute for Food and Development Policy, in this report we seek to synthesize crucial insights emerging from this social perspective, while pushing its analysis still further.
Peeling away another layer, we ask what lies behind the poverty and insecurity keeping birth rates high. In answering, we add a critical dimension without which we believe it is impossible to understand population patterns: power. By this we mean, very concretely, the relative ability of people to have a say in decisions that shape their lives, from those decisions made at the family level to those that are international in scope.
How society distributes power determines which human rights are acknowledged and protected. We find it most fruitful to view the varied forces keeping birth rates high as aspects of a systematic denial of essential human rights - understood to include not only political liberties, but access to life-sustaining resources and to educational and economic opportunity.
In our common search for solutions, we challenge all who are beginning to grasp the true social - rather than biological - roots of rapid population growth to follow through on the logical consequences of this deeper analysis. Unfortunately, it is in defining solutions that the promising social perspective falls flat. It describes the link between poverty and high fertility, but it fails to confront the forces that generate and perpetuate poverty.
The consequences are momentous. Ignoring the social roots of hunger while still trying to reduce birth rates leads almost inexorably to more coercive birth control technologies and programs that jeopardize people's health and self-determination.
Finally, we call for a shift in the entire debate about the population problem to incorporate insights emerging from environmentalists and from the land stewardship movement. Drawing on ancient insights from diverse cultures, they point to our much larger responsibility. We must halt human population growth not just to insure the well-being of humanity but to restore the interdependent biotic community in which we human beings must learn to see ourselves as members not masters.
<section>A power-structures perspective</section>
To understand why populations are exploding in the third world, one must come to see how choices open to people about their reproduction - those most personal, intimate choices - are influenced by structures of decision-making power. These structures include the distant arena of international finance and trade and extend downward to the level of national governments, on through the village, and, ultimately, to relationships within families.
"Power structures" is not a mysterious concept. We use it simply to refer to the rules, institutions, and assumptions that both determine who is allowed to participate in decisions and in whose interests decisions are made. The decisions most relevant to the population question are those governing access to and use of life-sustaining resources - land, jobs, health care, and the education needed to make the most of them - and contraceptive resources. (See figure 2 for a schematic representation of some of the many arenas of human relationships in which decisions are made that directly and indirectly influence fertility.)
Decision-making structures fall along a continuum from democratic to antidemocratic. By democratic we mean decision-making structures in which those most affected by the decisions participate or - at the very least - structures that include consideration of the interests of those affected. Of course, in no polity or other social institution is power shared in completely equal measure. But in our view, democratic organization exists to the extent that power is dispersed and no one is left utterly powerless. Antidemocratic structures, by contrast, can therefore be described as nonparticipatory - because those most affected have no say - or unequal.
In Western societies one tends to think of democracy as a political concept; we think of power primarily as being exercised in the political arena. Many Westerners also assume that in Marxist theory, power is perceived differently - as largely an economic struggle over control of productive resources. And we in the West also assume that because the communist state is the antithesis of political democracy, any use of the term democratic is utterly inappropriate when describing communist societies.
But why restrict the use of the concepts of power and democracy ? We find it most helpful to understand power as a critical variable in both political and economic affairs as well as in social and cultural life. And we find the terms democratic and antidemocratic - describing structures of decision-making power in a multiplicity of social institutions - most usefully applied not to societies in toto, but to the many arenas of life within societies.
It follows that we do not presume that within a society a uniform structure of power exists from the political to the economic to the social. While these varied aspects of community life interact and influence each other, asymmetry is more the norm. A society might be highly antidemocratic in the way political power is wielded but allow considerable sharing of economic control over essential resources. China comes to mind here. In contrast to most third world countries where the majority of rural people are denied control over basic resources, in China most rural people control enough land to secure their basic food needs. Even under the former collectivized system, everyone had the right to participate in economic life and share in the fruits from the land. At the same time, political leadership has not been freely chosen and people's right to political expression has not been protected.
The opposite imbalance is probably more common. In a number of societies - the United States is an example - political participation and expression are protected, but citizens' rights to economic resources essential for livelihood and healthcare are not protected. So a significant share of the population goes without enough income to provide adequate food, housing, and health care.
And while structures of economic and political power may be relatively participatory at, say, the national political level, they may remain grossly unequal at another level - for example, when it comes to relations between men and women within the family.
In what follows we apply this power-structures perspective to the population problem. Power becomes the critical variable in explaining population growth patterns. Without it, it is possible to describe conditions like poverty associated with high fertility, but not to understand them or to arrive at workable solutions. In a report of this length, however, we can only sketch how structures of power - interpersonal to international - can influence reproductive choices.
In largely agrarian societies, the most clear-cut evidence of the economic power structure is who controls farmland and who does not. Access to land determines a family's survival and security. "Without land to feed my family, I go hungry, no matter how much food the country produces," one Indian peasant explained to us.
So, we must ask what are the consequences for fertility when at least 1 billion rural people in the third world have been deprived of farmland? In many countries, including Brazil, Mexico, the Philippines, India, and most of the Central American countries, land-holdings have become increasingly concentrated in the hands of a minority during a period of rapid population growth. When the more powerful have an incentive to expand - say, to grow lucrative export crops - and have military backing, it is quite easy for them to seize the land of the less powerful. They might do it legally by calling in the loan of a heavily indebted peasant family, or, not so legally, by simply bulldozing the peasant's land and laying claim to it. The peasant family has no legal title nor lawyer to back up its claim in court.
In this context, without adequate land or secure tenure, and with no old-age support from the government or any other source outside the family, many poor people understandably view children as perhaps the only source of power open to them. For those in extreme poverty, children can be critical to one's very survival.
<section>Children: poor people's source of power</section>
Living at the economic margin, many poor parents perceive their children's labor as necessary to augment meager family income. By working in the fields and around the home, children also free up adults and elder siblings to earn outside income.
One study on the island of Java, Indonesia, for example, found children to be an extremely important asset in the rural economy. As early as age seven, a boy assumes responsibility for his family's chicken and ducks. At nine, he can care for goats and cattle, cut fodder, and harvest and transplant rice. And as early as twelve, he can work for wages. And by his fifteenth birthday, a Javanese boy has, through his labor, repaid the entire investment his family has made in him.^15 Similarly in Bangladesh, by age six a son provides labor and/or income for his family. By twelve, at the latest, he contributes more than he consumes.^16
The labor of girls is equally important. In Tanzania, one study found that girls between the ages of five and nine spend an average of three and a half hours a day working on economic activities and in the home.^17 In Peru, as in many other third world countries, girls of six and seven can be seen carting younger brothers and sisters around while their mothers are selling wares in the marketplace And on tea plantations in India, girls as young as twelve rise at 4 a.m. to help their mothers prepare breakfast and then spend up to ten hours a day in the herds picking tea during harvest time.^18
John Caldwell, a foremost theorist in population studies, criticizes his colleagues for underrating the importance of children to the village economy:
The analysis of the value of children in the village household economy often completely fails to understand the subsistence nature of village services... [In Western] societies, most... expenditure is on goods... which merely occupy space while providing services. Vacuum cleaners pick up the dust; mowers keep down the grass; washing machines clean up the dishes; hot water systems provide hot water... In a society where nearly all these consumer durables are vastly expensive and difficult or impossible to maintain, the services are largely provided by either cheap labour or more frequently by family subsistence labour.... In terms of the availability of cheap or ostensibly free labour, the farmer would be irrational who forced himself and his family to produce ever more crops for sale to buy expensive gadgets to supply the services he could get directly [from his children].^19
And children aren't assets only for people living in the countryside, Caldwell points out. Among the Yoruba in Nigeria, urban white collar families rely on many children to enhance their position through "sibling assistance chains." As one child grows up and completes school, he or she (most often he!) can help younger siblings climb up the educational ladder. Each successive child is thus in a position to get a higher-paying job. The family gets added income, status, and security.^20
Moreover, the "lottery mentality" is associated with poverty everywhere. With no reliable channels for advancement in sight, third world parents can always hope that the next child will be the one clever and bright enough to get an education and land a city job, despite the odds. In many countries, income from just one such job in the city can support a whole family in the countryside.
In nearly all third world societies, those rendered powerless by unjust economic structures also know that without children to care for them in old age, they will have nothing.^21 According to a 1984 World Bank report, 80 to 90 percent of the people surveyed in Indonesia, South Korea, Thailand, and Turkey expect to rely on their children for support in their old age.^22
In addition to providing old age security, children represent insurance against risk for many rural families, argues Mead Cain, a researcher at the Center for Population Studies in New York. Drawing on extensive experience in South Asia, Cain notes that children's financial help provide "an important me