<title>Saving the seed - Genetic diversity and European agriculture</title>
Renée Vellvé
GRAIN
GENETIC RESOURCES ACTION INTERNATIONAL
EARTHSCAN
Earthscan Publications Ltd., London
<section>About GRAIN</section>
GRAIN (Genetic Resources Action International), a non-profit, non-governmental organisation, has long been active in the issues surrounding global management and control of plant genetic resources. While most of GRAIN's work is focused on the developing countries, genetic resources and local development are critical concerns in the North as well. Since 1988, 'Conservation in Europe' has been an integral component of GRAIN's agenda for action within the NGO community. Most of GRAIN's work is devoted to raising public awareness and stimulating alternatives to combat bath genetic erosion and increasing monopoly control over the first link in the food chain, through networking, lobbying, and information activities at the international level.
For more information about how to get involved, please contact:
GRAIN
Girona 25, pral.
E-08010 Barcelona SPAIN
Tel. (34-3) 301 13 81 - Fax (34-3) 301 16 27
Email: grain@gn.apc.org
Fax: (34-3) 310 59 52
E-mail: GEO2: GRAIN
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
First published 1992 by
Earthscan Publications Limited
120 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JN
Copyright © GRAIN, 1992
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 185383 1506
Typeset by Books Unlimited (Nottm) - Sutton-in-Ashfield, NG17 1AL Printed by Biddles Ltd, Guildhord and Kings Lynn.
Earthscan Publications Ltd. is an editorially independent subsidiary of Kogan Page Ltd. and publishes in association with the International Institute for Environment and Development and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
<section>List of acronyms</section>
CAP
Common Agricultural Policy (EEC)
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CMS
cytoplasmic male sterility
COMECON
Council for Mutual Economic Aid
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DUS
'distinct', 'uniform', 'stable'
EC
European Community
ECU
European Currency Unit
EEC
European Economic Community
EUCARPIA
European Association for Plant Breeding Research
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organisation
GATT
General Agreement on Tarrifs and Trade
HDRA
Hendry Doubleday Research Association, UK
IARCs
International Agricultural Research Centres (CGIAR)
IBPGR
International Board for Plant Genetic Resources (CGIAR)
INRA
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, France
IPOs
Intellectual Property Obligations
NGOs
non-governmental organisations
ONIC
Office National Interprofessionel des Céréales, France
PAGE PACA
Patrimoine Génétique de Provence-Alpes-Côtes d'Azur, France
PBR
Plant Breeders' Rights
PGR
plant genetic resources
PR
public relations
SADCC
South African Development Cooperation Conference
TAC
Technical Advisory Committee (CGIAR)
UN
United Nations
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UPOV
Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants
<section>About this book</section>
The global nature of issues like biodiversity, tropical forests and climate change should not blur the fact that we all have to get our own houses in order. And in Europe, our house is in pretty bad shape. The environmental and social costs of our industrialised food system are becoming untenable in both the short and long term, and people - from consumers to policy- makers - are trying to find new ways around it. Genetic resources are at the heart of this problem. The vulnerability of our plants and animals, who controls conservation and breeding, what kind of choices people have in growing crops and raising livestock, are some of the questions we nerd to look at more seriously. At stake is the integrity of the food system upon which we all depend.
For as long as there have been farmers and gardeners, saving seeds has been an essential part of survival. It still is. The problem is that people have been progressively stripped of this role, while our governments hardly do a good job of conserving what are in tact our only options for tomorrow. If we are to face the challenge of adapting food production to pressures like new pests and disease, climate change or the requirements of sustainable agriculture, then we need to have access to a broad range of varieties suited to different needs. Current neglect for conserving those resources must be turned around and people's role in using and maintaining a broad spectrum of locally-adapted varieties reasserted. In this book, we focus on people's control of the genetic base of crop agriculture, a heritage developed by generations of farming and gardening families throughout Europe. But obviously, the question of developing a more sustainable agriculture, integrated with
environmental, social and political concerns, is a much broader one.
In taking this effort to print, our thanks go first of all to the people working unasked and unnoticed throughout the regions of Europe, on their farms and in their gardens, to save diverse breeds and seeds against the onslaught of uniformity. The few people we highlight in this book have shared a lot with us, and in the process have taught us quite a bit. We are grateful to each of them: Nancy Arrowsmith, Philippe Barret, Martin Bossart and Peter Raatsie, Giovanni Cerretelli and Francesca Castioni, Jeremy Cherfas, Hans-Peter Grünenfelder, Thomas Levander, Gus Lieberwerth, Jürgen Reckin and Sylvia Schmid.
We would also like to thank the people from Europe's genebank community - national coordinators and active scientists, too many to name - who provided information, personal perspectives and a better idea of the pressures they are up against. In particular we want to express our sincere appreciation to Jaap Hardon, who has done more than any other genebank director to try to wrest support for long-term conservation of genetic diversity in Europe, recognising that amateurs and NGOs have a critical role to play. Also, IBPGR staffers Pierre Perret and Mark Perry deserve acknowledgment for their generosity in handing over documentation and databases at all too numerous requests.
The editing of the drafts was taken up by close colleagues long committed to grassroots conservation and use of genetic diversity as a necessary approach to local agricultural development. Henk Hobbelink, coordinator of GRAIN, took on the unenviable challenge of turning a chaotic manuscript into something readable. Jeremy Cherfas meticulously turned the English into real English and garble into logic, while Michael Flitner, Hannes Lorenzen and Michel Pimbert made critical improvements on the arguments. These people pushed and pulled the book to its delivery.
Finally, the research, writing and production of this book would not have been possible without the financial support of those agencies which have funded GRAIN's programme over the years, of which this publication is an integral part: Catholic Fund for Overseas Development (UK), CS Fund (USA), Danchurchaid (Denmark), Dutch Ministry of Development Cooperation, Misereor (Germany), Norwegian Ministry of Environment, Novib (Netherlands), Swedish International Development Authority, Swissaid (Switzerland), Trócaire (Ireland).
Renée Vellvé
GRAIN
Barcelona, August 1992
<section>Foreword</section>
This book reflects a growing concern that in modern agriculture people are losing control over genetic diversity and the crops and varieties they grow. It analyses what is being done in Europe to safeguard genetic diversity at the levels of citizens, governments and industry. It concludes that industry, supported by government action, increasingly controls genetic diversity and its use. It highlights what concerned citizens consider to be mismanagement of genetic diversity as a cultural heritage by the modem industrial complex. Increased uniformity in farmers' fields is furthermore seen as a threat to sustainability and a threat to the rights of people who created diversity in the first place - farmers and gardeners.
The issues are well researched, giving evidence of a growing professionalism in non-governmental organisations concerned with the conservation and use of biodiversity. The book questions developments that seem intent on limiting - if not prohibiting - the involvement of ordinary people at the grassroots level in this important endeavour.
The formal institutional and industrial complex must take notice of these views. It must recognise the fact that genetic diversity serves more interests than just those of industrial agriculture. In Western Europe, our record in conserving genetic diversity is modest to say the least. There are few regions in the world other than Europe where so much original landrace material has been lost through failure of both institutional and private plant breeders to accept broad responsibility for conserving such materials when replaced by modern varieties beyond the immediate requirements of on-going breeding programmes. Even today, and in spite of Europe's reasonably progressive attitude at the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED 1992) where biodiversity was high on the agenda, genetic resources conservation in Europe continues to receive only marginal attention in the formal sector. Combined with the massive standardisation of our food system, this lack of priority
has destroyed more diversity in the past few decades here than ever before.
In the chapter aptly entitled 'Salvaging in Silence', actions undertaken by local non-governmental organisations in Europe to conserve and use old varieties are reviewed. Many of these groups found themselves up against a powerful industry intent on regulating the seed market. This was partly done to protect the interests of farmers and ensure the quality and identity of seeds offered for sale. However, at the same time, Plant Breeders' Rights and national varietal lists, strengthened by EC legislation establishing the Common Catalogue of varieties, actually outlawed conservation and use of local varieties at the grassroots level. In spite of this, concerned NGOs in many countries took it upon themselves to collect and save old varieties, to make them available to farmers and gardeners interested in more than just high yields. The argument is clear. For certain, plant breeding needs to be regulated in the interest of farmers, as a form of consumer protection. However, the
present bias towards stimulating and protecting the commercial interests of plant breeding needs to be rectified. It must leave room for alternative approaches and options for farmers and gardeners, and at the same time stimulate the use of genetic diversity rather than restrict it.
While this book deals essentially with the situation in Europe, inferences to the developing countries are clear. The same mistakes should be avoided.
The formal genetic resources system, linking ex situ genebanks with institutional and private plant breeding, and ultimately farmers, is mainly relevant to those conditions where modern varieties are adopted or for those crops covered by formal plant breeding. It leaves out farmers and gardeners who rely on landraces and on-farm crop improvement and seed production. While this group may be relatively small in industrialised countries, in developing countries this is by far the large majority and includes farmers in most centres of diversity of our crops farmers who are custodians of much of the genetic diversity that still exists.
There are numerous examples of minor crops and even major crops for limited, often more marginal and diverse, environments that will not justify - for economic reasons - costly, separate institutional breeding programmes. Under these conditions, many farmers will continue to rely on local on-farm crop improvement and seed production. This informal system should be recognised as having its own merits complementing the institutional system. It should not, as appears to be the case at present in Western Europe, be restricted by seed legislation and adverse agricultural policies.
This book provides a strong statement critical of the institutional system. Even if one does not agree with all that is said, it does suggest that there is some imbalance in the formal system that must be adjusted.
Higher productivity is essential to feed a growing world population and institutional and private plant breeding have an important role to play. However, this should not be achieved at the expense of a range of other approaches by monopolising the mandate to preserve and exploit genetic diversity.
This book deserves a wide audience. It may stimulate all those concerned with the conservation and use of genetic diversity to take a broader view. It may be particularly relevant to those in government and the Commission of the European Community who seem to have difficulty in grasping the importance of genetic conservation - and the need for joint action - in spite of the political support generated by the European Parliament for an integrated conservation strategy for the EC. Europe simply cannot afford to lag behind in contributing to the conservation of plant genetic resources if we want to maintain our access to such diversity for our future food production. The message of the book is that we need to do so in a manner whereby citizens, governments and industry alike participate in complementary and even cooperative programmes. It provides constructive suggestions to develop such activities within the context of agricultural policies, legal frameworks and research
agendas. Europe can and should take the lead in coordinated action and in providing a policy platform recognising biodiversity, and genetic resources in particular, as a global resource implying global responsibility to manage it. Time is running out. The alternative is a race to satisfy immediate needs of plant breeding and biotechnology at the expense of future options and unabated genetic erosion.
Jaap Hardon
Director
Centre for Genetic Resources, The Netherlands, Wageningen, June 1992
<section>Introduction</section>
If you stop and ask anyone walking down the street what 'genetic erosion' is, you are likely to get some furrowed brows as a response. To most people, 'genetic' has something to do with biology and those microscopic things called genes, while 'erosion' is what happens to soils and coastlines when they are washed or blown away. How on earth could genes get blown away? Yet if you go on to ask if anyone remembers something about an old and tasty apple or tomato that is nowhere to be found in the supermarkets any more, yes, that does ring a bell. What could these two questions possibly have to do with each other and why should anyone care?
Genetic erosion is in fact something like genes getting blown away - it is a violent process of replacing diversity with uniformity. Where diversity means choice, contrasts, options, alternatives and competition, uniformity means sameness, dullness, limits, dictatorships and monopolies. And the problem is not just genetic. As we destroy the resources necessary for crop production - be it our water, soils, climate or plants we are losing the means to take decisions tomorrow as to how we organise ourselves as societies. And as we passively sit and watch a few mega-corporations, like Ciba-Geigy or Sandoz, turn our farms into factories and claim patent rights on plants and animals and the technologies to manipulate them, we are ceding to them control of the food chain and the life support systems that sustain us. In that sense, this book is definitely not about ecology. It's not even about plants, although it talks a lot about them. It is about people and the political
responsibilities we have to keep options - diversity - alive.
Seeds of survival
Despite the tens of millions of plant species that exist, we depend on no more than thirty or so to feed us. Of those thirty, three cereals alone rice, maize and wheat - provide the basis of what most people eat each day. Our survival ultimately depends on theirs and vice-versa. One 'perfect' type of lettuce or barley will never be enough to supply a region or a country with the salad and animal feed it needs year after year. Plants have to evolve or they die. They cannot evolve without other plants to provide useful genes to tend off a new virus or withstand longer periods of drought as weather patterns change. In other words, plants depend on the availability of genetic diversity and that depends on us.
Plants are also an important part of our cultural survival. The crops we grow did not fall out of the sky. They are a living heritage. Generation after generation, people have been tailoring plants, watching them, learning from them and passing the good results on. Be it a certain potato that could withstand late spring frosts in Sweden or a radish that wasn't so sharp that a Spaniard would find it inedible, gardeners and farming families have created, hands-on, an incredible panorama of different crop varieties to suit their needs, customs and tastes. And in so doing they lay their story down and give that story a name, often suggesting the plant's origin or qualities. Just as stories have to be told, plants have to be reproduced - or they simply fade out of existence.
Conservation consciousness
Pandas are cute, tropical rainforests are breath-taking, but how do you mobilise people to save a carrot? It is extremely difficult unless they see and feel what is at stake. But often enough, that doesn't happen until it is too late. It was all too easy for one single fungus to wipe out Ireland's potato harvest in the 1840s, the staple food at the time, because everyone was growing a susceptible variety. Millions of people died and countless others fled the country in search of food and a livelihood. Before and since, similar scenarios have struck other crops in other lands and afflicted other peoples the world over. The message is staring us in the face: uniformity spells big risks and we are responsible for it.
In European agriculture, farmers are growing fewer crops. Of those crops, they are sowing fewer varieties. And within those varieties there is very little . . . variety! Not too long ago, most farmers were breeders themselves, experimenting, choosing, crossing, selecting and saving seeds for the next growing season. With the industrialisation of agriculture, people have lost that fundamental capacity to choose, create and control the basis of food production. It has been silently hijacked by those who are turning agri-'culture' into agri-'business' and farmers into assembly line workers. As industry replaces agriculture, so a handful of new, genetically similar 'super seeds' replaces the broad diversity of locally adapted farmer-saved seeds.
The problem is that we cannot create new seeds without the old ones. And we don't know what we will want or need tomorrow. Each variety of turnip, squash, wheat or olive that disappears means the irreplaceable loss of part of our past and part of our future. We simply cannot tell when another virus or fungus or change in the weather will bring about the loss of who knows how many hectares of farmland sown to the same uniform seeds. Under these circumstances, genetic conservation is not a consideration, it is an imperative.
Of rights and responsibilities
In the 1960s, the scientific community woke up to the dramatic plague of genetic erosion in the world's most important regions of biological diversity; the farmers' fields of Asia, Africa and Latin America. This was where most of our crops originated and diversified. And this is where the key sources of genes for future food production lie. As an emergency response, seed stores called 'genebanks' were built and collecting missions were mounted to rescue what was still left in the fields and put it in what was meant to be safe keeping for tomorrow.
In the 1970s, politicians and citizens' groups the world over realised just how fast the agrochemical industry of Europe and North America had taken over control of the seed supply, and with it the first link in the food chain. The chemical bias in breeding and farmers' loss of control over their production systems was leading to greater dependency and less sustainability. Worse, though, was the news that the companies were claiming and getting private monopoly rights over those seeds, in the form of Plant Breeders' Rights (PBR), despite the fact that farmers had put more sweat into developing the raw materials than any corporate lab technician putting on the finishing touches.
In the 1980s, it became increasingly evident that the genebank system was terribly skewed. Technically, it left a lot to be desired, as many seeds were dying in storage. Politically, it was under the control of too few desires, namely those of the rich North. At the same time, industry, increasingly fascinated by the glitter and profits to be reaped from the new biotechnologies, began lobbying for even more potent forms of monopoly rights over plants. PBR was not enough; only real patents could guarantee stronger control over markets and farmers.
As we enter the 1990s it is clear that governments and industry are doing more to create the problem than to construct the solutions. Governments use their right to destroy genetic diversity in whatever way possible. Industry claims the right legally to own whatever is left. What about people, the farmers, gardeners and consumers who created that diversity in the first place? What rights do they have? Basically none, not even the right to assume the responsibility for managing that diversity at a down-to-earth level, where it can be used and enjoyed, where it can flourish.
This book is part of the fight for that right: the right of local organisations and motivated people to regain control over plant genetic diversity and use it to build a more sustainable future. Without it, development will be meaningless and global food security ill assured even in Europe. The price we are paying for the genetic uniformity of our agriculture - which translates into escalating chemical bills, soil erosion, water pollution and farmers' dependency on industry - is all too high.
For the past couple of years, GRAIN has been looking closely at who is doing what in Europe to safeguard genetic diversity at all the different levels: citizens, governments and industry. Frankly, we are alarmed. Not so much by what has been lost already - it is not our point to mourn and grieve - but by the lack of seriousness and responsibility our governments are taking towards genetic resources management and the violent forces that are prohibiting ordinary people from participating in that vital endeavour at the grassroots level. Somehow, this state of affairs must be rapidly turned around.
This journey through the birth, decline and current mismanagement of our crop heritage in Europe shows us one important thing: that people have to regain their key position as the starting point for conservation and production. It is one thing to come to grips with the failings of our government efforts to store our genetic wealth for future needs. But it is quite another thing to discover that, against all tides, there are indeed a number of people out there taking into their own hands the imperative to use and maintain our crop heritage alive. These people are not cultivating museums, as many of their governments are. Moved by the loss of what are valuable plants, they are managing diversity in day to day gardening and farming: growing it, nurturing it, working with it and enjoying it. In so doing, they are preserving what are in fact our options for tomorrow: ours as ordinary people, not as governments, with the responsibility to design a more sustainable food system.
The farmers, gardeners and citizens' groups contributing to this unknown effort in Europe are salvaging both our past and our future in silence. Their work goes unseen, unrecognised, unsupported and unvalued. Picking up the work where the official sector is going wrong, they are the hidden but fundamental cornerstone of securing a better future for agriculture, one which doesn't just exploit but maintains and rebuilds constantly. Bringing conservation back into production and actively supporting such hands-on work with genetic diversity at the grassroots level are becoming more urgent than ever.
<section>1. The making of a heritage</section>
Today's gardeners cannot possibly comprehend the amount of history contained in their seeds, both what has come before and what may potentially come after their brief involvement.
Suzanne Ashworth, seed saver, 1991 (1)
To some, genetic diversity is a 'genepool', an immense supply of raw materials to be tapped for making crops grow, like the oil wells of Saudi Arabia make cars run. To others, it is the full spectrum of all that is different, unique, vast and interesting; the range between yellow and black potatoes. To yet others, it is a living history of what their grandparents and great grandparents grew, either on the same plot of land or half a world away. Actually, genetic diversity is all of these things at once: a moving mixture of the past and the future, a source of wealth and fertility, a coloured tableau of nature's possibilities and culture's limits. It would seem impossible to adopt one single attitude towards the complexity of life forms and forces surrounding us. Diversity simply has no face value. Depending on whatever aspect moves you most about it, you can be nostalgic, intellectual, scientific, spiritual, profit-hungry, or simply concerned about survival.
At the bottom line, when we confront the spread and depth of the diversity of plants that have fed, housed, clothed and cured people all through our existence, we cannot escape that awesome confrontation with time and space. Over an unimaginable number of years plants have evolved and co-evolved with the people who used them; their history and ours, their destiny and ours are intertwined. The open-ended array of soils they have grown in, the hands they have been cared for by, and values they have been fashioned to serve - the diversity of our crop plants is a direct reflection of the diversity of our cultures.
One way we like to look at it is to call it a heritage. That is a word loaded with all sorts of legal, political and ethical implications. But it is also a simple and powerful one. The ancient Romans called it patrimonium, from pater (father). It was used to designate that which was inherited from your father to be transmitted to the next generation, a chain of transmission that could not be interrupted. It was used precisely to distinguish between those goods that could be exchanged for their current monetary value, and those things that had a deeper, inalienable family and community value.
Plants definitely fall into this category, although maybe we should rename it matrimonium, since in many societies throughout history saving seeds, nurturing wild plants and breeding new crop varieties was largely carried out by women. Plants are a fundamental part of the chain of life that keeps this planet going and the diversity within them is the key to their survival. Some of that diversity has evolved through the changing pressures of the environment, but much of it is the result of continuous generations of people tampering with it and passing it on. We will never be able to measure how much credit goes to 'either side', but there is certainly a part of both. In this sense, genetic diversity is both a natural and cultural heritage that has to be transmitted for the sake of survival. Calling genetic diversity a heritage is not only recognising the role plants play in the chain of life, but also opens up the question as to who is responsible for keeping that chain
intact and extending it.
<section>Taming the wild</section>
People were not always farmers and gardeners. Agriculture, in fact, is a rather modern enterprise. Only about ten to fifteen thousand years ago did people start settling down and figuring out new ways to control their food supply. Before then, men and women sustained themselves and their families through gathering, hunting and fishing. Ten to fifteen thousand years might seem a long time ago, but if you consider that there have been people on this planet for perhaps five million years, it's clear that agriculture was historically invented yesterday.
Most of our ancestors did not bother 'growing' plants. They picked them from their surroundings: berries, grains, vegetables, nuts and roots. Food was abundant and populations were small. Many people were nomads, roaming at their own pace to and from areas particularly rich in plant and animal diversity. Others were more sedentary fisherfolk, living on seafood and the plants that grew near watershores, estuaries and riverbanks. The move to settle down and take on the quite different task of cultivating plants did not happen overnight. It must have been a gradual process that probably took place at more or less the same time in various parts of the world: China and southeast Asia, the Middle East, the Andes and parts of Africa. In the wetter tropical zones of Asia and Latin America, the first crops to be domesticated were probably roots and tubers, such as yams or potatoes. In the arid and semi-arid regions, like southwest Asia, cereals such as barley were probably the first
food crop grown.
The logic of cultivating plants around a village or settlement was in most cases probably not driven by hunger. Nor did crop cultivation totally replace the art of gathering, which remained, and still remains today, a source of food for many people. At the same time, it should be recognised that not every society has taken on sowing or hoeing at all. Various groups in Australia, Africa and the Americas still get by hunting and collecting food.
Many of the plants that people first went out of their way to nurture were useful for specific needs: religious and social ceremonies; painting, dyeing, weaving; making tools, containers and utensils; constructing fences or houses; making medicine, poison, beverages or cosmetics; extracting oils, providing animal feed, and so on. In fact, plants that could fulfil more than one purpose probably received more attention than others. Sorghum was grown early on in Africa to provide not just the dinner meal but also forage for animals, syrup for drinks, stalks to make brooms, popping seed for amusing snacks and flower heads for ornamental decorations (2). Cannabis, or hemp, was one of the first crops people cultivated in Eurasia. When it reached China around 2500 BC it was used for fibre, before its narcotic properties were exploited in India later on (3). Over in Brazil, manioc (or cassava) was used to provide toxins to poison arrowheads for game hunting and to kill fish in
streams before people figured out how to detoxify it and cook it (4). In Europe, many of the cereals we grow for bread or fodder today were first venerated as sacred plants associated with the gods Demeter and Ceres, and had a primary role in medicine (5).
But nurturing a plant is not the same thing as domesticating it. Many plants are 'cultivated' without being fully 'domesticated'. They may be weeds, wild plants, or crops undergoing adaptation towards domestication. They may be simply tolerated, actively protected or actually sown and harvested. Small-scale farmers and household gardeners 'work with' wild and semi-domesticated plants in many ways, even today. Truly domesticated plants are those that have been so severely pressured and harnessed to fit a habitat and production system, that many of them could not survive outside of that context. For example, maize and triticale are generally considered human creations. No wild form of maize has ever been found, although perennial relatives exist in Mexico, and the crop is dependent upon people to survive. Triticale is a forced combination of rye and wheat, that probably never would have crossed in nature.
In fact, while all of our crops were developed from wild plants, most passed through the phase of being a weed before they were harnessed as a crop. Rice was probably a weed in the flooded taro fields of southeast Asia before it was domesticated and grown for its nourishing grain. Wild oats were introduced into Africa and the Mediterranean as a weed associated with other cereals before they were harnessed for food and fodder. The same holds for rye in Central Europe. Potatoes, carrots and onions all have weed forms that occupy territories where there is little competition.
The differences between wild and domesticat