<title>Biological Monitoring: Signals from the Environment</title>
Hermann Ellenberg et al.
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE , a Division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1991
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE - stands for German Appropriate Technology Exchange. It was founded in 1978 as a special division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH. GATE is a centre for the dissemination and promotion of appropriate technologies for developing countries. GATE defines "Appropriate technologies" as those which are suitable and acceptable in the light of economic, social and cultural criteria. They should contribute to socio-economic development whilst ensuring optimal utilization of resources and minimal detriment to the environment. Depending on the case at hand a traditional, intermediate or highly-developed can he the "appropriate" one. GATE focusses its work on three key areas:
- Dissemination of Appropriate Technologies. Collecting, processing and disseminating information on technologies appropriate to the needs of the developing countries; ascertaining the technological requirements of Third World countries; support in the form of personnel, material and equipment to promote the development and adaptation of technologies for developing countries.
- Research and Development: Conducting and/or promoting research and development work in appropriate technologies.
- Environmental Protection. The growing importance of ecology and environmental protection require better coordination and harmonization of projects. In order to tackle these tasks more effectively, a coordination center was set up within GATE in 19X5.
GATE has entered into cooperation agreements with a number of technology centres in Third World countries.
GATE offers a free information service on appropriate technologies for all public and private development institutions in developing countries. dealing with the development, adaptation. introduction and application of technologies.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
The government-owned GTZ operates in the field of Technical Cooperation. 2 200 German experts are working together with partners from about 100 countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America in projects covering practically every sector of agriculture' forestry, economic development, social services and institutional and material infrastructure. The GTZ is commissioned to do this work both by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and by other government or semi-government authorities.
The GTZ activities encompass:
- appraisal technical planning, control and supervision of technical cooperation projects commissioned by the Government of the Federal Republic or by other authorities providing an advisory service to other agencies also working on development projects
- the recruitment, selection, briefing, assignment, administration of expert personnel and their welfare and technical backstopping during their period of assignment
- provision of materials and equipment for projects, planning work' selection, purchasing and shipment to the developing countries
management of all financial obligations to the partner-country.
Deutsches Zentrum fur Entwicklungstechnologien GATE
in: Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
P. O. Box 5180
D-6236 Eschborn
Federal Republic of Germany
Telephon: (06196) 79-0
Telex: 41523-0 gtz d
Fax: (06196) 794820
A Publication of Deutsches Zentrum fur Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE
A division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
The authors
Prof. Dr. Uwe Arndt, University of Hohenheim, Institute of Plant Ecology. Ecotoxicologist, working on plant ecology, ecophysiology, ecotoxicology, ecology of emmisions.
Dr. Rainer Bretthauer, University of Constance, Faculty of Biology. Biologist, working on physio-chemical and biological analysis of running and standing waters, bioindication, biomonitoring, restoration of water bodies.
Dr. rer. net. Hermann Ellenberg (born 1944). Biologist, having worked extensively on population ecology of wild ungulates (roe deer), raptors (gosshawks) and passerine birds (magpies).
Prof. Dr. Barbara Ruthsatz, University of Trier, Institute of Geobotany. Botanist, having conducted studies in biology, ecology and plant science.
Prof. Dr. Lore Steubing, Justus-Liebig-University of Gielßen, Institute of Plant Ecology. Plant ecologist, having worked on various fields of environmental pollution.
Translated from the German by Gregory Woods-Schank
Cover: Dorsi Germann
Die Deutsche Bibliothek - CIP-Einheitsaufnahme
Biological monitoring: signals from the environment; a publication of Deutsches Zentrum fur Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE, a division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH / Hermann Ellenberg et al. - Braunschweig: Vieweg 1991
ISBN 3-528-02302-3
NE: Ellenberg, Hermann; Deutsches Zentrum für
Entwicklungstechnologien <Eschborn>
The author's opinion does not necessarily represent the view of the publisher.
All rights reserved.
(c) Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, Eschborn 1991.
Published by Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Braunschweig Vieweg is a subsidiary company of the Bertelsmann Publishing Group International.
Printed in the Federal Republic of Germany by Lengericher Handelsdruckerei, Lengerich
ISBN 3-528-02302-3
<section>Foreword</section>
You have acquired a publication dealing with bioindicators. It provides an overview as to the data on the environment which they can supply, and how to interpret those data. With a complex, technical-sounding topic such as this, one might well ask: What use are bioindicators in development cooperation? And the question would appear legitimate.
For several years, environmental impact assessments (EIAs) have been conducted in a growing number of countries. This instrument provides information on the anticipated effects of a project on the environment. What is particularly important in this context is to establish whether and to what extent the natural environment in which the project is to be launched can withstand those impacts.
Unfortunately, the rich body of scientific knowledge already on hand is far from reaching the point where all the effects of all substances and all interventions on all living organisms (plant, animal, man) have been established. It will be many decades before that point is reached - and even then the knowledge we have will be incomplete.
One way of observing the effects of substances is through bioindicators. This publication is designed to give the reader an overview of the type of information which bioindicators can provide, what inferences can be made on the basis of that information, and how those inferences can be put to good use.
In producing the work a deliberate attempt has been made to avoid language which is too "scientific", in order to make the book more readily accessible to readers not yet familiar with the field. Sit back and enjoy the rich diversity of nature and the signals which she sends out to us. Discover too that in your immediate sphere, in your field of activity the appropriate instruments to monitor the environment have still to be found. Perhaps doing so will spur you on to study in greater depth the complex topic of bioindicators, and to put some of the latest findings into practice.
You will find more than enough references to specialized literature in the reference sections. And should you have any further questions, then please feel free to contact the authors or the staff of GATE at GTZ.
Finally, a word of gratitude to the authors of the various contributions which make up this work. Without their commitment and patience the book could not have been produced.
Brigitte Baumer
Project advisor at the Environmental Unit of GTZ
<section>Introduction</section>
With the growing environmental problems in both the industrialized and the developing countries, suitable methods are needed for monitoring of the environment and pollution levels. In view of the inherent limitations on what can be learned from discrete physicochemical measurements, and because of the practical difficulties which these must overcome in developing countries, it is important to investigate whether "bioindicators" could be used alternatively and/or as a complementary approach for environmental monitoring in tropical and subtropical ecosystems. The aim of this volume is, accordingly, to search for possibilities and to point out approaches which could be used in future to identify and give greater consideration to ecological restraints that must be obeyed by development projects. In this context, toxin related problems are not the only aspect deserving of attention.
By necessity, each of the following articles represents nothing more nor less than an expression of the well-founded opinions of an individual who has been concerned with the topic at hand for a lengthy period of time. It would go beyond the scope of this book to include either a comprehensive discussion of individual aspects with consideration of all of the relevant publications, or a synthesis of all five papers. We have endeavored, above all, to point out possibilities. They are intended to give the reader inspiration and ideas, if he or she is involved in dealing with the consequences which human activities have for the environment and environmental monitoring.
Nearly all of the experts contacted have made generally acknowledged contributions to the use of bioindicators for specific applications. However, most of these men and women have expressed basic skepticism and disapproval towards attempts to indiscriminately generalize biological monitoring techniques that have proven their worth under specific environmental conditions. In particular, they have reservations towards the attitude that biological monitoring is primarily a relatively inexpensive method of monitoring temporal and spatial trends in environmental change. This attitude may be justifiable up to a certain point, provided that precisely defined field and laboratory methods are available. However, this is normally the case only after lengthy and staff-intensive research work, often involving intensive use of expensive equipment, has already been performed. Knowledge derived from such efforts exists in only a small number of countries. There is an even greater lack of
essential prerequisites in many developing countries compared to some industrialized nations, especially as concerns knowledge of species and their natural history.
The most urgent task thus appears to be the establishment of and continuous support for research teams whose members possess knowledge of regional sociological, economic and ecological factors, as well as an extensive theoretical background. Even in Central Europe, few such research groups exist. They have already been publishing their results for many years, pointing out the irreversible ecological changes which could be brought about within the space of just a few human generations. Yet it was not until fairly recently that their warnings began to be taken seriously, and for this to happen political movements at the so-called grassroots level have had to force our so-called leaders to increasingly take them into account in their well-meant planning and forecasts.
Politics, industry, legislation and the classical natural sciences are all dominated by the belief that it is fundamentally possible to demonstrate clearcut relationships between causes and effects. The sad truth is, however, that monofactorial causal relationships are rare in ecosystems. As a consequence of this, ecologists usually look upon scientific results differently than the above-mentioned groups. From their experience with complex, highly intricate ecological structures, ecologists tend to take a cautious, perspicacious and reserved approach to things. Only in exceptional cases can the immediate effects, and much less the long-term impact, of direct and indirect intervention in ecosystems be predicted or demonstrated with the certainty and clarity demanded by politics, industry and legislation.
In societies that are characterized by competition, vacuums - even those of an argumentative nature - are quickly occupied by groups of individuals whose actions are governed first and foremost by what is likely to further their own personal advantage. This is no different in nature; no unoccupied ecological niches are left vacant for idealistic reasons there either. Instead, if at all possible they are filled and exploited. The yardstick for measuring the success of such "action" in nature is whether the organisms in question manage to produce young that are in turn capable of reproduction. At the limits of the capacity of a biotope to support a given species, this aim is striven for by the parent generation with enormous expense of energy, and is accompanied by losses in the next generation that are difficult to accurately predict in any specific instance. Even the most highly specialized "C strategist" ) maximizes the number of its offspring as far as possible under the
given circumstances.
It can thus be seen that a number of practical problems are urgently in need of solution in order to permit a consensus to be reached by all concemed on the results of ecological research. Optimization of the future limits to be placed on utilization of natural resources is something only human beings can strive for, and then only if understanding of ecological relationships goes hand in hand with the achievement of compatible behavior at the sociological, economic and political levels. If the individual is to preserve the high status which has hitherto been awarded to him in human society, then this cooperation must be put into practice much more effectively than has been the case in the past. In nature, by contrast, need and misery are everyday events.
The author would like to thank Dr. PLUSCHKE and with him GATE and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, who organized this project, for giving him the opportunity to present his points of view here. He also had occasion to personally visit and/or hold lengthy telephone conversations with a large number of experts in these and related fields. In addition to all of the authors of this volume, I owe special thanks to the following persons:
Prof. Dr. H. BICK, Bonn; Dr. R. BRANDL, Bayreuth; Prof. Dr. E.F. BRUNIG, Hamburg; Prof. Dr. Heinz ELLENBERG, Gottingen; Dr. Lutz FAHSER, Hamburg; Dr. habil. E.J. FITTKAU, Munich; Dr. H. JUNGIUS, IUCN/WWF, Gland, Switzerland; Dr. JUNK, Plon/Manaus; Prof. Dr. G. KAULE, Stuttgart; Prof. Dr. H. KLINGE, Plon/Manaus; Prof. Dr. R. LEWIS, Saarbrucken; Dr. C. MARTIN, WWF Switzerland, Zurich; Prof. Dr. H.-J. v. MAYDELL, Hamburg; Dr. U. NAGEL, WWF Switzerland, Zurich; Dr. H. PAPKE, Julich; Dr. Joseph REICHHOLF, Munich; Prof. Dr. K.-F. SCHREIBER, Munster; Prof. Dr. H. SCHWOERBEL, Constance; Dr. W. STOEPPLER, Julich; Prof. Dr. H. ZWOLFER, Bayreuth.
These contacts, study of current literature, and travel for the purpose of this project took place for the most part during the fall and winter of 1984/85. This is also true for the majority of the coauthors. Only Dr. Bretthauer, the limnologist, was later invited to present a contribution on his field of specialization. The authors' papers were discussed at two workshops, in 1985 and early 1988, organized by the GTZ. Appropriate coverage of the literature up to about 1984 has been achieved in the majority of the contributions. Updating was possible only in some cases. Nevertheless, the main lines of thinking and of practical work developed and diversified particularly rapidly during the late seventies and early eighties, most of which are referred to by the authors. Therefore we think that a publication today is worthwhile in that it may encourage readers the world over to focus their interest on the dwindling natural resources of life. It is hoped that it will stimulate
them to ask questions as to how to become aware of and monitor change and the impacts of pollution in ecosystems, and how to help nature persist and recover in spite of growing human populations and so-called developments in technology and agriculture which all too often burden our ecological environment, the environment which at the same time is the basis of our lives.
<section>Bioindicators and Biological Monitoring</section>
by Hermann Ellenberg
<section>1. Abstract</section>
"A bioindicator is a related group or community of organisms whose occurrence or an easily detectable trait of which can be so closely correlated with certain environmental conditions that it can be utilized as a pointer or quantitative test." - In this article, the attempt is made to present the interrelationships between the environment and indicators within the context of ecosystems in an easily understandable manner. In doing so, examples are provided, concentrating on the biological monitoring "levels" of the ecosystem and the biocenosis, and on the "levels" of populations and individuals. Higher and lower reference levels - e.g. those of landscapes and biomes, organs, cells, biochemistry and genetics - are dealt with here only peripherally, without ignoring the fact that ecosystemic relationships and thus also biological monitoring by no means exist only within isolated levels, instead running across all of the defined reference levels, and secondly keeping in mind
that the other authors of this volume (ARNDT, BRETTHAUER, RUTHSATZ and STEUBING) concentrate on other aspects not treated here.
As far as possible, examples are presented to thoroughly illustrate the use of changes which pollutants released into the environment cause in vegetation and vascular plants, these representing the basis for other life forms, and of phenological mapping for agricultural land-use planning. Shifts in the competitive relationships among individuals and populations provoked by anthropogenically induced modifications in environmental conditions are recognized as being essential factors. If correctly interpreted, they can reveal organisms suitable for use as bioindicators. A lengthy section is devoted to the use of birds as biomonitors of environmental pollution. Here, the attempt is made to demonstrate that, with appropriate standardization, well-defined "environmental specimens" are suited for monitoring of patterns and trends of impact or pollution, integrating by their way of life entire spans of time and geographical areas. These living organisms may be particularly
well-suited for interpolation between high-input physicochemical measurement stations (which nevertheless are necessary for "calibration" of bioindicators). The future risks of continued pesticide application in agriculture and to combat disease vectors are also dealt with; here, development of resistant strains, undesirable side effects at all ecosystem levels, and the availability of soil, water and air for sustained use are the crucial parameters.
The general theses advanced in this article can be roughly paraphrased as follows:
- Certain bioindicators can be absolutely quantified by calibrating them with physicochemical measurements. However, it is vital not to allow biological monitoring techniques to remain restricted to physicochemical residue analysis. This would rob them of their unique nature and of the possibilities which they offer for providing much-needed and frequently called-for independent evaluations.
- Bioindications - i.e. that which is indicated by organisms used for biological monitoring - can only be correctly interpreted and predicted on the basis of thorough understanding of ecosystems.
- Understanding of ecosystems must be derived from knowledge of species, and from local measurements and experiences.
- Working groups with an extensive theoretical background must be established to compile and process local and/or regional ecological data, and long-term support must be given to them. This is not primarily a research task; above all, it is important in connection with development cooperation in the developing countries (and, to a large extent, in the industrialized countries themselves).
- For the good of all, greater environmental awareness must be achieved in the face of powerful egotistical national end group interests. In view of the urgent necessity to cease squandering and destroying the world's natural resources, isolated and time consuming pilot projects are not enough.
- With each year that passes without taking action, the organizational effort required to establish such a "fire brigade" grows. Yet, we have at our disposal here a unique opportunity to link idealism and economic interests in the pursuit of similar goals for the good of the greater whole.
- Human intervention in and utilization of ecosystems are not only causing the balance to shift in their intricate structure of assimilation, predation, parasitism and dissimilation, but are also and above all endangering the continued survival of those organisms that are relatively long-lived and large in size and which reproduce at a slow rate among animals, the risk is greatest to those that roam over large areas. Biological monitoring with and of such organisms is therefore of overriding priority, especially since human beings - although themselves relatively long-lived and large in size - are only available to a limited extent for experiments and specimen collection of all kinds.
<section>2. The situation</section>
LIFE IN ECOSYSTEMS IS NOT
"NECESSARY" BUT "POSSIBLE" ....
..... IF AND/OR WHERE FUNDAMENTAL
REGULATORY PROCESSES ARE IN OPERATION
Basically, life need not necessarily exist if and/or where certain fundamental regulatory processes are in operation, but these are nonetheless prerequisites for it, without which life would be impossible. Within an ecosystem, energy, matter and information carriers interact in an intricate web of processes (see Figure 1). Changes in one compartment necessarily induce reactions, i.e. changes, in others. From an economic point of view, this can entail changes which are positively assessed, but it can also detract from or even endanger the usefulness of ecosystems, populations or individuals. Not infrequently, it is quite difficult to detect spatial and/or temporal trends in the network of interacting ecological factors amidst the regular, episodic or catastrophic oscillation of individual factors. The rate at which changes take place in ecosystems is also modified by adaptation and selection processes at the levels of individual and population. Our understanding of the
processes involved is, at best, only partial, and the search for keys to the workings of ecosystems tends to focus on those few aspects that are known, although in many cases their discovery has been accidental. The difficulties are compounded by the fact that one and the same problem can appear in a different light depending on the point of view and perspective (Figure 2). Consequently, any contribution towards solving a specific problem, including scientific endeavors such as ours, is inevitably one-sided. A synthesis must be sought at the sociopolitical level, as I have already stressed above in the introduction.
<section>3. The problem</section>
Biological monitoring can be described as any method that makes use of the reactions of life at any level - from the subcellular dimension to entire biocenoses - for identifying and/or characterizing substances and energy cycles in its environment. In this sense, biological monitoring is nothing more than a new word for more or less well known practices (STOCKER 1981). For this reason, STOCKER would like to restrict the concept of "bioindication" to the measurable reactions of biota to anthropogenically induced changes in environmental conditions. I believe that this narrowing of the concept goes too far. For certain applications it may be a feasible definition (e.g. studies of environmental pollution), but it excludes monitoring of ecosystems in their natural state.
This can be illustrated by the following example: the phenology of plants, i.e. the science of the interrelations of climate and periodic biological phenomena such as budding, flowering, etc. of fruit trees can be applied to characterizing the growing conditions in greatly varying landscapes. According to STOCKER's definition, however, only those fruit trees can truly be used for biological monitoring that grow inside of a human settlement, in front of a house wall on which the sun shines, or in a cold air mass which has accumulated alongside a road or an elevated railway line, and consequently blossom earlier or later relative to the "unmodified" microclimate in the same area.
As a rule, destruction of forests goes hand in hand with the disappearance of rare forest animals. The opposite occurs only in exceptional cases: namely those in which the disappearance of rare animals dependent on certain forest structures causes the demise of these same structures.
Here is an example from Central Europe: in order to find large, old oaks, it is not usual to begin by searching for the rare middle-spotted woodpecker (Dendrocopos medius); however, when middle-spotted woodpeckers - which in Central Europe are strongly dependent on old oaks with their thick, furrowed bark - are demons/ratably absent, in spite of the fact that such trees occur over a large area, investigation of the causes of their absence can sometimes lead to an improved understanding of ecological interreactions.
From a practical point of view, bioindicators or indicator species are sought which permit conclusions to be drawn on the situation or changes in ecosystems, providing information that would be difficult to obtain and quantify in any other way, or at least not as easily, as quickly, or as cheaply.
<section>4. Definitions</section>
At a meeting of experts held by the German Research Society (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) in May 1975, the following definition, proposed by ELLENBERG sen., was discussed and agreed upon:
"A bioindicator is a related group or community of organisms whose occurrence or an easily observed behavioral trait of which can be so closely correlated with certain environmental conditions that it can be utilized as a pointer or quantitative test."
This definition is likely to satisfy both practitioners and discerning observers. Nonetheless, it calls for observable facts to be corroborated by measurements or experiments.
REMMERT (1978) introduces two additional demands to the discussion when he writes (p. 232):
"The basic biochemical processes are the same in [many] organisms, and as a result it seems reasonable to utilize organisms as bioindicators that react faster than human beings to environmental toxins, and which therefore can be used to detect changes in the environment induced by human activities which could become dangerous to the human beings themselves."
Providing that the term "environmental toxins" is not understood too narrowly, this definition appears to me to be usable, especially with regard to the topic of this article (see introduction). However, REMMERT's definition lacks a number of important aspects which are covered by the first definition.
As already mentioned above, STOCKER, a highly reputed East German theoretician and expert on nature conservation, defines "bioindication" in a particularly narrow manner: "a time-dependent, sufficiently sensitive indication of anthropogenic or anthropogenically modified environmental influences with the aid of changed parameters (measurable attributes) of biological objects and systems in relation to defined reference conditions." Accordingly, he defines bioindicators as "biological objects, compartments and ecosystems that provide bioindications." I have already expressed my views on these definitions in the previous chapter.
A concise and easily grasped definition was attempted by Paul MULLER in 1980. According to his interpretation, biological monitoring (bioindication) involves "the decoding of the information content of biosystems for the purpose of evaluating a given space or domain." Apart from its failure to mention monitoring through time or possibilities of utilizing test organisms, this definition would appear to be broad and apt. Nevertheless, it has the drawback of lacking the practical dimension which is clearly expressed in the definition accepted by the German Research Society, although this very lack could be positively interpreted by some researchers: an understanding of the interactions and structures of ecosystems must be the basis for the practical use of bioindicators and biological monitoring. This aspect is also incorporated into the definition of the German Research Society. We therefore give preference to it.
<section>4.1 Relationship between the "environment" and "indicators"</section>
An essential component of any attempt to define bioindications or biological monitoring is that it must stress a clear correlation between the environmental attribute under study and the reaction of the studied organism on the one hand, and that the organism and/or the changes which it undergoes must be relatively simple to detect. An important prerequisite for the success of biological monitoring itself is that the specific working goal in each case be clearly and precisely formulated. "Environmental quality" for example, a concept which represents the sum total of a large number of isolated assessments, is a much too diffuse objective for scientifically practiced biological monitoring. The many subjective evaluations which this objective calls for must be derived from the political domain, including the politics of individuals or the researchers themselves.
If, however, biological monitoring is only possible on the basis of painstaking and expensive studies, then there is little demand for it. Besides being very time-consuming and requiring a great deal of patience, such studies must rely on a high degree of commitment and substantial financial support as well. Many researchers have often managed this all by themselves - this has occurred much more often in Central Europe, Scandinavia, Great Britain, Japan, Canada and the United States than in most of the developing countries of the dry and moist tropics, in which up to very recently only a relatively small number of research teams - predominantly from the first-mentioned countries have conducted relevant studies. Yet, much too little use seems to have been made even of their results and experience.
We are convinced that many of the goals of environmental assessment and monitoring could be achieved more efficiently than by elaborate research programs with expensive test equipment' namely by following these two steps:
1. Arranging of meetings between experts with the aim of elaborating clearly defined approaches.
2. Consulting and employment of individuals with relevant expertise and experience. These are often able to recognize and demonstrate connections, causes and effects on a broader basis - in the geographical sense as well - than could ever be achieved by technologically oriented programs. A small number of measurements performed at critical points can then be enough to confirm the statements made by such experts or to tie them into an absolute frame of reference.
We are aware of the particularly great difficulties confronting many developing countries in the search for persons with such thorough knowledge of species and biocenoses. The only possible answer is to train more such persons, to /et them gain experience, and to grant them continuous support.
The economic exploitation of areas and entire regions by human beings is normally governed by the seeming objectivity of economic or political "givers" and "compulsions". Until quite recently, for all practical purposes only a few "callers in the dark" were engaged in calling attention to ecological considerations and interconnections. The land-use and settlement policies practiced by Brazil in the Amazon basin, for example, or Indonesia's resettlement program in Borneo (transmigrasi) are creating more problems than they solve in both the long and the short term, because fundamental facts about the general nutrient poverty of the soils and their extremely low capacity for capturing and holding introduced nutrients have been given too little consideration by the governme