<title>Biogas plants in animal husbandry</title>
Uli Werner/Ulrich Stöhr/Nicolai Hees
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE , a Division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1989
<section>Foreword</section>
Biogas plants have become something of a permanent fixture in Technical Cooperation between the Federal Republic of Germany and partners in developing countries. Dating back to 1977, the first such projects were incorporated into cooperative efforts with Indian and Ethiopian organizations. At about the same time, the first GTZ project dealing solely with the transfer of biogas technology and the construction of biogas plants was launched in Cameroon.
In the meantime, GTZ has assisted in building and commissioning several hundred biogas plants in Asia, Africa, South and Central America. While most of the systems, in question are on a small scale intended to supply family farms with energy and organic fertilizer, some large-scale systems with the capacity to generate more than 100 m³ of biogas daily have been installed on large stock farms and agroindustrial estates.
In general, biogas technology is for rural areas. In addition to generating energy, biogas systems help stimulate ecologically beneficial closed-loop systems in the agricultural sector while serving to improve soil quality and promote progress in animal husbandry. Consequently, the promotion of biogas technology is regarded as an integral part of technical cooperation in rural areas and, hence, as a key sector of development cooperation on the part of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Within the GTZ, biogas activities center on
- the Biogas Extension Program (GATE), with interdisciplinary teams of extension officers presently working in four different countries:
- the Special Energy Program (Mineral and Energy Resources Division), with rural energy-supply projects now ongoing in ten countries, and
- projects engaged in by Division 14(animal production, animal health and fisheries), within which the importance of biogas technology as a flanking measure in animal husbandry is steadily increasing.
By concentrating the engineering and operational experience gained in numerous biogas projects, this handbook is intended to serve project practicians and advisors as a valuable practical guideline with regard to technical, agricultural and socioeconomic aspects.
Deutsche Gesellachaft fur Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
Authors' Foreword
Biogas plants constitute a widely disseminated branch of technology that came into use more than 30 years ago in Third World countries. There are hundreds of thousands of simple biogas plants now in operation, and each one of them helps improve the living and working conditions of people in rural areas.
While this guide deals only with biogas systems of simple design, the technology is nonetheless sufficiently complex and rewarding to warrant one's close attention to its proper application, planning and construction. The only good biogas system is a well-planned, carefully executed and properly functioning one that fulfills its purpose.
This guide addresses the planners and providers of stock-farming and agricultural-extension services in developing countries. It is intended to serve as:
- a source of information on the potentials of and prerequisites for biogas technology,
- a decision-making and planning aid for the construction and dissemination of biogas plants
- a book of reference for information on practical experience and detailed data.
While consulting experts, extension officers and advisors with little experience in biogas technology will find this guideline useful as an initial source of information, biogas practicians can use it as a hands-on manual. The tables and engineering drawings contained herein provide standard values for practical application. They were compiled from numerous extraneous and proprietary works of reference and then modified as necessary for practical use. The informational content draws chiefly on the latest know-how and experience of numerous associates involved in the various biogas projects of the GTZ Special Energy Program and the GATE/GTZ Biogas Extension Program, of L. Sasse and a great many Third World colleagues and, last but not least, OEKOTOP's own project experience.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank all of our colleagues for their cooperation and the constructive criticism that attended the writing of this handbook. Our appreciation also to GATE and the GTZ division Animal Production, Animal Health and Fisheries, who made this guideline possible. Special thanks also to Klaus von Mitzlaff for the section on gas-driven engines and to Uta Borges for her special elaboration of the aspects economic evaluation, social acceptance and dissemination.
We wish every success to all users of this guide. Feedback in the form of suggestions and criticism is gratefully welcomed.
The OEKOTOP Authors
<section>1. An introduction to biogas technology</section>
Biogas technology
. . . is a modern, ecology-oriented form of appropriate technology based on the decomposition of organic materials by putrefactive bacteria at suitable, stable temperatures. A combustible mixture of methane and carbon dioxide, commonly referred to as biogas, develops under air exclusion (leaving behind digested slurry) in the digester - the heart of - any biogas plant.
To ensure continuous gas production, the biogas plant must be fed daily with an ample supply of substrate, preferably in liquid and chopped or crushed form. The slurry is fed into the digester by way of the mixing pit. If possible, the mixing pit should be directly connected to the livestock housing by a manure gutter. Suitable substrates include:
- dung from cattle, pigs, chickens, etc.,
- green plants and plant waste,
- agroindustrial waste and wastewater.
Wood and ligneous substances are unsuitable.
Biogas guideline data
Suitable digesting temperature:
20 - 35 °C
Retention time:
40 - 100 days
Biogas energy content:
6 kWh/m³ = 0.61 diesel fuel
Biogas generation:
0.3-0.5 m³ gas/m³ digester volume x day
1 cow yields:
9-15 kg dung/day = 0.4m³ gas/day
1 pig yields:
2-3 kg dung/day = 0.15 m³ gas/day
Gas requirement for cooking:
0.1-0.3 m³ /person
for 1 lamp:
0.1-0.15 m³ /h
for engines:
0.6 m³/kWh
A simple 8 - 10 m³ biogas plant produces 1.5-2 m³ and 1001 digested-slurry fertilizer per day on dung from 3-5 head of cattle or 8 - 12 pigs. With that much biogas, a 6 - 8 person family can:
- cook 2-3 meals or
- operate one refrigerator all day and two lamps for 3 hours or
- operate a 3 kW motor generator for 1 hour.
Of the many alternative forms of agricultural biogas systems, two basic types have gained widespread acceptance by reason of their time-tested reliability and propagability:
- floating-drum plants with a floating metal gasholder,
- fixed-dome plants with gas storage according to the displacement principle.
The main difference between the two is that the biogas generated in a fixed-dome plant collects in the domed roof of the digester, while that produced in a floating-drum plant collects in a metal gasholder. The gasholder, the purpose of which is to cover peak demand, is directly hooked up to the consumers (kitchen, living quarters, refrigerator, motor generator, . . .) by way of pipes.
Plant construction is effected with as much local material as possible, i.e.:
- bricks, rocks, sand, cement for the digester,
- metal or plastic tubes for the gas pipes,
- metal for the gasholder,
- gas valves, fittings and appliances.
Target groups and applications
The prime field of application for biogas plants is family farms, particularly those engaging in animal husbandry. Also, biogas plants are a proven successful means of disposal for wastewater and organic waste. Differentiation is made between the following groups of users:
- Small and medium-sized farms equipped with family-size plants (6-25 m³ digester) use biogas for cooking and lighting. The installation of a biogas plant usually goes hand in hand with a transition to either overnight stabling or zero grazing. The modified stabling, coupled with the more intensive care given to the animals, improves the quality of animal husbandry as an inherent advantage of biogas technology.
- Specialized stock-farming operations involving the medium to large-scale production of cattle, pigs and/or poultry can use medium-to-large biogas systems with digester volumes ranging from 50 m³ upward. The resultant safe disposal of fresh manure is a real contribution toward environmental protection, particularly with regard to the prevention of water pollution. Moreover, that contribution is rewarding for the farmer, too, since the biogas constitutes an autonomous source of energy for production processes.
- For agroindustrial estates and slaughterhouses, the pro-biogas arguments are similar to those mentioned above in connection with stock farms: safe disposal of potentially hazardous solid and liquid waste materials, coupled with a private, independent source of energy for generating electricity, powering coolers, etc.
- Biogas plants in schools, hospitals and other public institutions provide a hygienic means of toilet/kitchen-waste disposal and a low-cost alternative source of energy. Schools in particular can serve as multipliers for the dissemination of information on biogas.
Gas appliances
A number of Third World manufacturers offer specially designed cooking burners and lamps that operate on biogas. Standard commercial cookers and lamps can also be converted to run on biogas.
Diesels and spark-ignition engines can be fueled with biogas following proper modification; diesel engines prefer a mixture of biogas and diesel fuel. Biogas-fueled refrigerators, though not very efficient, are attractive alternatives for hospitals, schools and restaurants without electrification.
Slurry utilization
The digested slurry from biogas plants is a valuable organic fertilizer, since most of the main nutrients (N, P, K) are preserved. In areas where regular fertilizing is uncommon, the use of digested slurry for that purpose requires intensive counseling of the farmer. Biogas technology can play an important role in self-sustaining ecofarming.
The advantages of biogas technology
. . . for the user consist chiefly of direct monetary returns, less work and various qualitative benefits.
The monetary returns consist mainly of:
- savings on kerosene, diesel fuel, bottled gas and, possibly, wood or charcoal,
- an additional energy supply for commercial activities,
- savings on chemical fertilizers and/or additional income from higher agricultural yields.
The qualitative benefits are:
- easier, cleaner cooking and better hygiene,
- better lighting during the evening hours,
- energy independence,
- improved stock-farming practice,
- good soil structure thanks to fertilization with digested sludge.
The regional and overall domestic significance derives from the following merits and aspects:
- development of a reliable, decentralized source of energy operated and monitored by the users themselves,
- less local deforestation,
- improved conditions of agricultural production,
- more work and income for local craftsmen,
- infrastructural development,
- expanded indigenous technological know-how.
While the absolute figures corresponding to the above effects may often be marginal as compared to the overall economy; they nonetheless have a noticeable impact within the project region.
Cost of construction, amortization
As a rule, it costs DM 1000 or more to install a masonry biogas plant, including all peripheral equipment, i.e. improved stabling, gas appliances, piping, etc. A favorable payback period of less than 5 years can be anticipated for such an investment, if the biogas is used in place of a commercial energy source like kerosene or firewood, but not if it is used as a substitute for "free" firewood.
Dissemination of biogas technology
Thanks to the broad scale of potential uses for biogas, in conjunction with an increasingly advanced state of technical development' numerous developing countries are intensively promoting the dissemination of biogas plants. The undisputed leaders are the PR China (4.5 million plants), India (200 000 plants) and Brazil (10 000 plants). Other countries also have launched biogas dissemination programs with some or all of the following components:
- development of appropriate appliances and plants,
- establishment of technology and advisory-service centers,
- continuous support for the users,
- training of biogas practicians,
- advertising and promotional activities,
- assistance for private craftsmen,
- provision of financing assistance.
Criteria for the utilization of biogas technology
Building a biogas plant is not the kind of project that can be taken care of "on the side" by anyone, least of all by a future user with no experience in biogas technology. The finished plant would probably turn out to be poorly planned, too expensive and, at best, marginally functionable - all of which would disappoint the user and spoil the prospects for the construction of additional plants. Consequently, the following rules of thumb should be observed:
- There are workable alternatives to biogas technology:
Regarding energy: energy-saving cookstoves, afforestation, wind/solar energy, small-scale hydropower, etc.; better access to commercial energy supplies
Regarding fertilization: spreading or composting of fresh dung
Regarding animal husbandry: pasturing instead of stabling in combination with a biogas plant.
Any decision in favor of or against the installation of a biogas plant should be based on due consideration of how it compares to other alternatives according to technical, economic, ecological and socioeconomic criteria.
- Both the available supply of substrate and the energy requirements must be accurately calculated, because the biogas plant would not be worth the effort if its energy yield did not cover a substantial share of the energy requirements.
- The system must be properly built in order to minimize the maintenance & repair effort.
- Siting alternatives must be painstakingly compared, and only a really suitable location should be selected for the biogas plant.
The financial means of the plant's user must not be overextended (risk of excessive indebtedness).
<section>2. A planning guide</section>
<section>2.1 Introduction</section>
This guide to planning is intended to serve agricultural extension officers as a comprehensive tool for arriving at decisions concerning the suitability of locations for family-size biogas plants. The essential siting con-ditions capable of influencing the decision for or against a biogas plant are covered (cf. figure 2.1 for a summary survey). The detailed planning outline (table 2.1) has a `'data" column for entering the pertinent information and a "rating" column for noting the results of evaluation.
Evaluation criteria
+ Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable, but
a) compensable by project activities,
b) not serious enough to cause ultimate failure,
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfiable
Information on how to obtain and evaluate the individual data can be found in the corresponding chapters of this manual by following the pointers provided in the "reference" column. .
Despite its detailed nature, this planning guide is, as intended, nothing more than a framework within which the extension officer should proceed to conduct a careful investigation and give due consideration, however subjectively, to the individual conditions in order to arrive at a locally practical solution. By no means is this planning guide intended to relieve the agricultural extension officer of his responsibility to thoroughly familiarize himself with the on the-spot situation and to judge the overall value of a given location on the basis of the knowledge thus gained.
2.2 Detailed Planning Guide
Table 2.1: Detailed planning guide for biogas plants
Item
Reference
Data
Rating
0. Initial situation
Addresses/project characterization
Plant acronym:
Address of operator/customer:
Place/region/counky:
Indigenous proj. org./executing org.:
Extension officer/advisor:
General user data
Household structure and no. of persons:
User's economic situation:
Animals: kind, quantity, housing:
Crops: types, areas, manner of cultivation:
Non-agricultural activity:
Household/farmincome:
Cultural and social characteristics of user:
Problems leading to the "biogas" approach
Energy-supply bottlenecks:
Workload for prior source of energy:
Poor soil structure/yields:
Erosion/deforestation:
Poor hygiene . . ., other factors:
Objectives of the measure "biogas plant"
User interests:
Project interests:
Other interests:
1. Natural / Agricultural conditions
Natural conditions
Chapter 3.1
Mean annual temperature:
Seasonal fluctuations:
Diurnal variation:
Rating:
+ o -
Subsoil
Chapter 3.1
Type of soil:
Groundwater table, potable water catchment area:
Rating:
+ o -
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfable
Water conditions
Chapter 3.1
Climate zone:
Table 3.1
Annual precipitation:
Dry season (months):
Distance to source of water:
Rating:
+ o -
Livestock inventory, useful for biogas
Chapter 3.2/3.3
production
Animals: kind and quantity:
Type and purpose of housing:
Use of dung:
Persons responsible for animals:
Rating:
Vegetable waste, useful for biogas production
Chapter 3.2/3.3
Types and quantities:
Prior use:
Rating:
+ o -
Fertilization
Chapter 3.4
Customary types and quantities of fertilizer/areas fertilized:
Organic fertilizer familiar/in use:
Rating:
+ o -
Potential sites for biogas plant
Chapter 3.3
Combined stabling/biogas plant possible:
Distance between biogas plant and livestock housing:
Distance between biogas plant and place of gas consumption:
Rating:
+ o -
Overall rating 4
+ o -
2. Balancing the energy demand with the biogas production
Chapter 4
Prior energy supply
Chapter 4
Uses, source of energy, consumption:
Anticipated biogas demand (kWh/day or l/d)
Chapter 5.5.3
for cooking:
Table 5.17
for lighting:
Table 5.20
for cooling:
Table 5.22
for engines:
Chapter 5.5.4
Total gas demand
Chapter 4.1
a) percentage that must be provided by the biogas plant:
b) desired demand coverage:
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfiable
Available biomass (kg/d) and potential gas production (l/d)
Chapter 3/4
from animal husbandry
Table 3.2
...pigs:
Table 3.5
...poultry:
Table 4.3
...cattle:
Figure 5.2
Night soil
Table 3.2
Vegetable waste (quantities and potential gas yield)
Table 3.3
Table 3.5
Totals: biomass and potential gas production
Chapter 4.2
a) easy to procure:
b) less easy to procure:
Balancing
Chapter 4.4
Gas production clearly greater than gas demand = positive rating (+)
Gas demand larger than gas production
= negative rating (-); but review of results in order regarding:
a) possible reduction of gas demand by the following measures
b) possible increase in biogas production by the following measures
If the measures take hold:
= qualified positive rating for the plant location (o)
If the measures do not take hold:
= site rating remains negative (-)
Overall rating 2
+ o -
3. Plant Design and Construction
Chapter 5
Selection of plant design
Chapter 5.3
Locally customary type of plant:
Arguments in favor of floating-drum plant:
Chapter 5.3.1
Arguments in favor of fixed-dome plant:
Chapter 5.3.2
Arguments in favor of other plant(s):
Chapter 5.3.3
Type of plant chosen:
Selection of site
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfiable
Availability of building materials
Bricks/blocks/stone:
Cement:
Metal:
Sand:
Piping/fittings:
Miscellaneous:
Availability of gas appliances
Cookers:
Lamps:
Overall rating 3
+ o -
4. Plant operation / maintenance / repair
Chapter 7
Assessment of plant operation
Chapter 7.1
Incidental work:
Chapter 7.2
Work expenditure in h:
Persons responsible:
Rating with regard to anticipated implementation:
+ o -
Plant maintenance
Chapter 7.3
Maintenance-intensive components:
Maintenance work by user:
Table 7.2
Maintenance work by external assistance:
Rating with regard to anticipated implementation:
+ o -
Plant repair
Chapter 7.4
Components liable to need repair:
Repairs that can be made by the user:
Repairs requiring external assistance:
Requisite materials and spare parts:
Rating with regard to expected
repair services:
+ o -
Overall rating 4
+ o -
5. Economic analysis
Chapter 8
Time-expenditure accounting
Chapter 8.2
Time saved with biogas plant
Table 8.1
Time lost due to biogas plant
Rating:
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfiable
Microeconomic analysis
Chapter 8.3
Initial investment:
Table 8.2
Cost of operation/maintenance/repair:
Return on investment:energy, fertilizer, otherwise:
Payback time (static):
Table 8.3
Productiveness (static):
Rating:
+ o -
Quality factors, useful socioeconomic effects and costs
Chapter 8.5
Useful effects: hygiene, autonomous energy, better
lighting, better working conditions, prestige:
Drawbacks: need to handle night soil, negative social impact:
Rating:
+ o -
Overall rating 5
+ o -
6. Social acceptance and potential for dissemination
Chapter 9
Anticipated acceptance
Chapter 9.1
Participation in planning and construction:
Integration into agricultural setting:
Integration into household: .
Sociocultural acceptance:
Rating:
Establishing a dessemination strategy
Chapter 9.2
Conditions for and chances of the professional craftsman approach:
+ o -
Conditions for and chances of the self-help oriented approach:
+ o -
General conditions for dissemination
Project-executing organization and its staffing:
Chapter 9.3
Organizational structure:
interest and prior experience in biogas technology:
Regional infrastructure for transportation and communication:
material procurement:
Craftsman involvement, i.e.
Chapter 9.4
which activities:
minimum qualifications:
tools and machines:
Training for engineers, craftsman and users:
Chapter 9.5
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied/not satisfiable
Proprietary capital, subsidy/credit requirement
on the part of
Chapter 9.6
user:
craftsmen:
Rating:
+ o -
Overall rating 6
+ o -
7. Summarization
Siting conditions
No.
Rating
Natural/agricultural conditions
+ o -
Balancing the energy demand and the biogas production
+ o -
Plant design and construction
+ o -
Plant operation/maintenance/repair
+ o -
Economic analysis
+ o -
Social acceptance and potential for dissemination
+ o -
Overall rating of siting conditions
+ o -
Ratings: + Siting condition favorable
o Siting condition unfavorable but compensable and/or not too serious
- Siting condition not satisfied / not satisfiable
Following assessment as in table 2.1, the biogas-plant site in question can only be regarded as suitable, if most of the siting factors have a favorable (+) rating. This applies in particularly to item 2, the positive energy balance, meaning that the potential biogas production must cover the gas demand.
If the favorable and unfavorable ratings are fairly well balanced, the more decisive factors should be re-evaluated to determine the extent to which supplementary measures could provide the missing conditions for building and operating a biogas plant despite some reservations but without injustifiable effort. Then, if the overall evaluation does not swing toward the positive side, the plant should not be built. If the site is given a favorable rating, further planning hints can be taken from the following checklist.
<section>2.3 Checklist for building a biogas plant</section>
1. Finishing the planning, i.e. site evaluation, determination of energy demand and biomass supply/biogas yield, plant sizing, selection of plant design, how and where to use the biogas, etc., ail in accordance with the above planning guide.
2. Stipulate the plant's location and elaborate a site plan, including all buildings, gas pipes, gas appliances and fields to be fertilized with digested slurry.
3. Draft a technical drawing showing all plant components, i.e. mixing pit, connection to stabling, inlet/outlet, digester, gasholder, gas pipes, slurry storage.
4. Preparation of material/personnel requirements list and procurement of materials needed for the chosen plant:
- bricks/stones/blocks for walls and foundation
- sand, gravel
- cement/lime
- inlet/outlet pipes
- metal parts (sheet metal, angle irons, etc.)
- gas pipes and fittings
- paint and sealants
- gas appliances
- tools
- mason and helper
- unskilled labor
- workshops for metal (gasholder) and pipe installation.
5. Material/personnel assignment planning, i.e. procedural planning and execution of:
- excavation
- foundation slab
- digester masonry
- gasholder
- rendering and sealing the masonry
- mixing pit
- slurry storage pit
- drying out the plant
- installing the gas pipe
- acceptance inspection.
6. Regular building supervision.
7. Commissioning
- functional inspection of the biogas plant and its components - starting the plant
8. Filling the plant.
9. Training the user.
<section>3. The agricultural setting</section>
<section>3.1 Natural parameters for biogas plants of simple design</section>
Climate zones
A minimum temperature of 15 °C is required for anaerobic fermentation of organic material (cf. chapter 5.1). Since simple biogas plants are unheated, they can only be used in climatic zones in which the minimum temperature is not fallen short of for any substantial length of time. In general, this is true of the area located between the two tropics, i.e. in the geographic region referred to as the "Tropics".
In the climatic sense, however, the Tropics are inhomogeneous, containing various climatic zones with their own typical forms of vegetation and agricultural practices. Proceeding on that basis, it may be said that a particular zone does or does not qualify as a "biogas zone'' (cf. table 3.1).
With the exception of subtropical arid regions (deserts and semideserts), all tropical climates are characterized by:
- increasingly small diurnal and seasonal temperature variation in the direction of the equator,
- decreasing annual rainfall and number of humid months with increasing distance from the equator.
This basic zonal breakdown, though, is altered in several ways by other climatic factors such as wind, elevation and ocean currents. Consequently, the climatic zones serve only as a basis for rough orientation with regard to the climatic evaluation of potential sites for biogas plants. The locally prevailing climatic conditions are decisive and must be ascertained on the spot.
Table 3.1: Climatic zones and their suitability for biogas plants (Source: OEKOTOP)
Climatic zone
Factors of relevance for biogas generation
As biogas zone:
Tropical rain forest
Annual rainfall > 1500 mm;unfavorable
temperature fairly constant at 25-28 °C; little animal husbandry due to various diseases, i.e. scarcity of dung; vegetable waste from permacultures and gardening
Wet savanna
Water usually available all year (rainfall: 800-1500 mm), livestock farming on the increase, integral farms (crop farming + livestock)
favorable
Dry savanna
Short rainy season, long dry season; most livestock pastured, but some integral farming
possible
Thornbush steppe
Short rainy season (rainfall: 200400 mm) extensive-type pasturing (nomads, cattle farmers), dung uncollectable; shortage of water
unsuitable
Dry hot desert
unsuitable
Soil conditions
Since the digesters of simple biogas plants are situated underground, the temperature of the soil is of decisive importance. It depends on the surface structure, the type of soil and the water content. The soil temperature usually varies less than the air temperature, e.g. tropical soils show nearly constant temperature at a depth of 30-60 cm. Due to lower absorption, the temperature amplitude of light soils is smaller than of dark soils. Since moist soil appears darker than dry soil, the same applies with regard to temperature amplitude. As a rule of thumb, the region's mean annual temperature may be taken as the soil temperature in tropical areas.
For biogas plants with unlined digesters and/ or underground masonry, it is important to know the stability of the soil structure. The stability of a given soil increases along with the bedding density. Natural soils are generally stable enough for biogas plants. Caution is called for, however, in the case of alluvial and wet, silty soils. Most of the laterite soil prevailing in the tropics shows high structural stability and is therefore quite suitable for biogas plants with unlined digesters. Unlined earth pits usually become more or less impermeable within a short time, but preparatory seepage trials should be conducted in exploratory holes, just to make sure. Previous experience has shown that seepage can drop to below 5% of the initial rate within a week. In the case of large-scale biogas plants, it is always advisable to have an expert check the soil stability.
Biogas plants should never be located in groundwater, areas subject to flooding, or near wells. On the other hand, an adequate supply of water must be available in the immediate vicinity of the biogas plant, because the substrate must be diluted. If the direction of groundwater flow is known, the biogas plant should be placed downstream of the well.
<section>3.2 Suitable types of biomass and their characteristics</section>
Practically any kind of watery organic substance is suitable for anaerobic digestion. The agricultural residues and waste materials that can be used as substrate for biogas plants consist chiefly of:
- waste from animal husbandry, e.g. dung, urine, fodder residue and manure, .
- vegetable waste, e.g. straw, grass, garden residue, etc. (though such materials do not ferment well alone),
- household waste like night soil, garbage, wastewater, etc.
Solid and liquid agroindustrial waste materials, from slaughterhouses for example, and wastewater from sugar/starch processing are not gone into here, since small-scale biogas plants of simple design would not suffice in that connection (cf. chapter 6).
Waste from animal husbandry
Most simple biogas plants are "fueled" with manure (dung and urine), because such substrates usually ferment well and produce good biogas yields. Quantity and composition of manure are primarily dependent on:
- the amount of fodder eaten and its digestibility; on average, 40 - 80% of the organic content reappears as manure (cattle, for example, excrete approximately 1/3 of their fibrous fodder),
- quality of fodder utilization and the liveweight of the animals.
It is difficult to offer approximate excrement-yield values, because they are subject to wide variation. In the case of cattle, for example, the yield can amount to anywhere from 8 to 40 kg per head and day, depending on the strain in question and the housing intensity. Manure yields should therefore be either measured or calculated on a liveweight basis, since there is relatively good correlation between the two methods.
The quantities of manure listed in table 3.2 are only then fully available, if all of the anirnals are kept in stables all of the time and if the stables are designed for catching urine as well as dung (cf. chapter 3.3).
Thus, the stated values will be in need of correction in most cases. If cattle are only kept in night stables, only about 1/3 to 1/2 as much manure can be collected. For cattle stalls with litter, the total yields will include 2 - 3 kg litter per animal and day.
Table 3.2: Standard liveweight values of animal husbandry and average manure yields (dung and urine) as percentages of liveweight (Source: Kaltwasser 1980, Williamson and Payne 1980)
Species
Daily manure yield as % of liveweight
Fresh-manure solids
Liveweight
(kg)
dung
urine
TS (%)
VS (%)
Cattle
Buffalo
Pigs
Sheep/goats
Chickens
Human
Table 3.3: TS and VS-contents of green plants
(Source: Memento de l'agronome 1984)
Material
TS
VS
(% of TS)
Rice straw
Wheat straw
Corn straw
Fresh grass
Water hyacinth
Bagasse
Vegetable residue
Vegetable waste
Crop residue and related waste such as straw, cornstalks, sugar-beet leaves, etc. are often used as fodder and sometimes processed into new products, e.g. straw rnats. Con