<title>Low cost charcoal gasifiers for rural energy supply</title>
ULRICH GRAF
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE , a Division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1994
All rights reserved
© Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, Eschborn 1984.
ISBN 3-528-02076-8
<section>Foreword</section>
Supported by the German Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (BMFT), the GTZ (Division 415--Energy--Conservation of Resources and the Environment) has implemented a back-up programme to complement the technical development of small gasifiers.
This programme focussed on elaborating the non-technical criteria which need to be met for the sustainable dissemination of small gasifiers in developing countries. It cooperated closely with the research laboratory for energy conservation and environmental protection systems (FLEUS) at the University of Bremen, which was commissioned by the BMFT with the technical development of small gasifiers.
This publication presents the essential results and findings obtained in the two projects, and arising in the process of international dialogue. The potential for dissemination of this technology is limited. The publication demonstrates to interested laypersons and experts the conditions and applications under which small charcoal gasifiers can be one option for development within a range of simple energy technologies, some much more extensively tried and tested.
Eschborn, 20 August 1993
Division 415--Energy--Conservation of Resources and the Environment
<section>1. What? Gasifiers?</section>
Environmental concerns, especially with respect to a rising content of CO2 in the atmosphere, make the extensive use of fossil fuels in the future more and more suspect. But what is the alternative? Perhaps liquid hydrogen, produced with the help of photovoltaics in desert areas - but this is still speculative, like the complete energy scenario of the future is. What can be done in short terms to at least limit the increasing consumption of fossil fuels?
Energetic use of biomass is one of the options which are dicussed under the headline "renewable sources of energy". There is one basic advantage of big-energy, compared to fossil energy:
If fossil fuels are burnt (and heat production by combustion is the first step in nearly all technically relevant energy conversion processes), the carbon, stored in the coal or oil, reacts with the oxigen of the air and forms carbon dioxide. This is the reason for the steadily increasing CO[2] content of the atmosphere, together with the reduction of CO[2] sinks' represented by tropical rain forests. If harvested plant material is burnt, the combustion reaction is the same. But, the storage time of the involved carbon is much shorter. The combustion is the reverse process of the photosynthesis: The amount of carbon, assimilated during the growth period of the plant, is released as CO[2]. If the plant is replanted, the carbon cycle is closed. Thus the combustion of plants, if handled in a sustainable way, is CO[2]--neutral (apart from eventual CO[2] production by fertilizer production or harvesting machinery etc.).
It is not increased consumption of wood which is meant by energetic use of biomass. It is the more effective use of plant materials by integration of waste products of agriculture and forestry in the product line. Bio-Energy can be the result of anerobic digestion (in biogas plants), it can be represented by plant oils, alcohols, and so on. Another technology of energetic use of biomass is gasification.
Gasification means thermochemical conversion of solid plant material into gaseous components. In a few phrases, a gasifier works as follows: Air is sucked through an already ignited charcoal bed. In a first reaction layer, the oxygen in the air is reacting with the hot charcoal, resulting in carbon dioxide (the typical combustion gas). The carbon dioxide, together with the water vapour of the fuel, is reacting with the adjacent hot charcoal layer, resulting in a mixture of gases, which contains around 28% of carbon monoxide, some 8% of hydrogen, a few percent of carbon dioxide, and around 58 % of nitrogen, the latter being an inert component of the air flow into the gasifier. Only about 36% volume of the gas mixture are inflammable components, and the heating value of the mixture (approx. 4000 - 5000 kJ/Nm³, Nm³ = norm cubic meter) is not very high. But, mixed with air, the gas can be ignited by the spark plug of a standard gasoline engine, serving as an engine fuel.
Theoretically, the engine could run with 30 % power loss compared to gasoline operation, but in practice the losses are higher. As a rule of thumb, 5 kW shaft power can be expected per liter engine volume at 2500 revolutions, if producer gas (that's the name of it) is applied.
The basic chemical reactions of gasification take place in a charcoal bed. This does not mean that only charcoal can be gasified. If wood or any other dry plant matter is filled into the tank of a gasifier, the material is automatically dried and pyrolized due to the high temperatures of the combustion zone, before entering this zone. For more details, extensive literature is available [1,2].
Theoretically, any plant material with a moisture content of 5--30 % can be gasified, as the basic composition of carbon, hydrogen and oxigen is almost the same (on dry, ash free basis). That means that agricultural wastes like rice husks, straw, nut shells, and forestry residues Like branches, trunks, bark and so on are all potential gasifier fuels--but only theoretically. The physical properties of the fuel as well as the ash content are aspects which define if it is worth the effort to gasify or not.
<section>2. Gasification in recent history</section>
Gasification is not a new technology. Germany is a country with extensive historical knowledge in practical operation of gasifier powered vehicles, and a lot of literature is available from that time, which is not so long ago: It was during the Second World War, when about 350000 vehicles in Germany were running on gas. But is was not a free decision of the vehicle owners to fix a gasifier on the back of his lorry, tractor, or private car: It was ordered by the military administration in order to save fuel for the war machinery. Virtually every detail of the application of gasifiers on vehicles was regulated by the Special Department for Gas Generators (Zentralstelle fur Generatoren): The type of gasifier, the type of fuel, the fuel supply per month. Great efforts were made to concentrate gasifier manufacturing on a few, standardized types, designed for the available types of fuel (wood, charcoal, anthracite, brown coal, hard coal and peat).
Remarkable is the way of fuel standardisation: Narrow specifications were introduced to standardize particle size, content of ash, sulphur, moisture, tar and volatile components, calorific value and specific weight. Of course, the high requirements of standardization could not be met by small scale fuel production. The preparation of solid fuels was under the responsibility of a special industrial branch, directly under the command of the Central Department for Gas Generators. So, an extremely detailed, centrally organized administrative structure was necessary to realize a substantial conversion (in the order of 25 %) from liquid fuel to solid fuels.
The German experience with gasifiers was definitely not a decentralized, environmentally appropriate technology. It was an emergency technology, which disappeared a few years after the war, when liquid fuels were available again.
The renaissance of gasifiers began in the late seventies. It was the first "oil crisis" which triggered research and development in gasification, especially in those developing countries depending on oil imports. Facing the abundance of agricultural and forestry wastes in these countries, it was a logical attitude to focus on gasification of these low-value resources. But here begins the trouble: Theoretically--but only theoretically--all these plant residues can be gasified. But the extensive experience with gasifiers from World War II was acquired with wood- and coal gasifiers, and this is something completely different. The underestimation of the technical problems which arise when matter like rice husks, straw, saw dust, coconut husks, cotton stalks and so on are to be gasified, resulted in a number of insufficient design proposals and finally in a disappointment of promotors and users.
The fact that the oil prizes did not rise in the anticipated way, but to the contrary remained at low level for nearly a decade, gave the rest to gasifier enthusiasts. The job was just too tricky and not worth the effort.
Meanwhile, the interest in gasification has re-adjusted. It is not seen as a universally applicable option for energy supply, but as a component within the range of available "regenerative energies". It is a valuable supplement to photovoltaic systems, solar collectors, small hydropower systems, wind energy converters, and biogas plants. According to site specific conditions it has to be decided if an energy supply based on renewable energies is technically and economically viable or not, and whether this might be gasification or anything else. An advantage of gasifier systems is it that standard internal combustion engines (Diesel and Otto cycle) for a wide power range (1--100 kW shaft power) can be used for gas operation, and that the investment costs and life cycle costs for a gasifier are much lower than the respective costs for all other regenerative energy converters in the kW-range. A disadvantage is the necessary effort for fuel preparation and the resulting
operational costs, which can vary considerably and do in fact define the economic viability of a gasifier-engine-systems.
3. Small gasifier-engine systems for rural energy supply in developing countries
Rural areas in developing countries are commonly characterized by disperse population and a lack of infrastructure. Especially the electric grid, a symbol for industrialization and high living standard, is missing and is extremely unlikely to be installed even in medium terms of energy planning due to the large distances and the low level of industrialization. On the other hand, energy supply is a basic condition for improved living conditions and increased productivity.
Especially important is the energy supply in agriculture, for example for irrigation pumps and the various machinery for post-harvesting, including grain mills. Small scale processing machinery (small saw mills, metal workshops) are another option, and last not least it is electricity for domestic use (light, radio, television). All that can be covered by "gensets" (the combination of a combustion engine and an electric generator) of 3--20 HP (2--15 kW) shaft power, and this is exactly the power range for"small gasifier-engine-systems". Such gasifier systems do not consume excessive amounts of fuel: If firewood is available at sufficient amounts, a gasifier for village energy supply should not present a problem of fuel shortage. Even the use of charcoal as fuel is acceptable for small gasifiers. Of course, energy losses are a consequence of charcoal production. But, on the other hand, charcoal is an excellent gasifier fuel, it avoids tar formation in the gasification
process, and the sizing of the fuel particles is much easier than the respective cutting of wood. At the present state of the art, the use of charcoal as fuel is highly recommendable, if gasifier-engine-systems around or below 10 kW shaftpower are to be applied.
Two International Conferences on Producer Gas, held 1982 in Sri Lanka and 1985 in Indonesia focussed on this topic, and a substantial amount of research and development was presented at these occasions. Then, gradually, the interest faded away. That happened when the state of the art was apparently not too far away from a level, sufficient to render technically viable results. That was the point when a joint project of the
German Ministry for Research and Development (BMFT), the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the University of Bremen started. The aim of the project CHAR (CHARcoal gasifier), carried out by the "Forschungslabor für Energie- und Umweltschutzsysteme (FLEUS)" at the University of Bremen, was the development of a reliable and cheap charcoal gasifier in the power range of 2--10 kW, based on an evaluation of the existing international experience with such systems. Parallel to this project, GTZ ordered a set of studies concerning non-technical aspects of gasifier application, such as problems with handling and maintenance of gasifiers under field conditions as well as reports about existing dissemination programmes in selected countries (see [3 - 8]).
As the project started at a time when it was already obvious that the existing gasifier systems did not meet the expectations, the search for reasons for the limited success was the first step to define further research activities.
<section>4. The trouble with "field applications"</section>
<section>4.1 Weak points of gasifier-engine-systems</section>
It became obvious in the late eighties that despite the lively interest in the gasifier technology during the past 10 years no "dissemination" worthwhile mentioning had taken place. The dominant argument to explain this was the claimed "technical immaturity" of the systems. This requires some comments.
It is typical for gasifiers employed in developing countries over the last years that these systems had mainly been developed by research institutions and universities. These plants (all of them prototypes) showed technical shortcomings as soon as they were tested under the rough conditions of "field application". In the end their failure consisted of a sum of mistakes made in details, which only came to light when the favourable conditions of lab application (defined and constant fuel quality, good possibilities for repair and optimization, qualified and motivated operators) were missing: Bad bunker flow of insufficiently prepared fuel, unoptimized container geometry, fast wear of parts subjected to varying temperature, wear of scalings, problems of corrosion, insufficient gas cleaning were wide-spread defects [3].
On the basis of subsequent documentation quite often it can also be reconstructed that grave mistakes have been made in the adaptation between gasifier output and engine size (usually the cylinder volume of the engine was chosen too small, thus preventing the gasifier from reaching the necessary operating temperature). Often there also existed wrong ideas about the application purposes, to which gasifiers might generally be suited or unsuited.
More will be said on the technical aspects later in this paper. First, however, another approach is chosen. The most commonly used argument of the allegedly existing technical "immaturity" of those gasifiers available certainly often holds true for some wellknown cases, but it can no longer be accepted as the sole reason for the hitherto limited dissemination. Technical problems are almost always solvable, once they have been recognized. Meanwhile, knowledge about gasifiers should be sufficient to realize good technical performance. But still the reputation of this technology is not too good.
<section>4.2 The problem of "acceptance"</section>
If a farmer in a developing country prefers other energy technologies to gasifiers, even though this preference cannot be reasonably explained from a technical point of view, one has to ask for the non-technical reasons. In such cases "acceptance" is always quoted-- a mysterious term which circumscribes that the user does not agree to this new technology. In reality technical and non-technical reasons for a lack of acceptance can seldom be clearly separated; the one often stems from the other.
There is one trivial fact which can explain low acceptance of gasifier systems: Nothing is as convenient as an electrical socket. A household connected to the public electrical grid is already something self-understood for inhabitants of towns; for the rural population, too, it symbolizes the modern way of life in a nut-shell. Sockets in the house--this means unlimited access to energy at all times, be it for cooking, washing, ironing, providing light, or watching television.
The typical consumer--and this not only holds true in industrial nations, but in developing countries as well--does not want to take care of any technical service of his energy supply. The public energy supply of industrial nations meets this need to a very high degree: it provides energy at high reliability and acceptable costs. And just that is, what the housewife in a developing country wishes for as well. That is why all decentralized systems, and especially those based on renewable energy, have not much chance to be loved.
But: As attractive as the public electrical grid may be, for many people it will just remain a dream. It is the population of rural areas in the developing world which has to be regarded as the foremost target group for the employment of regenerative energy sources. In general, this target group has no access to the public grid, and no realistic chance ever to gain it: A low population density and a low economic significance of those concerned promise little profit to enterprises selling electricity, should they extend their supply lines to every village. And yet: if you promise people in rural areas a better life, they will, among other things, expect electricity.
Only if access to grid electricity is unrealistic, it will be sensible to ask which energy conversion system the user might prefer as an alternative. The answer can be found in the afore-said: the operating comfort should come as close to the socket as possible. Compared to other alternatives a gasifier will not have the best of chances.
The traditional alternative to the mains is an energy supply by means of local engine-generator-sets. Though an engine-driven generator supplies electricity, it is not the same as being connected to the grid: Fuel has to be bought continuously, and one always lives with the risk of having an engine failure, but not the money for repairs. In brief: one has to take care of it permanently. On top of that, due to bad road conditions and a virtually non-existing infrastructure in the rural areas of developing countries, liquid fuel is very expensive in relation to the low income of the consumers.
Apart from diesel or gasoline engines, there are not many alternatives available. Liquid fuels on biomass basis might present a future option to replace diesel, if the question of rentability could be solved.
With regard to operating comfort, a photovoltaic plant is very attractive, and as far as household illumination and small-scale consumption is concerned, photovoltaics already represent an acceptable solution for those users who are financially well-off. If, however, mechanical or electrical energy is needed for working machinery (water pumps, grain mills, machines for carpentry, and the like) that lie in the power range from 2 kW up, photovoltaics are excluded for reasons of costs.
Small hydro power and biogas plants are other site-specific options for decentralized energy supply.
A gasifier-engine-system using solid fuel, as perfect as it may be, always requires more extensive operating care than an engine run on liquid fuel. But: if not quite love, at least acceptance might arise, if a gasifier offered considerable cost advantage. As the user in developing countries finds himself chronically in a situation of permanent financial difficulties, the term "acceptance" will simply be reduced to his insight in the necessity of saving money.
From this we may derive the kind of demands which have to be put to gasifiers in order to make them acceptable. If we assume that gasifier technology has matured enough to let its operation appear not more difficult than that of other, comparable energy technologies, the potential user will have the following requests:
(1) The operation of a gasifier should have considerable cost advantages when compared to available, competitive technologies (e.g. Iiquid fuel engines).
(2) It should be guaranteed that the plant fulfills the technical requirements of the application it is intended for (or in other words: it has to be clear what a gasifier is suited for, what not).
(3) The effort for preparing the fuel, operating the system and maintaining it should be kept as low as possible.
<section>5. Lowering plant costs by ferrocement construction</section>
<section>5.1 What makes a gasifier expensive?</section>
For a small farmer in a developing country, the investment risk of installing a gasifier is normally too high when compared to the expected savings. Apart from the mere investment costs, a gasifier causes operational costs which are mainly dependent on the fuel price: Even if the basic material is free, the general costs of preparing the raw fuel in a way that makes it suitable for gasifiers have to be taken into account. Thus it is even more important that the mere investment costs for the gasifier remain as low as possible.
The system costs for a gasifier depend on two aspects: The simplicity or complexity of the design, but also to a considerable extent on the materials used. Recent considerations have shown that the latter offers the key to an economic success.
The core of a gas generator is the reaction chamber, in which the thermochemical conversion of solid fuel into usable gas takes place. In the combustion zone, temperatures of around 1200 °C are reached, and in the adjacent reduction zone temperatures between 850 and 650 °C have to be expected. These combustion and reduction zones have to be surrounded by high-temperature resistant vessel walls, that is, special steels or (most commonly) fire-resistant refractory bricks.
The rest of a gasifier unit mainly consists of vessels and pipes, that is, containers for fuel and ashes, as well as containers and pipes for gas cleaning and cooling. These vessels are traditionally made of metal. Their manufacture requires sheet forming tools and welding equipment, drilling machines, thread cutting equipment and so on, as well as skilled workshop personnel. The resulting price is oriented on the regionally common costs for labour at a metal shop. Therefore a metal system is always relatively expensive. Even the fact that in India for instance, manufacturing can be done for a fraction of the costs (converted into DM) that are involved in Germany, does not change the situation that the average income of an Indian farmer is also only a fraction of the income of his German counterpart. Thus, specific investment costs of 200 DM per installed kW for a gasifier in India may correspond to 2000 DM/kW in Germany--both values are too high for economic attractiveness.
Within the last few years only one breakthrough in manufacturing costs for gasifiers has been outlined, and this is based on turning one's back to metal constructions. As the vessels and pipes do not have to withstand any heavy mechanical strain, metal constructions--derived from the manufacture of heating systems--do not constitute a necessity. It has long been known that gasifiers can be built from brick work, but this has often posed a problem, when trying to achieve gastightness. At the AIT Bangkok Robert Reines [9] took another road when adopting the ferrocement technique, known from water tank construction and ship building technology. With this technique (which mainly implies the construction of wire armatures and wire-mesh forms which are then plastered with mortar, see fig. 5--9) it is possible to produce cylinders, tubes, lids, and so on, in any desired shape. The costs for material are lowered drastically, as merely wire, wiremesh, cement, and sand are needed. The
problem of temperature strain is solved in two ways: the reaction zone is fenced in by a heat-resistant brick cylinder, and a general cooling tub surrounds all vessels.
Based on the impressive presentation of the AIT ferrocement gasifier, given by Robert Reines on the First International Workshop on Small Scale Producer Gas Systems in Bremen, 1989, the project CHAR focussed its activities on this approach. The steps of work were
-- to gather experience with the technique of ferrocement construction
-- to evaluate the system costs under varying local conditions --to test the performance of the ferrocement gasifier as well as the performance of competitive designs --to develop criteria and recommendations for practical application.
<section>5.2 The construction of a ferrocement gasifier</section>
A typical working schedule is the following:
First week
Final check of available materials and tools, completion.
Wiring of inner cylinders, top attachments, ash ports, covers. Ordering of metal parts, to be prepared in the workshop (fuel bunker, grid, shroud). Preparation and leveling of the platform for the gasifier.
Second week
Plastering of inner cylinders and attachments. Wiring of outer tank, plastering of outer tank. Construction of refractory cylinder and refractory disc. Curing of plastered parts. Begin of assembly of the inner cylinders in the cooling tank.
Third week
Completion of final assembly, water leak proofing.
Installation of the grate and the metal shroud Installation of the engine with gas-air-mixer and gas inlet manifold adapter.
First tests of gas production, run by an electric fan.
Installation of fabric filter bags, first test runs with engine suction.
Last modifications on the gasifier-engine-genset.
Fourth week
Commissioning of the gasifier-engine-genset. Test runs with engine without load.
Demonstration of alternative starting procedures:
-- by suction fan
-- by suction manifold from engine
-- by stove mode
Demonstration to personnel in optimum operation and maintenance of the ferrocement gasifer.
<section>6. Technical performance of the ferrocement gasifier</section>
<section>6.1 Design details</section>
For a better understanding of the specific advantages of the ferrocement design, it is useful to distinguish criteria of constructive design (which can be applied in a metal construction as well) from material-specific criteria (which are typical for the application of ferrocement). It will become obvious that the ferrocement charcoal gasifier, as realized in its present form, is possibly just the first step in a different way of building gasifiers.
The gasifier of Robert Reines is a down draft gasifier with a straight cylindrical reaction zone--this is common to all conventional small charcoal gasifiers. Furthermore, it is of an ,,open core" type. That means, primary air for the reaction zone is not entering through nozzles (wall nozzles, central nozzle), but has a more or less unlimited access to the combustion zone. The open core principle has been applied so far mainly in rice husk gasifiers in down draft operation, where the flow of primary air is uniform over the complete cross section of the fuel bed. This is slightly different in the ferrocement charcoal gasifier discussed here, where the fuel bunker, closed by a top cover in a water seal, is sitting on the combustion zone. The primary air enters through a circular slit between cylinder wall and bunker rim (see fig.9). The application of this open core principle has an important impact on the technical reliability of the gasifier: The problem of disturbed bunker
flow, often reported from nozzle gasifiers, is definitely reduced, as no nozzles disturb the downward flow of the fuel column. In addition to this, the uniform temperature distribution over the cross section of the combustion zone improves the flow characteristics. As an additional effect, no nozzles can melt or flake, an effect which requires subsequent repair work in nozzle gasifiers.
The reactor cylinder in the gasifier is easily accessible by removing the bunker. This is an advantage to the refractory lining in closed metal vessels of most conventional gasifiers as it is easier to replace the refractory cylinder by another one of different diameter in order to adapt it to the engine size. In order to avoid thermal ruptures of the refractory walls, the cylinder is preferably made of three rings of three blocks each. The thermal insulation to the outer wall is made of compacted rice husk ash. According to Reines, the ash begins to melt near the refractory cylinder surface and thus seals the slits between the bricks.
Table 1: Typical performance data of the ferroment gasifier (Mean values, ar = as received) Reaction cylinder: 300 mm diameter
unity
amount
fuel input:
charcoal
higher heating value, ar
kJ/kg
fuel consumption for starting period, ar
kg
specific fuel consumption under load (10 kW)
kg/kWh
Gas components:
CO
% vol
CO[2]
% vol
H[2]
% vol
gas flow
Nm³/h
gas heating value
kJ/Nm³
gasifier conversion efficiency
engine/generator set:
engine volume
liter
engine speed
rpm
volumetric efficiency
engine/generator efficiency
power output, electrical
kW
total conversion efficiency (electrical power vs. fuel heat content)
The configuration of the reaction zone of the Reines gasifier is not determined by the application of ferrocement as main building material; it can be done in the same way in a metal gasifier [12]. It has been said already that the open core principle is not completely new in gasifier construction. It is, however, not common in small charcoal gasifiers, and it is not necessarily guaranteed that it is effective in that case. Therefore, as a first step it had to be tested wether this design was as good--or even better--than a nozzle gasifier in terms of effective conversion of solid fuel to combustible gas.
<section>6.2 Performance data</section>
In table 1, data are listed which were measured at the operation of a standardized gasifier in ferrocement construction, designed for a power range of 2--10 kW. These data are derived from test series, carried out in the laboratory of FLEUS (Bremen University). More detailled data sets can be derived from the project report for BMFT [ 12].
The performance data largely depend on the mechanical resp. electrical load, connected to the engine. The values in table I resulted when a 6-cylinder engine with 2.0 cylinder volume and a speed of 2,500 rpm was connected, linked to a 3-phase alternator powering an electrical load (stove plates).
Diagr. 1 and 2 show very clear that the "nominal operation" of the gasifier has to be defined clearly. In diagr. 1 the specific fuel consumption of the ferrocement gasifier is plotted for three load situations (2, 6 and 10 kW). At 10 kW (which is a bit below the maximum power of 12 kW, which can be reached with he 2 liter engine) the fuel consumption per kWh is much less than at the load 2 kW. This is reflected as well in the overall efficiency of the system (the relation of usable electric energy to the energy content of the fuel): The efficiency is much better on 10 kW than on 2 kW.
This tendency is obviously common to all types of gasifiers and has to be recognized:
A gasifier has a narrow range of optimum performance. A deviation from the optimum working condition results in less efficient use of fuel, less operational stability, and less economic viability.
<section>7. Derived technical demands for field application of gasifier-engine systems</section>
The following considerations are limited to stationary gas producer plants for mechanical and electrical energy supply. The use of process heat is a further important application, but is not treated here as not being within the terms of reference of the project.
<section>7.1 Issues in engine operation</section>
As soon as a hot charcoal bed is established in the gasifier and the hot combustion gases are driven by suction or pressure through the charcoal layer next to the combustion zone, gas production begins. As soon as the pipes and vessels between gas producer tank and engine inlet are filled with gas and the gas is mixed with the adequate amount of secondary air, the engine should start.
The performance of the gasifier depends first of all on the engine characteristics. The adaptation of the engine to the dimensions and performance of the gasifier (or vice versa) is essential to the performance of the complete system. The engine has the correct size, if its gas consumption (dependent on cylinder volume and revolutions per minute) in nominal operating conditions corresponds to the nominal gas production of the gasifier. Details of this correlation are often not sufficiently understo