<title>Village-Level Brickmaking</title>
Anne Beamish/Will Donovan
A Publication of GTZ Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1989
<section>Preface</section>
The authors worked in northern Mozambique with the Ministry of Public Works on a project funded by Oxfam-Belgium and CUSO/SUCO Canada, promoting the village level production of building materials such as bricks, tiles and lime. The objective of the project was to give technical advice, support and training to production cooperatives and to investigate and demonstrate improved production techniques.
It was observed that the main technical problems that brickmaking units suffered from were: poor quality, weak bricks; a high breakage rate; no standardization; and a lack of knowledge and experience of how to correctly use bricks in construction.
The poor quality and high breakage rate was normally caused by selecting inferior quality clays and/or faulty production techniques during the clay preparation, moulding, drying and firing stages.
The lack of standardization at these brick sites created all sorts of problems for masons. The brick sizes varied from small to large blocks and none were correctly proportioned for use in construction. When bricks with different dimensions were bought from various brickmakers, the builders found that it was very difficult to build a wall and large quantities of cement had to be used in plastering to level off the surface of the wall.
Brickmaking is not a technically sophisticated or complicated process, but there are certainly correct and incorrect ways of producing bricks and it does take experience and skill to produce good quality bricks. During the project, the authors found that there was a complete lack of practical and easy to understand information available for first time producers to help them gain that skill.
Over the years of working in Mozambique, a number of technical manuals were written by the authors to assist small-scale brickmaking units to produce good quality bricks. Those who used the manuals were from cooperatives, state companies, schools, district Public Works staff, development projects and individuals who had to make bricks because no other building material was available locally. Often they did not intend to continue to produce bricks indefinitely but had to produce enough bricks to build a school, clinic, dormitory, warehouse, etc., so that they could continue with their other work. Because these people were not necessarily interested in becoming full-time brickmakers and often only wanted to produce enough bricks to build a certain number of buildings, they were not interested in investing in any substantial infrastructure such as permanent kilns or costly equipment.
The information contained in those manuals has been translated and re-written in english and now forms a more comprehensive brickmaking manual.
The manual is intended for the first-time producer wishing to produce fired clay bricks on a small scale using the minimum of infrastructure and investment. For example, it is for those individuals, projects, government departments and non government agencies who find themselves in the position of having to produce their own building materials because none are available on the local market. It is also for those who intend to start producing bricks full-time to supply bricks for the local market.
It is intended for brickmakers who already produce bricks but need an easy to understand book on how to improve their production.
It is intended to be used as a training manual to accompany a practical hands-on brickmaking course.
It is also intended for those in government departments who have the role of encouraging and supporting the small-scale production of building materials and who do not make the bricks themselves but need to understand all of the practical aspects of brickmaking.
<section>Minimum Conditions Necessary To Produce Fired Clay Bricks</section>
Many countries have an abundance of the natural elements needed to produce bricks, but there are usually few areas which have all the necessary conditions within a 15 km radius of the brick site. It is essential to verify before beginning to establish a small brick production centre that all these conditions do exist. If the planned brick site lacks even one of the minimum conditions listed here, it is not advisable to establish a production centre at that site.
The ten minimum conditions that a first-time producer needs to examine very closely are:
1. Clay
2. Water
3. Sand
4. Fuel (firewood or coal)
5. Space
6. Transport
7 Motivation
8. Management
9. Tools and Equipment
10. Assistance
1. Clay
A production unit needs to have good quality clay to produce a strong brick that can be used in construction. Certain types of clay are not good for making fired bricks. For example, the clay used by a potter to make bowls and cups is not good for making bricks because it has a high shrinkage rate which causes the bricks to crack during drying.
If there is no tradition of making bricks in your area and if you are not certain that the clay you intend to use is the correct type, contact your local public works office and ask for assistance in analysing the soil. Never begin the full scale production of bricks with a clay soil which has not been thoroughly tested. In Appendix 1, there are some simple initial tests which can be done to check clay quality, but it is still recommended that you contact a knowledgeable person to assist in selecting the correct clay.
To produce 1,000 bricks per day, about 3 cubic metres of clay soil must be prepared each day. The distance between the place where the clay is dug and the brick moulding site should not be more than 200 metres.
2. Water
To produce bricks you must have water available in sufficient quantity. If you plan to make bricks during the entire dry season, check with the local population that your planned source of water (a lake, stream, pond or well) does not dry up during that time. Also make sure that the brickmaking unit will not be competing for the same water used for public bathing, washing, drinking, irrigating crops or watering animals.
To produce 1,000 bricks per day, at least 600 litres of water will be needed. You will also need to have a container to store that water in; three empty fuel drums, each with a 200 litre capacity, are ideal.
If the water is to be carried daily to the brick site by hand, the distance between the river or lake and the brick site should not be more than 500 metres.
3. Sand
Sand is used as a releasing agent during the moulding of a brick. It prevents the wet clay from sticking to the sides of the mould. It is also sometimes used as a stabilizer and mixed with very clayey soils to prevent the bricks from cracking when drying.
If sand is used as a releasing agent and must be fetched with wheelbarrows or buckets, the distance between the source of the sand and the brick site should be less than 1 km.
4. Fuel (firewood or coal)
To fire the bricks well, you will need sufficient amounts of fuel; either firewood or coal.
If you fire bricks with coal, you will need 1 1/8 sacks of coal and 1/2 sack of cinders for every 1,000 bricks. For example, to fire 20,000 bricks, you will need 22.5 sacks of coal and 10 sacks of cinders.
If you fire bricks with wood, you will need one ton or 3m3 of firewood for every 1,000 bricks. For example, to fire 20,000 bricks you will have to gather 60 cubic metres of firewood.
Because there are so few areas with forests that can meet the demands of a brick producing unit, it will be necessary to establish a woodlot to supply firewood if you plan to fire many kilns every year. Well managed woodlots can produce from 25 to 60 m, of firewood per hectare per year. In comparison, a natural forest may yield only 2 to 8 m3 per hectare per year.
Firing brick kilns will use large quantities of wood and if the cutting is carelessly done, it could lead to deforestation in your area Contact your local forestry department for advice and assistance.
If there is insufficient firewood or coal in you area, or if you are not willing to establish a woodlot, consider producing other building materials which do not need firewood or coal, such as soil-cement blocks, sand-cement blocks, or stabilized soil.
To minimize the cost of transport, the fuel should be as close as possible to the brickmaking site and should not be more than 10 km.
5. Space
You will need sufficient space to mould and dry the bricks. The site should be smooth and level. A brick unit producing 1,000 bricks per day will need an area from 600 to 1,000 square metres.
6. Transport
It is essential that a brick producing unit has some type of transport to fetch firewood or coal and possibly deliver the finished bricks to the customer. The transport used could be trucks, tractors with trailers, or oxen with suitable carts. The important point to remember, especially if the vehicles are borrowed or rented, is that the brick unit will need regular access to this transport. The amount of tune which is involved can be quite substantial, so this part must be well planned
Consider also where the brick site will be located. It should be possible for vehicles to easily enter the site and if your intention is to sell the bricks to nearby communities, the site should be located near a good access road.
7. Motivation
The production of hand-made bricks is exhausting, tedious and dirty work. Therefore, in order for a brick production unit to succeed, the workers must be motivated or want to produce the bricks. They have to feel that the making of bricks will either benefit themselves personally by earning them a fair and just salary from the sale, or benefit their village by using the bricks in the construction of a public building such as a school or clinic.
8. Management
As with any production unit or business, good management is essential. Unfortunately this aspect is often ignored or forgotten because brickmaking is considered to be a "low" or relatively simple technology. Remember that a brick production unit cannot withstand more setbacks and difficulties than a normal commercial business would be expected or prepared to tolerate.
Management of a brick unit means planning, organizing, staffing and controlling the production in order that the bricks can be produced within budget and sold at a reasonable price. This includes ensuring that:
- adequate supplies of raw materials are obtained;
- the equipment is maintained;
- suitable production facilities are available for the workers to work in safety and comfort, at a reasonable pace and for the hours allotted for the tasks;
- the quality of the product is checked regularly;
- there is a smooth flow of production;
- adequate financial arrangements are made for wages and general purchases (with a good bookkeeping system);
- suitable skilled personnel are recruited and trained; and
- the staff have specific tasks or roles and have the necessary tools and information to do the job.
9. Tools and Equipment
A brickmaking unit will need basic tools in order to make bricks. A group of 15 people producing 1,000 bricks per day will need the following minimum equipment:
6 hoes
2 pick axes
4 shovels
4 axes
4 machetes
2 wheelbarrows
3 empty fuel drums, each with a 200 litre capacity
7 buckets or pails, each with a 20 litre capacity
6 hinge moulds (see page 34)
2 moulding tables (see page 34)
4 bow cutters (see page 35)
8 pallets (see page 36)
4 carrying boards (see page 44)
10. Assistance
Financial Assistance: The time between preparing to make the first brick and selling it can be very long; this period can often be between 3 to 6 months. For this reason you have to plan how the workers' salaries and general expenses will be paid. You may have to borrow money from the bank. If you do, plan on at least 3 to 6 months of no earned income. Remember too that if you borrow, this money is not a gift and must be paid back to the bank.
Technical Assistance: All brickmaking units need technical assistance to continually improve their methods of selecting and preparing the clay, moulding the bricks, and firing them in a kiln, especially if production has only begun recently. Contact the local public works department for assistance.
Management Assistance: Finding capable people in rural areas with the expertise to manage a brick production unit is difficult and is often the greatest problem to overcome. For this reason, it would be beneficial if a production unit had access to advice on how to run a small business. Possible organizations that might offer this service are development banks, government ministries, development agencies, churches, schools, or chambers of commerce.
<section>Standardization</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
Standardization is an agreement between a group of producers or manufacturers stating that the product which each one produces will have the same characteristics.
For example, a person who owns a small portable radio can purchase batteries for it made in Europe, Africa or Asia and know that the batteries will fit in the radio. This is because the size, shape and power of the batteries have been standardized.
It is also important to standardize the characteristics of bricks made in an area. These characteristics are:
1. Form
2. Size
3. Quality
4. Strength
The Benefits of Standardization
Many builders and contractors do not like to use bricks made by small independent producers because the bricks can vary a great deal in form, size and quality. For example, one producer may make a brick 240 mm x 115 mm x 77 mm and another in the same area may make a brick 220 mm x 100 mm x 65 mm. Because the sizes differ, it is difficult for a builder to mix these bricks when building a wall. A large contractor may need 500,000 bricks annually, yet many small producers will only have 100,000 bricks available to sell each year. If the contractor bought 100,000 bricks from 5 different producers who each produced a different brick, it would cause many problems for the builders.
Another advantage of standardizing the bricks is being able to accurately calculate the number of bricks needed to construct a building. It also means that the size of the openings (e.g. doors and windows) can be calculated and can be made before the building is built.
Before starting to make bricks, contact all the other producers near you as well as contractors, builders and the local public works department and together agree on the form, size, quality and strength of the bricks that will be produced.
If there are no existing standards in your area, the following pages will help you to establish your own local standards.
<section>Form</section>
There are two general types of back forms:
1. Hollow Clay blocks
2. Solid Clay bricks
Hollow Clay Blocks
Normally these types of blocks are made in a back factory with special machines and equipment. In rural areas, it is also possible to make hollow blocks with wooden moulds but the results are often unsatisfactory.
Builders often like using hollow blocks because the larger size allows them to build a house in less time than with smaller solid backs. However, hollow clay blocks also have the following disadvantages:
- a special permanent kiln is necessary to fire them correctly,
- the blocks can not be used to build arches, and
- more cement and steel is usually required for reinforcement end plastering
Solid Clay Bricks
Solid clay bricks are better for a small rural producer to make because:
The form is simple. It is much easier to make the mould and easier to mould the brick so there is less chance of a poorly formed brick.
You do not need a permanent kiln. It is possible to build and fire a simple clamp or field kiln.
The bricks have good strength and can carry the weight of a heavy roof without steel and concrete reinforcement.
They can be used to build arches.
If the bricks are made and fired well, it is not necessary to render or plaster the wall, and therefore building materials are saved.
The bricks can be used to pave a floor.
<section>Size</section>
A brick has a length, width and height. The size or dimensions of a brick are determined by how it is used in construction.
Width
The width of a brick should be small enough to allow a bricklayer to lift the brick with one hand and place it on a bed of mortar. For the average person, the width should not be more than 115 mm. If the brick was wider, the bricklayer would have to put down the trowel while building the wall to pick up the brick with two hands and as a result, time would be wasted. In addition, a wider brick would weigh more and therefore tire the mason more quickly. In terms of brickmaking, a larger brick is also more difficult to fire in a kiln.
Length
There is a very important relationship between the length of a brick and its width because of how we use bricks to build a wall.
The length of a brick should be equal to twice its width plus 10 mm (for the mortar joint). A brick with this length will be easier to build with because it will provide and even surface on both sides of the wall.
For example, if you follow the rule of the length being twice the width plus 10 mm, if you would like to have a brick 115 mm wide, then the ideal length would be 240 mm.
115 mm (width of brick)
115 mm (width of back)
+10 mm (thickness of mortar joint)
240 mm (length of brick)
Height
The height of a brick, though of less importance, also has a relationship with the length of the brick. The height of three bricks plus two 10 mm joints should be equal to the length of a brick. This allows a bricklayer to lay bricks on end (called a soldier course) and join them into the wall without having to cut the bricks.
To determine the height of a brick, subtract 20 mm (the thickness of the two 10 mm mortar joints) from the length and divide the result by three (this represents the three bricks).
Possible Brick Sizes
Therefore, using these rules, the largest size brick that would still permit a bricklayer to comfortably pick it up with one hand, would be 240 ram in length, 115 mm in width and 73 mm in height. A brick of this size would weigh about 3.5 kg.
Every country in the world seems to have a different size of brick. The sizes are a result of centuries of tradition or custom but almost all use the same rules and lie within the limits mentioned. No one size is better than the other. In India the standard brick size is 190 mm x 90 mm x 40 mm while the British standard is 215 mm x 102.5 mm x 65 mm.
To choose your brick size, first contact the local public works department to see if your country has a standard size. If not, you will have to choose your own size based on the rules listed in this chapter. Possible brick sizes that you could choose from are shown in the chart.
Possible Brick Sizes
Length
Width
Height
240 mm
115 mm
73 mm
230 mm
110 mm
70 mm
220 mm
105 mm
67 mm
215 mm
102 mm
65 mm
210 mm
100 mm
63 mm
Minimum and Maximum Dimensions
Each fired brick will not be exactly the same size; they will vary a little for many reasons. Ideally, these variations in dimensions should be limited because many contractors prefer to have a guarantee that the bricks they buy will be between certain predetermined limits.
The bricks manufactured in rural areas should have a tolerance of approximately 5%. This means that if the brick size is 240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm, the length of the brick should fall between 235 mm and 245 mm. The width should be between 112 mm and 118 mm and the height between 71 mm and 75 mm. Bricks with dimensions outside of this 5% limit should be set aside and not sold.
<section>Quality</section>
A good quality brick should be regular in shape and size, with smooth even sides and no cracks or defects.
Normally poor quality bricks are a result of using poor techniques when making the bricks but these errors can often be easily corrected. You will find a list of solutions to various problems on pages 48 to 49. If you do have very poor quality bricks, do not sell them or build with them
<section>Strength</section>
Bricks must have enough strength to carry the weight of the roof. If bricks have been well- made and well-fired, you will hear a metallic sound or ring when they are knocked together. If they make a dull sound, it could mean that they are either cracked or underfired.
A simple test for strength is to drop a brick from a height of 1.2 metres (shoulder height). A good brick will not break. This test should be repeated with a wet brick (a brick soaked in water for one week). If the soaked brick does not break when dropped, the quality is good enough to build single storey structures. Note: should the bricks dissolve or fall apart underwater, the bricks were probably underfired.
<section>Using Bricks In Construction</section>
If you are going to produce bricks, it is important to know some very basic facts about how bricks are used in construction and how to calculate the number of bricks which will be needed to build a building.
Wall Thickness
Internal Walls: The walls inside a building which do not carry the weight of the roof usually have a thickness of half a brick. The term half brick refers to half the length of the brick which is equal to the width. These internal walls should not be subject to shocks, vibrations, etc..
The drawing shows an internal wall being constructed. If the brick used is 240 mm long by 115 mm wide by 73 mm high, the thickness of the wall is half a brick or 115 mm.
External Walls: The walls on the outside of a building which carry the weight of the roof usually have a thickness of one brick. The term one brick thick refers to the full length of a brick.
The drawing shows an outer wall being constructed. If the brick used is 240 mm long by 115 mm in wide by 73 mm in high, the thickness of the wall which is a full brick wide is 240 mm
Quantity
It is possible to calculate the number of bricks that will be necessary to build each square metre of wall. This will help the builder or contractor to calculate the number of bricks which must be bought to build a building.
For example, if you have bricks 240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm, the builder should buy SO bricks for each square metre of interior wall with a thickness of half a brick or 115 mm. If an interior wall is 2.5 metres tall by 3 metres long, you would need 375 bricks (2.5 m x 3 m x 50 bricks/m2= 375 bricks).
For an external wall one brick thick or in this case 240 mm, a builder should buy 100 bricks per square metre of external wall. If for example, an external wall is 6 metres long by 2.5 metres high, you would need to buy 1,500 bricks to build that one wall (6 m x 5.5 m x 100 bricks/m2= 1,500 bricks).
Mortar Joint
Brick mortar can be made from lime, cement or mud. The purpose of the mortar is to join the bricks together in a certain fixed position and to smooth out the irregularities in the shape and size of the bricks. This is necessary in order to transmit the load or weight correctly and evenly throughout every part of the wall.
The strength of the mortar should be less than that of the brick. This will prevent the bricks from cracking when a wall or a foundation settles. If movement does occur, it is better to have the mortar crack instead of the brick because it is easier to repair or replace mortar than a brick.
The strength of a wall is also affected by the thickness of the mortar joints. A mortar joint, especially if made with lime, of 20 to 30 mm is much weaker than a joint of 10 mm. For a strong wall, all mortar joints should be 10 mm thick.
<section>Moulds</section>
Because all clay shrinks when dried and fired, brick moulds must be larger than the final size of the bricks. Good brickmaking clays shrink between 5% and 11% and therefore the moulds should be 5% to 11% larger than the final size of the fired brick.
The following table gives the interior dimensions of a mould for various clay shrinkage rates which will produce a 240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm fired brick. Information on how to make the mould and tables for other bricks with different dimensions can be found in Appendix 2.
Note: It is essential to accurately calculate the shrinkage of the clay. Contact your local public works department for assistance.
Shrinkage Rates And Mould Sizes
Fired BrickSize: 240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm .
Shrinkage
Interior Mould Size
Rate
Length
Width
Height
253 mm
121mm
77 mm
256 mm
122mm
78 mm
258 mm
123mm
79 mm
261 mm
125mm
80 mm
264 mm
126mm
81 mm
267 mm
128mm
81 mm
270 mm
129mm
82 mm
273 mm
131mm
83 mm
Stages Of Brickmaking
There are two main stages in the production of bricks. They are:
A. Forming the brick, and
B. Firing the brick.
Within each of these, there are several important steps:
A. Forming the brick:
- extraction of the clay
- clay preparation
- moulding or shaping
- drying
B. Firing the brick:
- building the field kiln
- firing the field kiln
Each of these steps will be dealt with in detail in the following chapters.
<section>Extraction</section>
Once you have located your source of good quality clay (see Appendix 1 for more information on how to analyse the clay), the work of extraction begins. The first step is to cut the grass and do a general cleaning, removing all surface vegetation, and stones from the area where you will dig the clay.
When the area is clean, remove the top layer of soil which will probably contain rocks, dead vegetation, and roots until you reach the layer of clay below. This top layer of soil will be at least 300 mm to 500 mm deep. Remove it all; none must remain.
After removing the top soil, you can begin digging and transporting the dry clay soil to the preparation area. A word of caution though - it is not unusual to find the clay deposited in layers with sandy soil. Take care not to mix the different layers as you dig deeper. If you hit a large layer of non-clayey soil, rather than digging deeper you may find that you have to dig your hole wider. Check your soil every day while digging.
Depending on the situation, the equipment which you will probably find most useful for digging the soil is the following:
-machetes
-picks
-hoes
-shovels
-wheelbarrows
-buckets
<section>Clay Preparation</section>
To make good quality bricks, the dry lumpy clay soil has to become a smooth, soft, moist mixture containing no hard lumps of soil or stone. To obtain this mixture, the clay soil is treated in two different steps:
1. Tempering, and
2. Mixing
<section>Tempering</section>
Tempering is the process of adding water to the clay and allowing it to stand undisturbed for a few days before mixing occurs. This will begin to soften and break down the lumps of clay making the mixing process easier.
At some brick sites, the producers flood the hole or pit where they are digging with water because it makes the digging or extracting of the clay easier. This method is not recommended because far too much water tends to get mixed into the clay which results in lower quality bricks.
It is better to dig or extract the dry clay and bring it to a special pit or tempering tank where you can add water in exact proportions. This tempering tank should be located close to the place where you mix the clay and mould the bricks.
In the tempering pit or tank, the clay is moistened with the correct amount of water. In general, for every three buckets of dry clay soil, you will add one bucket of water. The amount of water can vary and will depend on the type of soil and how damp it is. The dry clay soil should be in powder form or only small lumps before the water is added. This is to help the clay absorb the water quicker. The ratio of three buckets of soil to one of water is much less than what many producers are used to. It may seem slightly more difficult to mix the clay when using this ratio but the results will be far better with a stronger brick and a much lower breakage rate during drying.
Note: It is true that some very experienced people can judge the correct amount of water without measuring, but this is not recommended for first time producers. Because more water makes mixing easier, most people "forget" that the bricks will be a poorer quality and tend to add more and more water to make their work easier.
Normally a 100 mm layer of dry clay soil is placed in the tempering pit and the correct amount of water is sprinkled on top of it. To ensure that the layer is moistened well, turn it over with hoes or shovels. Next, add another 100 mm layer of soil and this is sprinkled with water as well. Again, turn the layer over with hoes or shovels. Continue this process until the tempering pit is full. When full, cover the pit with grass or leaves to prevent the clay from drying out.
The clay is left in the pit to temper for one to five days (the time will depend on the type of clay). During this tempering time, the water will enter the clay particles or lumps and begin to soften them.
Each of your tempering pits or tanks should have-the capacity to hold enough clay for one day's production. If you produce 1,000 bricks per day, you will need 3 cubic metres of prepared clay each day. Therefore, the tempering pit or tank should have a capacity or volume of 3 cubic metres. Possible interior dimensions of this tank could be 1.75 m in length and width and 1.0 m in height.
If the clay needs to be tempered for only one day, you will need two tanks, each with a capacity of three cubic metres. One tank will hold the day's supply of tempered clay which you will use to make bricks, and the other will be filled with more soil for the next day's production. If your clay needs to temper for 2 days, you will need 3 tanks, each with a three cubic metre capacity. If it needs to temper 3 days you will need 4 tanks. With 4 days of tempering, 5 tanks will be necessary.
The tempering tank can be as simple as a hole or pit in the ground or a specially built tank built into or on top of the ground. A good permanent tank can be made of fired bricks with a cement plaster coat.
<section>Mixing</section>
After the soil has been tempered well, it needs to be mixed and kneaded. The purpose-of mixing is to ensure that the clay is a smooth, soft, homogeneous mixture that contains no hard lumps.
There are various methods of mixing tempered clay for small-scale brickmaking. One system uses a simple mechanical mixer that uses an empty 200 litre fuel drum with a mixing paddle built into it. The mixing paddle is connected to a long pole and turned by a horse, donkey or ox. The tempered clay is put into the top of the barrel and the paddles mixes and pushes the clay out a hole cut in the side of the drum. This method is very good for mixing but for some brick units obtaining the materials for building it or the animal to operate it can be difficult.
A simpler method preferred by many first-time producers which will give very good results, is to mix the tempered clay with your feet. The tempered clay is taken from the tempering pit and spread on top of a hard surface where workers trample it with their feet until it becomes a smooth mixture with a uniform colour. One advantage with this system is that rocks, stones or lumps of hard clay can be felt with the feet and removed. This results in a smoother mixture for moulding. The one difficulty with mixing clay with feet is that it can be very tiring. To prevent the workers from becoming tired quickly, keep the depth of the clay on the platform to about 100 mm.
After mixing, the clay can be used immediately for moulding into bricks or returned to the tempering tanks where it can remain until needed.
A good sized mixing platform is 3 metres by 3 metres. The mixing area can be built on top of or into the ground. A hard flat area can be made with fired bricks and cement plaster.
Depending on the situation, the tools and equipment that you will probably find most useful for tempering and mixing the clay are the following:
- buckets with 20 litre capacity
- empty fuel drums with 200 litre capacity
- hoes
- watering cans
- shovels
- wheelbarrows
To build a permanent tempering tank with a capacity of 3 cubic metres, you will need approximately:
- 600 bricks (240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm)
- 70 kg of lime (for mortar)
- 300 kg of sand (for mortar)
- 75 kg of cement (for plastering)
- 200 kg of sand (for plastering)
- brick mason's tools
To build a mixing platform, 3 m x 3 m, you will need approximately:
- 700 bricks (240 mm x 115 mm x 73 mm)
- 150 kg of lime (for mortar)
- 600 kg of sand (for mortar)
- 100 kg of cement (for plastering)
- 300 kg of sand (for plastering)
- brick mason's tools
<section>Moulding</section>
Moulding is the process where the prepared clay is place