<title>Forming Techniques for the Self-Reliant Potter</title>
Henrik Norsker, James Danisch
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1991
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien- GATE
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE - stands for German Appropriate Technology Exchange. It was founded in 1978 as a special division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH. GATE is a centre for the dissemination and promotion of appropriate technologies for developing countries. GATE defines "Appropriate technologies" as those which are suitable and acceptable in the light of economic, social and cultural criteria. They should contribute to socio-economic development whilst ensuring optimal utilization of resources and minimal detriment to the environment. Depending on the case at hand a traditional, intermediate or highly-developed can be the "appropriate" one. GATE focusses its work on the key areas:
- Dissemination of Appropriate Technologies: Collecting, processing and disseminating information on technologies appropriate to the needs of the developing countries: ascertaining the technological requirements of Third World countries: support in the form of personnel, material and equipment to promote the development and adaptation of technologies for developing countries.
- Research and Development : Conducting and/or promoting research and development work in appropriate technologies.
- Environmental Protection. The growing importance of ecology and environmental protection require better coordination and harmonization of projects. In order to tackle these tasks more effectively, a coordination center was set up within GATE in 1985.
GATE has entered into cooperation agreements with a number of technology centres in Third World countries.
GATE offers a free information service on appropriate technologies for all public and private development institutions in developing countries, dealing with the development, adaptation, introduction and application of technologies.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
The government-owned GTZ operates in the field of Technical Cooperation. 2200 German experts are working together with partners from about 100 countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America in projects covering practically every sector of agriculture, forestry, economic development, social services and institutional and material infrastructure. - The GTZ is commissioned to do this work both by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and by other government or semi-government authorities.
The GTZ activities encompass:
- appraisal, technical planning, control and supervision of technical cooperation projects commissioned by the Government of the Federal Republic or by other authorities
- providing an advisory service to other agencies also working on development projects
- the recruitment, selection, briefing, assignment, administration of expert personnel and their welfare and technical backstopping during their period of assignment
- provision of materials and equipment for projects, planning work, selection, purchasing and shipment to the developing countries
- management of all financial obligations to the partner-country.
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE
in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
P. O. Box 5180
D-6236 Eschborn
Federal Republic of Germany
Tel.: (06196) 79-0
Telex: 41523-0 gtz d
Fax: (06196) 794820
The authors:
Henrik Norsker has been making pottery since 1970. He left his pottery workshop in Denmark in 1976 to establish a pottery school in a village in Tanzania. Since then he has continued working in developing countries with promotion of small scale ceramics industries. Besides Tansania he has been employed in ceramic projects in Burma, Bangladesh and Nepal.
James Danisch has been making, selling and experimenting with ceramics since 1963. He has taught college level ceramics in Scotland and California, and has conducted workshops in the US, South America and Canada. From 1984 to 1992, he has been working with small scale and rural ceramics development in Nepal. His articles on ceramics have been published in several magazines, and he has studied traditional and modern techniques in Europe, Nepal, India, Thailand, Burma, South America and Mexico.
Books by the same author include:
The Self-Reliant Potter: Refractories and Kilns
GATE / Vieweg, 1987
Clay Materials - for the Self-Reliant Potter
GATE / Vieweg, 1990
Die Deutsche Bibliothek - CIP-Einheitsaufnahme
Norsker, Henrik:
Forming techniques - for the self-reliant potter: a publication of Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH / Henrik Norsker; James Danisch.
Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1991
ISBN 3-528-02061-X
NE: Danisch, James:
All rights reserved.
© Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, Eschborn 1991.
Published by Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn Verlagsgesellschaft mbH,Braunschweig
Printed in the Federal Republic of Germany by Lengericher Handelsdruckerei, Lengerich
ISBN 3-528-02061-X
<section>1. Introduction and scope</section>
This book is intended as a practical guide for cottage and small-scale ceramics production, primarily in developing countries, using locally-based technology and available raw materials, where machinery usually needs to be made locally in order to be practical. However, we think it may also be of use in developed countries, as many "studio" potters are shifting from one-person production to a group approach, creating interest in the revival of jiggers, handmade tiles, etc.
It is assumed that the reader is already producing ceramics, or is looking into the possibility of starting ceramics as a business.
Much of the material is based on the direct experience of the authors in developing countries, in particular Nepal, Burma, Tanzania, India, Bangladesh and Thailand, where we both have been involved for several years in ceramics development projects, and have looked closely at the various problems and solutions, past and present. Information about forming systems and machinery designs is for the most part not available in books. Nor has there been much documentation of successful systems that small factories use in developing countries. We hope that this book will help to fill the gap.
<section>2. Products and options</section>
This chapter presents a summary of various articles that the small producer can make.
<section>2.1. Market sectors and forming considerations</section>
2.1.1. THE EXPORT MARKET
2.1.2. THE LOCAL MARKET
In developing countries, there are two main market sectors: the export market and the local market. They require different kinds of products in most cases.
2.1.1. The export market
CAUTION!
Exportation from many countries is very difficult, due to customs regulations. Before dreaming about huge profits from exports, it is important to find out about rules and costs, and to be sure that you have a reliable buyer.
profitability
Because of high labor costs in industrialized countries, it has become profitable in developing countries to produce ceramics for export. There is now a very large market for floor and wall tiles, tableware, and decorative or novelty items, which are very competitive in the world market in spite of high shipping costs. Any product which is labor-intensive (for example, requiring hand-painting or large amounts of handling) has a good scope for export, because it takes advantage of low labor costs.
success in Thailand
For example, factories in northern Thailand producing cheap novelty items for export have orders for the coming two years, and are finding it difficult to increase their capacity enough to supply the demand. Many of these factories are small-scale and use simple forming techniques, such as slip casting or jiggering. The products are often designed by the customer, and most of these products do not require special finishing and quality control. For example, 1,000,000 "Elvis Presley" figurines were ordered from Thailand for a U.S. promotion campaign. They were produced by slip casting with something like a 500% profit margin.
traditional products
Another market sector is "ethnic" arts, for example ceramic dolls dressed in the traditional costumes of their country. Although this is not a large volume market, it can be profitable for a small producer. In Nepal, one small pottery makes most of its profit sending hand-painted dolls to Japan. Similarly, decorative pottery (like candlestands, ashtrays, etc.) that is done with traditional shapes and decoration has its own market for export.
labor-intensive products
Anything handmade has an export market for example, special designs of handmade tile can fetch a high price in the West. Similarly, there are some businesses which import high-quality tableware from Europe, hand-paint it with overglaze, and send it back to the country of origin for a high profit.
joint venture factories
Another export sector which is growing rapidly is joint-venture floor and wall tile production. This is usually done on a large scale, using high capital-investment foreign machinery, and as such is outside the scope of this book.
punctual delivery
Products for export need to be selected very carefully, and problems of quality control and punctual delivery must be thought about. Western buyers expect to get their orders on time, and will not accept excuses for late delivery. This means that the producer must have a realistic idea about whether he has the capacity to produce an order, and he has to make an accurate estimate of the time it will take. It may be tempting to accept a big order, but if it requires ten times your normal capacity, it would be foolish to do so.
Be sure of your ability to produce
Traditional designs already being made in your country, but adjusted for export, are easier to control for quality, because they are familiar to the workers. Orders for designs that have not been tried before should never be accepted- the rule is, do not try to fool the customer, because it will only backfire on you in the end.
2.1.2. The local market
The local market usually already has a demand for glazed ceramics, except in remote areas where they may still be unknown.
However, needs for new products are changing fast, in line with modern times. It is easy to see that in every country the introduction of plastic and aluminum has revolutionized the way people live. In the same way, a ceramics producer who keeps his eyes open to how things are changing will find a good market for new products.
example: Nepal
Nepal had no glazed ceramics production until very recently. However, the market had developed based on household ware imported from India, which is mostly low-quality- white stoneware. Because there are no suitable local raw materials for stoneware, Ceramics Promotion Project developed low temperature glazed red clay technology. Now, small producers are finding a good market. The new industry has found customers ranging from tourist hotels to local housewives. Because the products are low-cost, they can be sold even though the quality still has to be improved. This is a good example of introducing a new variation into an existing market.
local market possibilities
There are at least three main possibilities for the local market:
Import substitution: where feasible, local production of goods that are usually imported.
Improving existing products.
Introducing new products.
Import substitution is only feasible if locally made products can be made more cheaply than the imports, or if import duties keep the cost high. Wherever there is a tourist trade, obvious customers are hotels and restaurants. Hotels often like to have locally-made ceramics as decoration and advertisement, such as ashtrays and flower vases. A small producer who can capture the orders of even one large hotel has a guaranteed business, as smart hotels encourage customers to take ashtrays home as souvenirs - it is good advertising for them.
Where there is already local production, a clever producer may find ways to produce the same quality at a lower cost, or to improve the product in a way (better glaze, more attractive decoration) that attracts customers.
New products are often risky for the producer, since the market is unknown. However, part of being a successful producer is being able to see a need that nobody else has seen. For example, everybody needs containers for drinking water, and replacing traditional jars with new designs fitted with a tap appeals to customers wanting to be modern. Likewise, there is a lot of money in rural sanitation projects, and these projects generally are interested in promoting local production efforts.
hotels and restaurants
Within the local market, there are also several different sectors. Mainly, there is the profitable hotel and restaurant trade, which is low in volume but has a high profit margin. In the beginning, producers will try to capture that until the market is saturated. In the long run, most producers will be supported by the local market for cheap household items, which is large in volume but has a much lower profit margin.
<section>2.2. Investment decisions</section>
Because risk is high in starting any new industry, it usually is best to start small and expand gradually.
A profitable ceramics business can be run in the corner of a room, and requires only a table, clay, glaze and a small electric kiln. The total investment may be less than US$100, and the products would be small, handmade decorative and novelty items (like animals, dolls, etc.).
At the other extreme, perhaps the most costly "small"-scale investment would be a sewage pipe factory, where equipment and kilns could total US$ 750,000. This is also a profitable business, but requires large volume production in order to pay back the machinery.
questions to ask
Before deciding to invest in ceramics, you should answer the following questions, which are standard questions for any new business:
1. Is there a market for the product? If so, what is the size of the market? If the product is being made locally, how much of the market sector can you expect to capture? If the product is imported, can you equal the quality or make it significantly cheaper?
2. Do you know enough about the business? Can you get machinery? Technical assistance?
3. Is there enough skilled labor available?
4. Is the amount of investment required too much? Are you able to get a loan? If so, what is the payback period - and are you able to get the business running smoothly in time?
<section>2.3. Choosing your product line</section>
2.3.1. MACHINERY CONSIDERATIONS
For new producers of ceramics, there is one main rule to follow: KEEP IT SIMPLE. Choose only one product line, and make that successful before trying to diversify. Avoid trying too many kinds of forming at once (don't start jiggering, slip casting and semidry pressing at the same time). As with most businesses, if there is one successful unit, it will soon be copied. If the market sector is large enough, this is a safe way to go. On the other hand, the really successful producers are usually the ones who start a new business before anyone else does. There is more risk in this, but by definition being a businessman means being willing to take greater risks than most people.
expanding your product line
For existing producers wanting to expand their product line, it is important to think about the total system. In other words, if you are already producing cups by jigger, it is easy to make new moulds for producing soup bowls, with little additional investment. On the other hand, this may mean purchasing additional jigger machines, getting additional workers, and expanding kiln capacity. If you want to produce glazed tiles by semidry pressing, this requires a greater investment, since the clay processing, production line and even the kilns will have to be different.
2.3.1. MACHINERY CONSIDERATIONS
Depending on the size of your industry, there are several options for machinery.
Ready-made machinery
Most countries have suppliers for ceramics machinery that is appropriate for local conditions. In big countries such as India, there are many suppliers producing different qualities. Try to get the right machine for the work to be done. Before choosing an expensive machine, you should get as much advice as possible regarding what capacity and quality you need. For example, nondeairing pug mills can be very cheap, and are often satisfactory if you do not run the machine all the time and do not mind doing periodic maintenance and repairs (they usually are made from low quality steel and have cheap bearings). However, if you expect to be running your pug mill at full capacity for 2 shifts per day, it probably is a cheaper long-term investment to get a more expensive, better quality pug mill.
Talk to other producers using machinery to get a better idea. Never believe a machinery salesman until you have talked to his other customers.
Used machinery
It is often possible to buy already-used machinery at low cost from factories that are upgrading their machinery or that have gone out of business. Many small producers have started out this way.
If you are starting a small-scale industry which requires heavier machinery, it is often possible to get used machines from Europe at a low cost. Their condition is generally certified, and many are almost new. European factories have to upgrade their equipment quite frequently in order to compete, and many have gone out of business because of competition from imports! So there are some good bargains available. Catalogs and price lists are available from advertisements in "Interceram" and "Tile & Brick International" magazines (see Appendix).
Making your own machinery
It is not recommended to make your own machinery unless you have another machine to copy, or a lot of money to spend. Even simple machines like hand extruders need some attention to detail. We have made a lot of prototype machinery in Nepal (potter's wheels, pug mills, vibrating screens, etc., many of which are shown in this book), and have rarely had a successful prototype the first time. On the other hand, an inventive mechanic could probably follow plans and have a good chance of success - but he will probably have to try the machine out and make some changes before it works correctly.
Make it strong
In any case, it is most important to get the details right: for example, use good bearings if available, and always make things stronger than you think is necessary. Even simple machines like hand extruders can have problems: the metal piece that holds the die in place can break if the steel is too thin, the handle can bend if too thin. etc.
<section>3. Main product lines and forming options</section>
This chapter focuses on a catalog of products, and what is required for forming them. The specific forming systems are discussed in detail in later chapters.
<section>3.1. Household ware, crockery, decorative and novelty items</section>
3.1.1. HAND METHODS
3.1.2. POTTER'S WHEEL
3.1.3. PRESS MOULD
3.1.4. SLIP CASTING
3.1.5. JIGGER
3.1.6. OTHER FORMING METHODS
Household ware and crockery mean approximately the same thing. These are products such as cups, plates, storage jars, teapots, bowls, lamp bases, etc. Decorative and novelty items are such things as flower vases, figurines, wall hangings and souvenirs. These products are capable of being produced in one and the same factory, as long as the forming methods are the same.
Household items are usually the easiest to produce without introducing complicated forming techniques. In most countries, there is already a tradition of ceramic household items, although they may not be glazed. From the point of view of forming, this does not present a major change in technology. The following is a list of forming methods, and some typical products that can be successfully made.
3.1.1. HAND METHODS
Hand methods refer to using slabs, coils and pieces of clay to assemble various forms, using only the hands and simple tools.
novelty items
There are few highly marketable items that can be made by these methods, but there are some successful microbusinesses that produce very small novelty items by hand, such as animals, flowers, etc. The process for animals is to make the body from a piece of clay, and then to add feet, ears, tail, etc., all by hand. The main point is to use fine detail, which makes the product attractive to the customer. These items are made at very low cost (mainly labor) and have a high profit margin. They are easy to export, being small.
3.1.2. POTTER'S WHEEL
The potter's wheel still remains a very important production tool. It can be used for unique items, or for series of identical products. It depends on having highly-skilled "throwers" to produce quality items. Although handmade items are no longer so attractive in the local market, industrialized countries have a big demand for handmade products, and there is growing local prestige market and a tourist market for handcrafted ceramics.
Typical products are cups, containers, bowls, candlestands, lamp bases, flowerpots and novelties, as well as hundreds of other household and decorative items.
3.1.3. PRESS MOULD
Press moulding is the process of forming plastic clay by forcing it by hand into plaster, cement or wooden moulds. It is used to produce items with detailed relief decoration, or large forms that cannot be made any other way. Like all moulded products, it has the advantage of producing large numbers of identical items with low investment. In pressmoulding, several shapes are often pressed separately and then assembled into complicated sculptural forms.
Typical products are tiles with relief designs, sculpture (animals, gods), large flowerpots with relief designs, water containers, pipes, etc.
3.1.4. SLIP CASTING
Slip casting is the process of pouring liquid clay slip into plaster of parts moulds. It has the advantage of producing large quantities of identical forms, and is especially good for products that are not round (square pots, irregular shapes, etc.).
Typical products are flower vases, lamp bases, relief design tableware, figurines, etc.
3.1.5. JIGGER
This is a machine that is really a semiautomatic potter's wheel, which uses plaster moulds to produce identical items. It is most useful for hollow ware, which means open forms (cups, bowls, plates) that have a big mouth, and is best for round shapes. This machine is frequently called a "jigger-jolly", but for simplicity's, in this book it will always be called "jigger".
The jigger is the standard method for making dinner plates, soup bowls, teacups, and similar forms.
3.1.6. OTHER FOAMING METHODS
Other methods usually are combinations of the above. For example, cups produced by jigger may have handles made by slip casting.
<section>3.2. Tiles</section>
3.2.1. SCOPE FOR THE SMALL PRODUCER
3.2.2. HANDMADE TILES
3.2.3. PLASTIC-PRESSED TILES
3.2.4. SEMIDRY PRESSED TILES
3.2.5. GLAZED AND UNGLAZED TILE CONSIDERATIONS
Tiles refer to flat plates of clay that can be set together to cover walls and floors, or specially shaped tiles for roofing. There are many kinds of tiles, glazed and unglazed, with relief designs and plain. Tiles are popular all over the world for use in and on buildings.
3.2.1. SCOPE FOR THE SMALL PRODUCER
Nowadays, most standard glazed tiles are produced by very large-scale, automated factories, which are able to make their profit through large volume and low amount of handling. Because the industry is so large and aggressive, it is impossible for the small producer to compete directly in terms of quality and cost.
competing with big industries
However, there is also a good market for special decorative tiles, which may have relief designs or painted glaze designs. These are in great demand in industrialized countries, where they have a high profit margin. Another product is unglazed red clay tiles, which are very popular for floor and wall covering. These are best for the local market, since they normally are not transported for long distances (which increases their cost too much). They have a low profit margin, but like the brick industry, they are profitable because of large volume production. Similarly, unglazed roofing tiles are also marketed in the local area.
3.2.2. HANDMADE TILES
Handmade tiles are a good business in many countries. There are two types:
- unglazed red clay tiles, which can range from 30 cm x 30 cm x 3 cm for floors, down to about 10 cm x 10 cm x 1.5 cm.
- glazed relief design tiles, which usually range from 15 cm x 15 cm x 2 cm down to small sizes.
These tiles are made in frames or plaster of parts moulds, and require only a small investment in machinery.
3.2.3. PLASTIC-PRESSED TILES
These tiles are usually plain-surfaced, but are more uniform in size and finishing compared to handmade tiles. They are made with a press machine which uses metal dies, and the machine may be hand-operated or motorized. They use clay in the plastic state. They are relatively easy to produce, but require quite a large amount of transporting and hand finishing.
The process is most suitable for unglazed floor and wall tiles, but can also be used for glazed tiles and is the normal system for making roofing tiles.
3.2.4. SEMIDRY PRESSED TILES
These are tiles made with clay powder having a low moisture content of up to 10%, or using leather-hard clay (a variation of plastic pressing). They are usually plain-surfaced, and are faster to produce compared to plastic-pressed tiles. However, they require more control in clay preparation, and may need more investment in machinery. They use the same type of press machine as above (with higher pressure), but have the advantage of being almost dry after they are pressed. This reduces drying problems and minimizes the amount of handling and transport required.
The process is commonly used for glazed and unglazed wall and floor tiles.
3.2.5. GLAZED AND UNGLAZED TILE CONSIDERATIONS
As mentioned above, the small producer is not advised to compete directly with standard glazed tile manufacturers. It is much easier to enter into unglazed tile production, which will give better results with fewer problems. There is always a good scope for unglazed floor tile, facing brick, etc. There are many successful businesses in Thailand making unglazed relief tile for the outside of buildings. Likewise, there is good scope for unglazed roofing tile - in countries like Nepal and Burma, there is not enough good quality roofing tile to meet the demand.
relief tile
Glazed relief tile has a good scope for the small producer, and requires only investment in a few plaster of parts moulds. Even small orders can be profitable, since there can be a good profit margin added. A producer who is already making household items can consider making relief tile, without having to change any of his equipment.
<section>3.3. Refractories and miscellaneous industry support products</section>
3.3.1. FORMING METHODS
3.3.2. KILN FURNITURE
Refractories are all of the products that are necessary for firing ceramics. "Refractory" means "capable of withstanding high temperature", and the refractories industry produces firebricks, insulating bricks, kiln shelves (setter slabs), etc. Additionally, ceramics factories need special items like porcelain balls and lining bricks for ball mills, and porcelain jars for pot mills. Where a substantial ceramics industry already exists, there is often enough business to support a refractories factory. If you have a fairly large ceramics industry and are purchasing expensive imported refractories, it is worth thinking about producing certain items yourself as a sideline, and possibly selling them to nearby factories as well.
Miscellaneous industry support products are pot mill jars, balls and brick linings for ball mills, mortars and pestles, chemical storage containers, etc.
3.3.1. FORMING METHODS
Refractories can be made by simple methods, including hand-extrusion, semidry pressing, hand-moulding and casting.
3.3.2. KILN FURNITURE
Kiln furniture refers to setter slabs (kiln shelves), saggers and various stands, specialized setters for plates, tiles, etc. These are generally formed as follows:
- Extrusion: A hand extruder can be used for producing stands to support kiln shelves.
- Semidry pressing: Kiln shelves are made with semidry (about 10 % water) clay. They cannot be made in standard screw press machines, which do not have sufficient pressure. The classical and still best way to make them is in a metal frame, handbeating the clay to make it uniform and dense. Other specialized shapes, such as "thimbles" for tile setting, are made in presses. Firebricks are made either by pressing in screw presses, or, for better quality, beating clay by hand into metal moulds.
- Hand-moulding: Setters for plates can be moulded by hand on the potter's wheel. Porcelain balls for ball mills are often made simply by rolling clay in the hands. Saggars are usually made by wrapping clay slabs around wooden forms and beating them into shape. Insulating bricks are usually "slop-moulded" in wooden forms (as is done everywhere for common bricks), and are sometimes pressed in a screw press when they have stiffened to give them a more uniform size.
- Slip casting: Ball mill jars are sometimes cast, or simply thrown on the potter's wheel (which makes a stronger jar because it aligns the clay particles better). Setter slabs (shelves) are also sometimes cast.
For more information, see Refractories and Kilns, in this series of books.
<section>3.4. Pipe</section>
3.4.1. KINDS OF CERAMIC PIPE
Ceramic pipe can be glazed or unglazed, d pending on its use and required strength. There are several uses for pipe:
- Simple, low-pressure water pipe: This is usually unglazed, is used only for short distances, and can be made on the potter's wheel or in a two-piece mould. Another system involves wrapping plastic clay slabs around a wooden form. It requires almost no investment, and is suitable for traditional (no kiln) firing systems.
- Perforated drainage pipe: This is unglazed, has holes along one side, and is used for collecting excess water under roads, or in soak pits (leach fields) for septic tanks. It can be made on the potter's wheel, extruded, or in a two-piece mould. It has the same requirements as water pipe.
- Chimney pipe for stoves: This is unglazed, and also is made on the potter's wheel or in a two-piece mould. It is the same as making water pipe.
- Sewage pipe: This is glazed and fired to higher temperatures, and is best made in quantity by an extruder machine. Sewage pipe is also suitable for carrying irrigation water, and is capable of withstanding relatively high pressure. It is suitable for small-scale industry, and requires high capital investment.
- Semicircular roofing tiles: These are thrown as small pipe and later cut in half. This is the usual way to make village roofing tiles, which is slowly disappearing because the roof is very heavy and requires too much wood for construction.
<section>3.5. Electrical products</section>
3.5.1. SEMIDRY PRESSING
Electrical products suitable for small producers are low-tension insulators and fuse holders. These are relatively easy to produce and do not require too much quality control. These products are formed by:
3.5.1. SEMIDRY PRESSING
- Fuse holders are made in small toggle presses or screw presses. These hand-operated presses require low investment. They often are made as a cottage industry, where there is one central clay supplier and firing center. The fuse holders are pressed in homes, usually by one person using one toggle press. Each morning, these workers come to the center with their finished goods and collect enough clay for the day's production. They are paid by the piece.
- Low-tension insulators are formed in presses. They can be made according to the same system as fuse holders. They sometimes are extruded and then shaped on a potter's wheel.
<section>3.6. Miscellaneous products</section>
3.6.1. WATER FILTERS
3.6.2. AGRICULTURAL ITEMS
3.6.3. SANITARY WARE
3.6.1. WATER FILTERS
With more and more education on hygiene and the need for clean drinking water, water filter units are becoming popular. The water containers can be made cheaply, on the potter's wheel or by using plaster moulds and hand-pressing. The filter candles are more complicated, because they require a special clay body, a