<title>Introduction of Animal-Powered Cereal Mills</title>
Wulf Boie
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE , a Division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1989
The author:
Wulf Boie, born in 1957, studied mechanical engineering in Cologne and pedagogics of vocationaltraining in Kassel. From 1983-1986 free-lance contributor to the GTZ project "Documentation, Improvement and Propagation of animal-Powered Technology". Since 1987 staff member of Projekt-Consult GmbH, Frankfurt.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien- GATE
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE - stands for German Appropriate Technology Exchange. It was founded in 1978 as a special division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH. GATE is a centre for the dissemination and promotion of appropriate technologies for developing countries. GATE defines "Appropriate technologies" as those which are suitable and acceptable in the light of economic, social and cultural criteria. They should contribute to socio-economic development whilst ensuring optimal utilization of resources and minimal detriment to the environment. Depending on the case at hand a traditional, intermediate or highly-developed can be the "appropriate" one. GATE focusses its work on the key areas:
- Technology Exchange: Collecting, processing and disseminating information on technologies appropriate to the needs of the developing countries: ascertaining the technological requirements of Third World countries: support in the form of personnel, material and equipment to promote the development and adaptation of technologies for developing countries.
- Research and Development :Conducting and/or promoting research and development work in appropriate technologies.
- Cooperation in Technological Development: Cooperation in the form of joint projects with relevant institutions in developing countries and in the Federal Republic of Germany.
- Environmental Protection. The growing importance of ecology and environmental protection require better coordination and harmonization of projects. In order to tackle these tasks more effectively, a coordination center was set up within GATE in 1985.
GATE has entered into cooperation agreements with a number of technology centres in Third World countries.
GATE offers a free information service on appropriate technologies for all public and private development institutions in developing countries, dealing with the development, adaptation, introduction and application of technologies.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
The government-owned GTZ operates in the field of Technical Cooperation. 2200 German experts are working together with partners from about 100 countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America in projects covering practically every sector of agriculture, forestry, economic development, social services and institutional and material infrastructure. - The GTZ is commissioned to do this work both by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and by other government or semi-government authorities.
The GTZ activities encompass:
- appraisal, technical planning, control and supervision of technical cooperation projects commissioned by the Government of the Federal Republic or by other authorities
- providing an advisory service to other agencies also working on development projects
- the recruitment, selection, briefing, assignment, administration of expert personnel and their welfare and technical backstopping during their period of assignment
- provision of materials and equipment for projects, planning work, selection, purchasing and shipment to the developing countries
- management of all financial obligations to the partner-country.
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE
in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
P. O. Box 5180
D-65726 Eschborn
Federal Republic of Germany
Tel.: (06196) 79-0
Telex: 41523-0 gtz d
Fax: (06196) 797352
A Publication of
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien -GATE
in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
Cereal grinding takes a considerable portion of the daily working time of women in rural areas in the third world.
Work with the traditional grinding stones or the mortar is very hard. In many regions, the women join up in order to organise the purchase of a motor mill. However' experience has shown that especially in remote regions and small villages motor mills often do not work any more after a short time.
In many cases, animal-powered cereal mills can be an alternative to motor mills. Since 1984, GATE has worked on the introduction of animal-powered mills in West Africa within the framework of a pilot programme. This brochure reflects the experience gained so far. It is designed to provide information and help to interested projects and organisations for the planning and implementation of projects for the dissemination of animal-powered mills.
<section>Introduction</section>
Today, power gears are still widely spread in large parts of North Africa, Asia and Latin America. For most parts of the rural population they are the only practicable alternative to manual labour for works such as water raising, sugar cane crushing, and grinding of cereals and oil producing fruits. In Europe, power gears were used until the first half of this century.
The GTZ project ,,Documentation, Improvement and Dissemination of Animal-Powered Technology", which was begun in 1984, was based on the consideration, that power gears can facilitate work for the rural population even beyond their traditional dispersal area, provided that the use of draft animals is already known.
So far, the project has concentrated on disseminating animal-powered cereal mills in West Africa. The present guideline is based on the experience made in Senegal, Burkina Faso, Sierra Leone, Cameroon and the Central African Republic. Furthermore, individual pilot and demonstration power gears for water raising, rice husking and manioc grinding were tested in these countries.
In many African regions dishes made of flour are the main food component. Normally, the women are responsible for flour production. They grind the cereals in traditional, labour- extensive processes using wooden mortars or grinding stones.
Investigations conducted in West Africa have shown that motor mills can only work economically when they have a customer range of 1000 to 1500 consumers. Furthermore, motor mills pose quite a number of maintenance and repair problems as well as bottlenecks in fuel supply, so that often they are no practicable alternative to manual work in particular for the population in very poor, remote regions.
The animal-powered mill developed by Project-Consult on behalf of GATE, however, can be operated economically even in small villages. All maintenance and repair works can be performed by the users themselves or by local craftsmen. Nevertheless, it facilitates work very much in comparison with manual labour.
This guideline is designed to provide help for the implementation of animal-powered mills in developing countries. In Part I, the technical foundations and socioeconomic frame conditions are explained. Part II deals with the construction of animal-powered mills. The work conducted by the project so far has shown that initial difficulties of the introduction of the mill were rarely due to clearly classifiable problems, but to a complicated network of technical, cultural, economic and organisatorial problems.
The use of animal-powered mills affects several fields of problems, influences them and is influenced by them:
- Animal-powered mills are designed to facilitate the women's work, women shall use the mill and organise its operation. This is often contradictory to the roles traditionally played by men and women.
- The power of draft animals is used for driving the power gear of the mill. However, this power can only be roughly estimated and depends very much on feeding, health conditions, care and training. Often particularly the women are denied the use of draft animals.
- Animal-powered mills serve for the production of basic food. This food has to meet certain requirements, which differ very much regionally and individually. This fact calls for constructional adaptations of the mills and alterations of the traditional process of food preparation.
- The device is to be manufactured by local craftsmen, whose qualifications may vary considerably from one location to the other. The construction must always be adapted to the abilities and equipment of the craftsmen.
Every first introduction of animal-powered mills must be preceded by a thorough analysis of these framework conditions. Such an analysis is the basis for discussing all possible ways of organising the use of the animal-powered mill with the women; for planning the training of users and craftsmen; for adapting the mill to the actual local requirements; for recognizing the cause of any problems which may arise.
In most of the locations in question the thought of driving mills by draft animals is an entirely new idea. This means that every demonstration unit is judged much more critically and skeptically than a familiar technology, e.g. a motor mill. Therefore, even slight faults can result in a fundamental disapproval of the power gear technology on the part of the village population.
Hence every implementation in a village should be preceded by a trial and demonstration phase, in the course of which the technical problems can be solved and the acceptance of the flour can be tested.
<section>Part I: General Conditions for the use of Animal-Powered Mills</section>
<section>1. Objectives of the Introduction of Animal-Powered Mills</section>
Grinding is one of the most power- and time-consuming daily tasks of women in rural Africa. Often the women give highest priority to the mechanization this work. It could give them time for other economic and social activities, thus being a precondition for other projects designed to improve the situation of women in rural areas.
The animal-powered mills installed so far are mostly operated by rural women's cooperatives. The concrete and difficult task of organising the operation of the mill often leads to a clear consolidation and strengthening of such self-help organisations.
The animal-powered mill utilizes the work of draft animals, i.e. a renewable source of energy, which is available in many developing countries. It contributes to the preservation of the environment, the saving of fossil fuels and thus also to the saving of foreign currencies.
The local artisans play a central role in their propagation. In order to enable a commercial dissemination of the device in the internal economic circulation in the long run, the power gear is so designed that it can be manufactured by metal craftsmen with comparatively simple . workshop equipment. The local craftsmen are also responsible for repairs and for training the maintenance staff. This means that a successful implementation of animal- powered mills must always be combined with a punctual promotion of artisans by means of training activities, acquisition of tools and loans etc.
<section>2. Framework Conditions for the Use of Animal-Powered Mills</section>
2.1 Nutritional habits and working rhythm
2.2 Possible problems for the use of draft animals and power gears by women
2.3 Questions concerning animal keeping
2.4 Manufacture of animal-powered mills by craftsmen
2.1 Nutritional habits and working rhythm
So far, the project has gained experience mainly in the field of animal-powered mills used for millet grinding. First tests were performed for maize milling, as well as for driving rice hullers and manioc mills, by means of power gears.
In those regions where millet is the basic food, fermented millet flour is often preferred. After removal of the indigestible husks, the millet is soaked in water overnight for fermentation, so that its taste becomes slightly sour. In times of overwork, e.g. during the harvest, however, fermentation, and in some regions even the removal of husks, is dispensed with.
Two different traditional milling procedures are used in West Africa:
- pounding of millet in a mortar
- grinding of millet between two grinding stones
The two procedures are based on different working rhythms. In those regions, in which the cereals are ground with grinding stones, the grains are dried before grinding, whereas in the mortar the millet is pounded while it is humid.
If the grains ground by the animal-powered mills are too humid, the mill becomes sticky, so that no acceptable flour can be produced. Therefore, in those regions where the mortar is traditionally used, the grains must be dried in the morning after the overnight fermentation, before they can be ground in the afternoon, or soaking of the millet must be dispensed with, which would, however, cause a difference in taste.
Tab. 1: The traditional working rhythm of flour production, shown by the examples of Senegal and Burkina Faso, and the change required by the introduction of animal-powered mills.
Grinding stones fermented flour
unfermented flour
Wooden mortar fermented flour
Animal powered mill fermented flour
unfermented flour
Afternoon
glume removal
glume removal
Evening
grain washing preparation of fermentation
grain washing preparation of fermentation
glume removal
glume removal
Night
fermentation
fermentation
fermentation
Morning
glume removal
grinding
Noon
drying
drying
further fermentation or drying
drying
short drying grinding
Afternoon
grinding
grinding
Evening
food preparation
food preparation
food preparation
Table 1 shows traditional working rhythms and their alterations required by the introduction of animal-powered mills. Work with animal-powered mills requires coordination among the women, which was not necessary when grinding stones or mortars were used individually. If the millet is dried before grindings the flour can be stored for a few days, which is a positive secondary consequence. This feature can facilitate the organisation of the mill use if the women can be convinced to grind millet on stock.
The consumers test the quality of the flour optically, haptically (i.e. by touching) and in terms of taste. The following parameters influence the quality:
- the fineness (average size distribution of the individual particles)
- the homogeneity (uniformity of size distribution)
- the hardness (depends on the grain size and humidity content)
- the colour (depends on the humidity and on whether extracts or the whole grain were used).
Tab. 2: Characteristic curve of the flour produced by traditional processes.
Grinding with grinding stones
Grinding with mortar
Fineness
relatively fine
relatively coarse
Homogeneity
relatively homogenous
relatively inhomogeneous
Humidity
dry
humid
Hardness
hard
soft
Colour
bright
bright
Table 2 shows the flour qualities achieved using the traditional processes. The fineness is probably the most important criterion for the evaluation of the flour. This is not only due to its taste, but fine flour also signals wealth, because the fineness of the flour produced by traditional processes indicates how much working time the family can spend on grinding. The flour ground with the help of the power gear is furthermore compared with the product of the motor mill, so that fine flour is also regarded as an indication of progress.
Still, often the consumers disapprove of flour which is fine, but inhomogeneous, because it is not fine enough. This can be remedied by sieving out the coarse particles after the first grinding process. If fine, humid flour is compared with equally fine, but dry flour by ,,touching", the humid flour appears to be finer ("woollen granularity"). The use of cereals with too high a humidity content can lead to differences in colour and taste. Furthermore, insufficient cleaning of the mill influences the colour and taste, because spoilt particles mix with the flour.
Investigation and counseling steps
examination of the traditional organisation of work
evaluation of the quality of the flour produced by traditional procedures regarding
- fineness
- homogeneity
- humidity
- hardness
-colour
determination of the necessary processing capacity and of the processing peaks which must be covered by the capacity of the mill.
trials with the animal
-powered mill:
- adjustment of the millstones
- drying oftrains
- sieving of flour
food test with consumers until a satisfactory flour quality is achieved
counseling of the women regarding the organisation of work and coordination among themselves, advantages of stockkeeping
technical counseling of the women with respect to mill adjustment, drying, sieving procedure, cleaning of the mill.
2.2 Possible problems for the use of draft animals and power gears by women
Often the women's fear of handling the draft animals and mainly the resistance of the men, who mostly have the disposing power of the draft animals, still prevent the women from working with draft animals.
Traditionally, the preparation of food is a female duty; and the men are responsible for handling the technical equipment. In West Africa, the social position of women is determined above all by the quality of their housework. With respect to housekeeping, the men totally depend on the women. Therefore, the social position of the women would certainly be weakened if a considerable part of the housework, namely grinding, was taken over by the men. For this reason' in the case of most power gears installed so far the women were familiarized with handling the draft animals and the animal-powered mill. The women organise the operation of the mill, operate the device and harness and unharness the draft animals themselves. But they often leave those works- they consider to be technical jobs, such as cleaning the mill, to the men.
The experience made so far shows that women are certainly willing to work with draft animals, if this is clearly advantageous for them. In this case they mostly have energy enough to convince their husbands to make concessions. It proved to be advantageous that, if the men still refuse their consent, the women's group buys one or two draft animals designed exclusively to drive the power gear.
Usually it is more readily accepted socially if the women work with donkeys than with, e.g., oxen.
Investigation and counseling steps
examination, in how far resistance on the part of the men and women against the use of draft animals by women is to be expected
training of women for handling draft animals
2.3 Questions concerning animal keeping
So far, donkeys, oxen and horses have been used as draft animals for animal powered mills. The employment of donkeys as draft and pack animals is very widespread, they are also frequently used by women. They are easy to handle, relatively insensitive, live on very little and are much cheaper than other draft animals.
Oxen are more expensive, more difficult to train and make more demands regarding feeding and care, but are more powerful than donkeys.
As far as horses are concerned, the situation varies very much, depending on the country and the region. In Burkina Faso, e.g., horses are very expensive. They are mostly owned by rich people, for whom the horse is more of a status symbol than of a work animal. In Senegal, however, horses are frequently used as draft animals.
The regular employment of draft animals for animal-powered mills makes higher demands regarding their care and feeding than their temporary use for soil treatment and transportation. This means that care for the draft animals must be improved by targeted training and counseling activities. First of all it must be ascertained whether the economic basis for sufficient feeding of the draft animals is secured during the dry season, too.
Investigation and counseling steps
register available draft animals find out disposing powers
examine feeding situation
select draft animals with respect to the factors
- disposability
- disposing power
- costs
- care capacity
- basis of feeding
training of the future mill users in handling the draft animals
counseling with regard to feeding of and care for the animals, training of care staff
2.4 Manufacture of animal powered mills by craftsmen
Animal-powered mills can be manufactured by local craftsmen with relatively simple workshop equipment. In addition to the usual tools, such as hammers, spanners, pliers, and manual saws, a welding unit and a drilling machine are needed. A forging equipment is desirable, but it is not a necessary precondition for building animal-powered mills.
Since animal-powered mills can be produced locally and are competitive with motor mills, a strategy can be chosen which aims at an automatic commercial dissemination of the device in the medium term. Therefore, local private craftsmen must be integrated into the production of and the post-support for the installed power gears as early as possible.
The craftsmen should:
- be open to innovations and improvisation
- have a certain spatial faculty of imagination
- be able to work with a high degree of exactitude
- possibly have knowledge in forging.
Investigation and counceling steps
selection of an adequate workshop
training of the craftsman "on the job"
<section>3. Technical Foundations</section>
3.1 Functional principle of animal-powered mills
3.2 Grinding output
3.3 Evaluation of output and flour quality
3.1 Functional principle of animal-powered mills
The driving gear of the animal-powered mill is so designed that it can be produced by craftsmen in developing countries. The grinding unit used so far is an industrially manufactured cereal mill produced by the company Moulis and imported from France. It is a disk mill with stone disks, which was originally designed for manual and motor operation. In principle, all disk mills with a disk diameter of 18-20 cm can be used in connection with a power gear. However, comparative examinations of small commercial mills showed that the Moulis mill is the best, although it also has numerous constructional deficiencies. The selection of the grinding unit should be determined not only by the size of the millstones, but also by a solid construction, good bearings and easy cleaning, which are necessary because of the great torques exerted at the power gear. A grinding unit which can also be manufactured by local craftsmen is still under development.
The grinding unit has a horizontal axle. This means that the power gear must meet two requirements:
- it must convert the movement of the draft animals around a vertical axis into the rotation of a horizontal axis;
- it must gear up the slow circular movement of the animals (2-3 rounds/minute at a circle diameter of 8 m) to 40-100 times this speed.
The power gear designs known from the traditional usage areas and from Europe mostly achieve this goal by means of a multistage toothed gearing. This interlocking type of power transmission had the consequence that the power gears had to be over dimensioned in order ta resist overloads, e.g. when the working machine blocked.
In the animal-powered mill, power deviation and the first transmission are achieved by means of a wheel which runs on a circular wall. This wheel is connected to a centralized axle via a frame and is pulled by the animal running round in a circle. A chain drive links the wheel and the grinding unit, which is fixed to the frame, thus forming the second transmission stage (Fig. 5).
This system offers two advantages:
- A high transmission is achieved by two gear steps (up to 1/140).
- Contrary to toothed-wheel power gears only series components are used, which are available in many developing countries.
- The friction principle limits the tractive power exerted by the draft animal, so that over dimensioning of components can be dispensed with (important e.g. in case the cereal mill blocks).
- By using series components and since over dimensioning can be dispensed with, the material costs are low compared to the traditional toothed-wheel power gears.
3.2 Grinding output
The grinding output of animal-powered mills varies very much, depending on the desired flour quality and the capability of the draft animals. Table 3 shows the grinding output determined for the animal-powered mills installed so far.
If very fine flour is desired, and if only badly fed and weak draft animals are available, the lower values indicated in the table are more likely to be achieved, whereas the higher values can be assumed in the case of stronger draft animals and more coarse flour.
3.3 Evaluation of output and flour quality
Especially in the initial phase of the introduction of animal-powered mills it is necessary to systematically monitor the quality of the flour ground with the help of this mill type and the per hour output of the mill. Any deficiencies of the mill can usually be evaluated only if these parameters are compared to those of other animal-powered mills, which have already been tested, on the basis of possibly objective standards.
The users normally express their criticism of the mill and the flour quality in a relatively general way. It is the duty of the supporting team to find out the precise reason for any possible discontent.
For example, if the output is too low? this can be due to constructional faults, but also to a bad organisation of work, too weak animals or wrong adjustment of the mill.
The output can be judged only if the flour quality is determined at the same time. If fine flour is ground the output is usually lower than in the case of coarse flour.
The decisive criterion for the evaluation of the flour quality is the fineness of the flour. It is described by a particle-size distribution curve and the fineness index. With the help of the fineness index it is possible to compare the flour ground by the animal-powered mill with the traditional product and the flour produced by a motor mill (Annex 1, p. 61).
Tab. 3: Output of the animal-powered mills installed so far. (The figures are based on the determination of the grinding time needed for quantities of 2 kg.)
Country
traditional process
grinding stock
intended use
draft animal
grinding output
remarks
Burkina Faso
grinding stones (relatively fine flour)
millet
food flour
donkey
5-15 kg/h
animals are in bad health and food conditions
Burkina Faso
grinding stones (relatively fine flour)
millet
Dolo (only coarse grinding required)
donkey
30-50 kg/h
Senegal
mortar (relatively coarse flour)
millet
food flour
donkey
10-12 kg/h
Senegal
mortar (relatively coarse flour)
millet
food flour
horse
15-20 kg/h
Senegal
mortar (relatively coarse flour)
maize
food flour
donkey
8 kg/h
Sierra
mortar
maize
food flour
ox
14 kg/h
Leone
(relatively coarse flour)
Sierra
mortar
maize
food flour
pair of oxen
20 kg/h
Leone
(relatively coarse flour)
Central African Republic
mortar (relatively coarse flour)
millet
food flour
ox
15 kg/h
mortar(relatively coarse flour)
manioc
manioc flour
ox
34-38 kg/h
with modified grinding unit of the company Irus (modified hopper and feeding screw)
Investigation and counseling steps
performance of test meals or distribution of flour samples to families. Interviews with the consumers. Systematization of the criticism.
determination of the output of the animal-powered mill, comparison with other power gears that have already been tested
determination of the particle-size distribution curve and of the fineness index, comparison with the particle size distribution curve and the fineness index of the traditional product
evaluation of the test results, identification of deficiencies and problems in the field of technology and organisation of work. If necessary, technical and organisatorial alterations.
<section>4. Economic Efficiency and Acceptance of the Animal-Powered Mill in Comparison with the Motor Mill</section>
Investigations conducted in West Africa have shown, that even small motor mills with a capacity of 80 kg/in can work economically only in the case of a user circle of 1000 to 1500 consumers. Therefore, motor mills which work on a commercial basis are mostly found in towns or bigger villages.
The animal-powered mill is designed for a consumer circle of approximately 100 persons with a daily operation time of four hours, or 200 persons with a daily operation time of eight hours. This results in 10 to 25 actual female users - a number which can be justified also with respect to organisatorial considerations, if a family size of 8-10 persons is assumed.
Although the employment ranges of animal-powered mills and motor mills differ substantially, as shown in Annex 3 (p. 65) and Fig. 7 (p. 19), animal-powered mills are often compared to motor mills.
In fact, motor mills have the advantage over animal-powered mills, that they apparently ,,automatically" produce flour of almost any fineness. Animal-powered mills, on their part, have a relatively low grinding capacity, require a certain degree of coordination among the users, require a draft animal, which must be harnessed and unharnessed, and produce a more inhomogeneous flour. Although the flour quality certainly corresponds to that achieved by traditional methods, and although the time consumption, including the travelling and waiting times, necessary for the use of the animal-powered mill is not higher than in the case of the motor mill, the motor mill is often regarded as the "more progressive" solution.
This is a problem particularly in those regions, where the motor mill is known by mere report, but not by own experience. When the population has already gathered experience in terms of maintenance problems and costs caused by a motor mill, it is much easier to explain the advantages of the animal-powered mill.
When selecting the locations for animal powered mills, care must be taken that the number of persons to be equipped with this milling facility does not become too big, because this may lead to disputes about the right to use the mill. If necessary, several mills must be installed in one village.
The women should pay an adequate price for the use of the mill, which allows them to finance the maintenance and repair works themselves, and to replace the mill after expiry of the estimated useful life. It would probably be best if the women paid this grinding price in the form of a monthly contribution to a common fund, other types of organisation are also conceivable.
Annex 3 (p. 65) lists comparative figures for the determination of the necessary grinding price.
Investigation and counseling steps
examine prior experience with motor mills
establish a public image on the question ,,motor or animal-powered mill,,, with particular regard to influential persons (chiefs, missionaries, etc.)
examine and point out the economy and easy maintenance of the animal powered mill in comparison with the motor mill in the respective context
examine and compare the time consumption required for the use of animal-powered and motor mills
determine the potential user circle
determine the required grinding price
give organisatorial counseling with respect to the payment of the grinding price
<section>5. Organisation Models</section>
In most existing locations, the animal-powered mills are owned collectively by women's groups. In Senegal, the groups elected two women, who are responsible for monitoring the operation, and a mechanic for servicing the device. In Burkina Faso, control mostly lies with "mill committees", with equal representation of men and women.
The grinding price is usually paid in the form of a weekly or monthly contribution to a common fund. As a rule, all members of the women's group, or all women who have shared the costs of the installation, have access to the mill.
In most cases every woman uses her own donkey, or that of her family, as draft animal. If the men do not accept this, or if other organisatorial problems occur, the women's group can also purchase several draft' animals (at least two), which are exclusively used to drive the power gear. In this case a person must be appointed who is responsible for the care for the animals.
The women's group should not be big, and its members should possibly live in the same neighbourhood in order to facilitate the coordination of the mill use.
Other types of organisation are conceivable as an alternative. For example, the women could hire a miller, who would be responsible for all questions concerning the mill operation, maintenance and care for the animals. This model has the advantage of clear responsibilities and optimum mill operati