<title>Clay materials for the self-reliant potter</title>
by Hendrik Norsker
<section>Preface</section>
This book is the second in a series of books for potters and ceramists working in developing countries. The term "self-reliant potter" is the common name for the series and this reflects the condition of potters in many developing countries. Imported materials and equipment are seldom available, and the supply of raw materials within a country is often difficult. Self-reliance is therefore a practical approach to ensure profitable pottery production under such conditions.
The book is mainly directed to:
1. Trainers, field workers involved with promotion and training.
2. Technicians doing research in ceramics centres.
3. Students of pottery in ceramics training institutes.
4. Potters in established cottage and small scale industries.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Potters and colleagues in Bangladesh, Burma, Denmark, India, Nepal, Tanzania and Thailand have helped me in collecting the material and experiences presented in this book. Shailendra Maharjan has produced most of the drawings. James Danisch has contributed valuable suggestions and has corrected my English.
<section>The Author:</section>
Henrik Norsker has been making pottery since1970. He left his pottery workshop in Denmarkin 1976 to help with establishing a pottery school in a village in Tanzania. Since then he has continued working with promotion of modern pottery in developing countries. Besides Tanzania, he has worked for ceramics projects in Bangladesh and Burma. He is presently working for a ceramics project in Nepal.
<section>Origin of clay</section>
1. Minerals and rocks
2. Formation of clay
3. Primary Clay
4. Secondary Clay
Clay is a product of the continuous weatheringof the Earth's surface. Our study of clay begins with how the planet Earth was formed.
The Earth was created some 5,000 million years ago, according to scientific theory. At first it was a gaseous molten mass, which slowlycontracted. While the mass was still molten, theheavier materials like iron and nickel sunk tothe centre of the Earth. As the hot Earth gradually cooled, a layer of solid materials formed the crust.The crust feels very secure to us, but it is only about 40 km thick, floating on a 3000 km deeplayer of molten materials (fig.6-1).
Slow currents in this molten sea cause whole continents to move at speeds of up to 2 cm per year. Where continents grind against each other, earthquakes and volcanoes occur. The map at fig.6-2 shows how all the big continent shave changed location during the last 200 million years. Africa was then so far to the South tha tit was covered by polar ice masses. The Indian plate moved North, and when it collided with the Asian continent the highest mountains on Earth- the Himalayas - were formed.In this way the crust of the Earth has changed continuously since it was formed. Where we see mountains today there may formerly have beenwide oceans, and tropical forests may have been covered with arctic ice million of years ago. weathering: Weathering also causes major changes. Solidrocks are broken up by the alternate action ofsun, rain and ice. The resulting small rockparticles rocks are carried away by water, and even mountains wear away in a few million years. Clay and many other
ceramic rawmaterials are produced by this process.
1. Minerals and Rocks.
minerals:
A mineral is a substance which has a uniform chemical composition, in the form of one or many crystals. Quartz and feldspar are minerals, and so is salt. Salt crystals (sodium chloride) have a cubic shape which can easily be seen under a magnifying glass. When salt is dissolved in a glass of water and left for a while crystals will form slowly as the water evaporates.
rocks:
Most rocks are made up of several different minerals, though some rocks like gypsum only consist of one mineral. The rock named granite contains the minerals quartz, feldspar and mica, and the individual crystals can be seen clearly with a magnifying glass. Rocks can be arranged in three major groups; igneous rocks, sedimentary rocks and metamor- phic rocks.
Igneous rocks:
When the young Earth slowly started to cool, different minerals formed crystals in the mass of molten rocks (also named magma). A variety of crystalline rocks were formed, according to the different conditions of their locality. Thus the igneous rock called basalt was created at a great depth, and contains little feldspar compared to granite, which formed near the surface.
If the rock cooled very slowly, the crystals had time to grow large, whereas rapid cooling produces small crystals. This process is still going on today where movement in the crust of the Earth causes deep layers of molten materials to rise to the surface. An erupting volcano lets out hot magma on the surface, where it cools quickly. The resulting volcanic rocks have microscopic size crystals, since the rapid cooling allows little time for the crystals to grow.
sedimentary rocks:
Sedimentary rocks are made of materials produced by the crumbling of old rocks. All rocks eventually break up in the course of time when exposed to weather, and the broken up rock particles are carried away by water. These particles of clay and sand are transported to lower lying areas, or to the sea where they settle one layer upon the other. In the span of millions of years, the growing weight of sediments causes the deeper layers to compact and gradually turn into rocks, called sedimentary rocks. Much later, the movement of landmasses sometimes turns the whole area upside down, so that the old sea floor, with its sedimentary rocks, becomes a new range of mountains.
The upper part of new mountains consists of sedimentary rocks resting on deeply set igneous rocks. After some millions of years, the upper sedimentary rocks erodes away by weathering and the deeper igneous rocks are exposed.
Sedimentary rocks like sandstone and shale can often be recognized by their layered structure. Limestone is a sedimentary rock created by the left over skeletons of billions of small animals that lived in the ancient seas. Gypsum is formed by chemical sedimentation, in areas where seawater evaporated on a large scale. This produced a high concentration of gypsum which formed crystals in a fashion similar to the formation of salt crystals in a glass of salty water.
metamorphic rocks:
Igneous and sedimentary rocks are sometimes changed into new forms by high temperatures and high pressure. Marble is an example of a metamorphic rock that is formed from a sedimentary rock named limestone.
rock cycle:
Fig.8-2 shows how one continental plate moves under another, causing some rocks to be exposed to high temperatures and pressure. Sedimentary or metamorphic rocks melt, and may later return to the surface as igneous rocks. These later will erode to become clay and sedimentary rocks. Fig.8-3 shows this rock cycle graphically.
2. Formation of Clay.
The formation of clay from rock is a most common event, taking place daily everywhere in the world. If a piece of granite is picked up and broken in two, the fresh faces of the stone will show a shiny surface and the crystals of the different minerals can be identified. The black shaded crystals are mica. The yellow, white or red colored crystals with a pearly shine are different types of feldspar. The clear colorless crystals are quartz. The weathered surface of the granite will most probably show a rough surface with many holes, where the soluble feldspar crystals have been washed away by rain, whereas the less soluble crystals of mica and quartz remain. This is the beginning of the process of changing feldspar into clay.
Weathering breaks up the granite rocks and enables the water to wash away the soluble soda, potash or lime parts of the feldspar. These soluble parts are carried away by water and the soda ends up adding to the salt of the oceans. The process is shown in fig.9-1. Most of the remaining alumina and silica of the feldspar combines with water and forms a new mineral: clay. Some of the silica from the feldspar does not take part in formation of clay and forms instead another mineral known as quartz.
3. Primary Clay.
Clays which have not moved from the location of their parent rock are known as primary clays. Kaolin (also called China clay) is a primary clay.
steam & acid:
In some cases the parent rock was exposed to steam from volcanic activity or to acid seeping down from above. The acid or hot steam slowly changed the rock into clay, quartz and mica in the same location. Such a deposit may only contain 25% clay, and in some cases where the granite rock is only partly changed the clay content may be 10% or less.
kaolin:
Kaolin clays are pure, without impurities like iron oxide and limestone. Therefore, they have a high melting point (about 1780 C) and they fire to a white colour. Kaolin has little plasticity due to its large particle size.
4. Secondary Clay.
Clays which have been removed from their place of origin and have settled somewhere else are called secondary clays. Figure illustrates this process; rain washes the clay out from the site of its parent rock and the clay is carried downhill by rivers and streams.
grading:
A rapid river can even carry small stones, but as the flow of the river slows down, the heavy particles will start to settle, then the coarser sand, and finally the fine sand. The clay remains suspended in the water and will only settle where the river flows into a lake or a sea. At the mouth of the river, the silt and coarser clay will settle, whereas the fine clay will only settle further away. In this way, the original materials of the erosion process are graded according to their particle size (fig.10-1).
grinding:
The clay may travel thousands of kilometers before it settles. During transport the clay particles are subjected to the grinding action of pebbles in the streams. This works very much like grinding in a ball mill and makes the clay particles still smaller, thereby adding plasticity to the final clay.
impurities:
The river or stream carrying the clay will also pick up all kinds of impurities on its way through the landscape. These impurities will later be deposited together with the clay. It is very rare to find a pure secondary clay, i.e. a white firing plastic clay.
The most common impurity is iron oxide (rust) which gives the fired clay a buff, red or brown colour. Iron oxide exists in slightly different forms which may be yellow, red, grey or brown in the raw clay. However, the different iron oxides all turn into red iron oxide (FE2.O3) during an oxidizing firing. The clay may also contain organic matter which was added in the form of leaves and other vegetation from contemporary forests. This organic matter (carbon) gives the raw clay a grey or black colour, but as the carbon normally burns away during firing it does not affect the fired colour of the clay. Black clay is usually not black after firing. Other impurities like feldspar, mica and lime- stone lower the melting point of clay.
In general, secondary clays are plastic and have a lower melting point compared to primary clays, due to their impurities. The quality of secon- dary clays varies from one deposit to another, and even within the same deposit the quality of a clay can vary considerably.
<section>Prospecting and mining clay</section>
1. Prospecting Clay
2. Clay mining
2.1. Before mining
2.2. Stockpilling and weathering
1. Prospecting clay
Pottery clay can be found in most countries. In areas where pottery or brick-making have a long history suitable clay deposits will already be well known. However, introduction of new techniques like glazing or high temperature firing may call for new types of clay. In some countries the land may still be virgin from a potter's point of view and before any production facilities are established a reliable source of good pottery clay must be found.
Local authorities: First of all, information about the geology and the soil of the region should be gathered from local authorities, like industrial development organizations, agricultural institutions, National Geological Institutes or mining corporations. They may have little information, and the authorities may even say that no clay is available in the region. However, that is often not true, and should not keep anybody from trying on his own.
Practical people: It is worth talking to people who make water wells, and builders of dams and roads. They should have first-hand information about the soil of the region. Farmers in the area will know about the upper layers of soil on their fields. Sometimes clay is used for other purposes, like whitewashing houses or medicine. In Tanzania iron smelters use a highly refractory clay for their furnaces, and in Nepal the brass makers use a local fireclay for their casting moulds.
Prospecting: When setting out to explore the countryside one should bear in mind how nature created clay. Recent deposits of plastic clay are most likely found in the plains and valleys, or along rivers. They are often close to the surface. Older secondary deposits may be found in the hills where the land was raised and folded, millions of years after the clay was deposited. Such deposits may be covered with a thick layer of other materials.
River banks: A good potter's clay will often be covered by several meters of overburden. Instead of digging test holes through the overburden at random, a general idea of the deeper soils in the area can be obtained by examining the soils exposed in river banks, escarpments and cut areas where a road or a railway was made through a hill. Quarries, wells and ditches should be examined as well. Termites bring soil up from below, and the material from termite hills indicates the quality of soil located 1-2 meters down.
Field testing: In the field a few simple tests can establish whether the clay is worth examining further. First, take a sample from about 30 cm inside the exposed surface, and mix it with water. If it turns into a plastic sticky mass it is clay. Then knead it well and form a rope the thickness of a pencil. If you can bend this rope around two fingers without seeing big cracks, the clay has plasticity (fig.13-1).
If you bite the plastic clay gently with your front teeth you will get an idea of how finely grained the sand content is.
Then rub a sample of dry clay in the palm of your hand until the fine particles are rubbed away. What remains is the grit content, which may be particles of feldspar, quartz or mica.
Small pieces of limestone will cause trouble in pot-making, so the deposit and its vicinity should be examined for signs of white or grey limestone. Lime powder thoroughly mixed with the clay will lower its melting point and is often used for low-temperature pottery. But a piece of limestone the size of a pinhead will crack the pots or bricks when they are exposed to moisture after firing. Screening the clay through a fine sieve reduces this problem, but if possible, it is better to look for another clay. Lime content can be tested by putting a few drops of dilute hydrochloric acid on a sample. If there is lime, bubbles will form from the reaction.
sample collection: If the clay, after field testing, has proven to be of interest samples should be collected for further and more thorough testing. The quality of clay from different places in the same deposit will differ slightly, so in order to get a repre- sentative sample, clay from 4 different spots within a few meters' distance are dug out. The clay should not be taken from the exposed surface of the deposit but rather from 30-50 cm inside since the clay at the surface may be contaminated with other soils or washed out by rain.
The 4 samples are mixed well at the location and a sample of about 5 kg is then packed and labelled with its location .
Make a sketch of the location as accurately as possible, indicating features of the landscape like big trees or rocks. If a motor vehicle is used, note the exact distance on the odometer from the nearest town to the clay site. A photograph of the clay site will help in finding the right site again later.
Probe digging: In areas where initial survey and testing indicates deposits of suitable clay, holes should be dug in a regular grid in order to ascertain the size of the deposit. Initially, holes should be dug with a grid distance of 50 m. and where the best quality clay is discovered, the distance can be reduced to 15 m. It is worthwhile to ensure that the deposit is large enough to supply the planned production for a long time. The holes can be dug with a spade, but if a hole is more than 2 m deep the sides of the hole should be supported by planks.
A bucket auger (fig.14-2) is a very useful tool for taking samples. One or two people rotate the auger, which drills its way into the soil. The shaft can be extended so that samples can be taken from depth of 5 m or more. The bucket auger can be made at a local machine shop.
Map: A map should be made of the whole grid area, and on the map the probe holes are marked with a number, thickness of overburden and depth of clay layer.
The map is drawn with the help of a few fixed features, like trees and large stones (fig.15-1). The distance between three fixed points is measured as accurately as possible. The map is made in a scale of 1:100 (1 cm on the map represents 100 cm (1 m) in reality) or 1:200 (1cm=2m). The three fixed features are then marked on the map like on fig.15-2. The location of the test holes is measured and marked on the map according to its distance from the fixed points. Each test hole is given a number, which is marked by the hole itself, on the test sample label and on the map.
After testing of all the samples has pinpointed the best area, a more detailed plan (e.g. scale 1:50) of that area should be drawn, showing the depth of the various layers of top soil, clays and possibly other materials.
Economy: After having established the quality of the raw clay, the approximate size of the deposit and the thickness of the overburden the final decision of whether or not to start mining the clay remains to be done. Many factors control the economy of mining clay:
1) The distance from the deposit to a suitable road, and the cost of transport to the workshop. It may be necessary to construct a small track from the deposit to the nearest road.
2) The cost of removing the overburden com- pared to the amount of clay underneath.
3) The cost of renting or buying land.
4) The quality of the clay. If the raw clay contains large amounts of sand, it may be necessary to wash the clay at the mine in order to reduce the cost of transport.
The total cost of opening up the mine, and the cost of digging and transporting the clay as listed above should be calculated as cost per kilogram of clay. This cost per kilogram is then compared with the cost of possible alternative sources of clay.
2. Clay Mining
2.1 Before Mining
The clay you intend to mine may have been deposited in an ancient lake as shown in fig.16- 1. It may have taken hundreds of thousands of years to fill the lake with sediments, and during that period variations in climate, course of rivers, etc., caused the layers of sediments to vary. Each layer may contain its own type of clay or sand and the thickness of each layer may vary considerably.
clay layers: Before you start to dig the clay, expect it to be limited to certain layers. Today these layers will often be positioned horizontally in the same manner as they were laid down (fig.16-1). But they may also have been turned upside down by later folding of the landmasses and could be positioned as suggested in fig.16-2 and fig.16-3. The digging of probe holes as mentioned above should indicate how the clay layers are positioned.
overburden: First the top soil or overburden has to be removed and piled away from the clay pit where no future clay digging is planned. Care should be taken to avoid mixing top soil with the clay. If the overburden is several meters thick, it may be worthwhile to hire a bulldozer to clear away enough top soil for several years' clay mining.
In some cases, the overburden is too thick to be removed, and underground mining must be considered. This method is especially tempting if the clay is situated on a riverbank, on a slope or on an escarpment so that horizontal shafts can be dug. That will save the tedious task of removing the overburden, but this advantage may be offset by the extra cost of using lumber supports for keeping the walls of the under- ground shafts from collapsing. Underground mining of clay in vault shaped shafts without supports is often seen but is dangerous.
digging tools: Commercial mining of clay on a large scale in industrialized countries uses heavy machinery (fig. 17-1). In most other places manual methods are more economical.
Manual digging is done by spade or hoe. A shovel is no good for breaking up clay, but it is useful when loading the clay into a wheelbarrow or truck. A wheelbarrow is used for bringing clay from the pit to a vehicle.
supervision of clay winning: While digging, the worker should sort out roots, limestone, rocks and other unwanted material. The digging should always be supervised by an experienced person who can judge the quality of the raw clay. As the working of the clay pit progresses it may reach layers of inferior clay. The supervisor should regularly test the quality of the clay using the simple methods described above (page 13). Production of first class pottery demands raw materials of consistent and uniform quality. A potter adjusts production methods to the clay, and if it suddenly changes its behavior, it may ruin the production. If, for example, the clay becomes more plastic it may cause pots to crack during drying.
Even within the same layer of clay the composition of the raw clay may differ. Therefore, it is prudent to dig clay from several levels or locations at the same time, and to mix the material before loading it for transport. A worker can dig 4 to 8 tons of raw clay per day, depending on conditions in the clay pit. If the worker is paid according to quantity (piece work) the quality of the clay may suffer unless the supervision is thorough. In the long run, it may be less costly to pay by the hour (time work) in order to get better quality clay.
safety: Clay is normally extracted from open pits, which are much safer compared to underground mining. However, safety should also be a concern in open pits. Clay should not be dug from a vertical clay face higher than 2 m because a large portion of the face could break loose and bury the worker. The digging of clay in deep pits should be done in benches as shown in fig.18-2. The overburden is removed away from the clay face being worked on, so that no top soil will get mixed with the clay itself. The benches on the clay face are made in steps about 1 m high and 1/2 - 1 m wide. The material from different levels can be thrown to the bottom of the pit for mixing, in order to even out variations in clay quality.
record: A record should be kept of where in the pit the different batches of clay are extracted, so that sudden changes in the quality of clay can be traced to specific locations in the pit, and these can be avoided in the future. The movement of the digging area is recorded on the original map and is compared with the location of the original test holes. In this way, the supervisor can decide in which direction and to which depth to direct the digging, and he will be able to avoid clay beds of inferior quality that are shown on the test hole map.
2.2. Stockpiling and Weathering
planning: Clay mining is impractical or impossible during rainy seasons, and in some areas of the world the ground freezes hard during winter. Therefore, it is necessary to extract sufficient clay during the dry season or during the summer to cover a whole year's production. That means you will have to plan your clay digging and production 1/2 - 1 year ahead, or you will run out of clay.
weathering: Storing the clay in the open, and exposing it to the action of rain, sun or frost is called weathering. The alternate wetting and drying, or freezing and thawing, improves the plasticity of the clay by breaking it into smaller particles.
Weathering will reduce the content of possible organic matter in the clay, and this may have a bleaching effect on the raw clay . Weathering also washes out soluble salts. The clay should not be piled higher than 0.5 m. Clay may be weathered from a few months up to one year.
clay storing: When clay is received at the pottery it should be piled as shown in fig.19-1. Each truck or cart load is spread out in a thin layer covering the whole storage area. This makes horizontal layers.
The raw clay is collected from the clay bin by making vertical cuts in the pile, so that a little clay from each truck load is part of each batch of clay used in production. This procedure will ensure a more uniform clay quality.
<section>Clay washing and clay body preparation</section>
1. Washing at the pit
2. Clay body preparation
2.1 Dry method
2.2 Slop method
2.3 Industrial slip house
2.4 Simple stop method
1. Washing at the Pit
After extracting the clay from its pit, it is normally brought directly to the pottery for further treatment. However, some raw clays contain so much sand that it is more economical to dispose of the sand at the clay pit, thus avoiding the cost of transporting this unwanted material. The true clay content found in primary clay deposits may be only 15% or less. The whiteness or the refractoriness of such clays may still make it profitable to mine them.
commercial kaolin mine: In some commercial kaolin mines, clay is extracted by washing the clay face in an open kaolin pit with a high-pressure water-jet. The fine clay is carried away with the water leaving behind most of the coarse materials. In older mines, the resulting clay slurry is run through troughs, where the non-clay materials settle, after which the clay slurry is pumped into settling tanks. After siphoning off the clear water, the clay slip is de-watered in filterpresses and dried in ovens. In more modern works, the trough type settling tanks have been replaced by centrifuges.
Smaller clay works cannot afford such machinery. Instead the raw clay is mixed with water, and stirred either manually in ponds or in a washmill.
washing ponds: Next to the clay pit and close to a source of water two or more shallow ponds are dug, measuring about 4 m by 2 m and 0.5 m deep. The sides of the ponds can be lined with bricks or simple wickerwork plastered with clay.
The pond is half filled with water and the raw clay is added until the pond is nearly full. The raw clay is then stirred with a shovel, until all the clay is separated from the sand. With dry sandy clays this may take less than 20 minutes. Finer clays need longer stirring and for very fine ones it may be necessary to let the clay soak for a day. However, clay that fine is in no need of having its sand removed.
When all the clay is suspended in water and the material at the bottom of the pond is only sand (without a clayey feeling), the clay slurry can be transferred to a settling pond. If possible the settling pond should be located at a slightly lower level so that the clay slurry can run in by itself. Otherwise, the clay slurry is transferred by bucket, which is filled in a small pit connected to the stirring pond with a pipe. In this way the bucket will not disturb the settled sand in the stirring pond.
When a very pure clay is desired, the clay slip is led through several settling pits before filling the final settling pond. During the slow flow through the intermediate pits, the fine sand particles will settle and only the much finer clay particles will flow on.
After the clay has settled in the settling pond, the clear water on top can be transferred by pump or by bucket, back to the stirring pond, which first has been emptied of its sand. The bucket or pump intake should not be dipped into the settling pond since that would stir the settled clay. Instead the surplus water is led to a small pit next to the settling pond, and water is taken from here. For each stir- ring pond several settling ponds are needed. The clay is then left in the settling pond until it is stiff enough to be removed for further drying.
washmill: For large quantities of clay an animal powered washmill is useful (fig.21-2). The circular tank is half filled with water and raw clay, preferably dry and without large lumps, is added while stirring, until the tank is almost full. After stirring for 1-2 hours (depending on the properties of the clay), the clay will be suspended in the water, while stones and coarse sand settle at the bottom. The clay slurry is then run into settling ponds.
The washmill can also be operated continuously; first it is filled as described above and when the clay and sand have been separated, more raw clay is added gradually. The added raw clay will sink to the bottom, where it is worked by the harrows, and an equal amount of clay slurry will run off at the upper outlet. Fresh water is added from a pit with an inlet at the bottom of the tank. After operating the washmill continuously for some days, sand and stones accumulated at the bottom of the tank has to be cleaned out.
sand separator: If the fine sand content of the clay is not desired, the slurry is run (on its way to the settling tanks) either through a fine mesh sieve, a grooved tray (fig.22-2), a series of settling tanks (fig.22-3) or a sand separator (fig.22-4 & 22-5).
washmill construction: The washmill is built of bricks laid with cement mortar. The centre section supports the beam that turns the harrows. The beam turns in simple bearings, that can be made of hardwood which is kept well greased. A sluice system with adjustable outlet levels can be fitted with a grate to catch roots and other organic material. The harrows should be made of iron or of wood reinforced with iron. Fig.22-1 shows how an extra set of harrows hinged onto the main harrows improves the disintegrating action. The tank should not be more than 1 m deep, and increased capacity is achieved by widening the diameter of the circular tank. A tank with a diameter of 4.5 m can wash at least 6 ton of raw clay at a time.
The washmill can be powered by one or two persons or by a draught animal. A motor could also power the washmill, but since a rather high gear ratio is needed, the washmill becomes much more costly. Alternatively, the raw clay can be washed in a high speed blunger as described on page 27.
2. Clay body preparation
Two different methods are used for preparing the clay for production: dry and slop. Each method has many variations, and the right choice of techniques and machinery depends very much on the nature of the clay and on the type of ware to be produced. Therefore, before deciding on any method, the clay should first be tried out thoroughly - from prepara- tion of clay to forming, glazing and firing.
2.1 Dry Method
After weathering, the clay is dried completely. If the clay can be used as it is, without having sand or stones removed, the dried clay is wetted directly and left until it has a plastic consistency. Then it is kneaded manually or in a pugmill. Fig.23-1 shows such a system with dry clay stored in the back, a slaking pit in front, plastic clay covered under wet cloth ready to be pugged.
In must cases, however, sand and other impurities have to be removed. The dried clay is then first pulverized either manually by a lever hammer, or with the help of a hammer mill or pin mill.
lever hammer: The lever hammer is operated by two persons. One steps on the short lever, thereby lifting the long lever onto which a heavy iron or wooden hammer is fixed. This falls on the clay, which is fed to the hammer by the second person, who may also screen the powdered clay.
In many countries, the same traditional machine is used for rice hulling.
hammer mill: A hammer mill or plate mill of the type used for grinding grain may be cheaper to operate compared to the lever hammer. It can be powered either by an electric motor or small diesel engine. In the hammer mill, a number of small exchangeable hammers are mounted on a rotating disk. The hammers disintegrate the material by impact until the particles are small enough to pass through a curved screen. The screens can be changed, so that coarse material like grog can be produced as well.
The rotation of the hammers produces suction at the centre and pressure at the perimeter. Therefore, the inlet of material should be at the centre the point of suction. The