<title>Glazes -for the Self-Reliant Potter</title>
Henrik Norsker, James Danisch
A Publication of the Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien -GATE in: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH - 1993
The authors:
Henrik Norsker has been making pottery since 1970. He left his pottery workshop in Denmark in 1976 to establish a pottery school in a village in Tanzania. Since then he has continued working in developing countries with promotion of small scale ceramics industries. Besides Tanzania he has been employed in ceramics projects in Burma, Bangladesh and Nepal.
James Danisch has been making, selling and experimenting with ceramics since 1963. He has taught college level ceramics in Scotland and California, and has conducted workshops in the US, South America and Canada. From 1984 to 1992, he has been working with small scale and rural ceramics development in Nepal. His articles on ceramics have been published in several magazines, and he has studied traditional and he has sudied traditional and modern techniques in Europe, Nepal, India, Thailand, Burma, South America and Mexico.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien-GATE
Deutsches Zentrum für Entwicklungstechnologien - GATE - stands for German Appropriate Technology Exchange. It was founded in 1978 as a special division of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH. GATE is a centre for the dissemination and promotion of appropriate technologies for developing countries. GATE defines "Appropriate technologies" as those which are suitable and acceptable in the light of economic, social and cultural criteria. They should contribute to socio-economic development whilst ensuring optimal utilization of resources and minimal detriment to the environment. Depending on the case at hand a traditional, intermediate or highly-developed can be the "appropriate" one. GATE focusses its work on the key areas:
- Dissemination of Appropriate Technologies: Collecting, processing and disseminating information on technologies appropriate to the needs of the developing countries: ascertaining the technological requirements of Third World countries: support in the form of personnel, material and equipment to promote the development and adaptation of technologies for developing countries.
- Environmental Protection. The growing importance of ecology and environmental protection require better coordination and harmonization of projects. In order to tackle these tasks more effectively, a coordination center was set up within GATE in 1985.
GATE has entered into cooperation agreements with a number of technology centres in Third World countries.
GATE offers a free information service on appropriate technologies for all public and private development institutions in developing countries, dealing with the development, adaptation, introduction and application of technologies.
Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
The government-owned GTZ operates in the field of Technical Cooperation. 2200 German experts are working together with partners from about 100 countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America in projects covering practically every sector of agriculture, forestry, economic development, social services and institutional and material infrastructure. -The GTZ is commissioned to do this work both by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and by other government or semi-government authorities.
The GTZ activities encompass:
- appraisal, technical planning, control and supervision of technical cooperation projects commissioned by the Government of the Federal Republic or by other authorities
- providing an advisory service to other agencies also working on development projects
- the recruitment, selection, briefing, assignment, administration of expert personnel and their welfare and technical backstopping during their period of assignment
- provision of materials and equipment for projects, planning work, selection, purchasing and shipment to the developing countries
- management of all financial obligations to the partner-country.
Deutsches Zentrum fur Entwicklungstechnologien -GATE
in: Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
P. O. Box 5180
D-65726 Eschborn
Federal Republic of Germany
Tel.: (06196) 79-0
Telex: 41523-0 gtz d
Fax: (06196) 797352
<section>1. Introduction and scope</section>
There are already many books in the world on the subject of ceramic glazes. So the obvious question is: why yet another book on the subject? The authors have worked together for several years in a ceramics development project in Nepal, which is based on using local raw materials and resources. There are few existing books which offer much help in this area, especially working in the low temperature range from 900°C to 1100°C, where lead glazes have been the tradition but which now, with greater understanding of health hazards, need to be replaced with lead-free glazes. This book is intended to provide practical information for ceramists working in developing countries, with little access to the prepared and controlled glaze materials available in industrialized nations.
Glazes are at one and the same time the area of most fascination and most difficulty for potters. Most potters have little inclination or time to devote to developing glazes, faced as they are by the daily need to produce for the market. However, there often are times when familiar glazes suddenly stop working correctly or special glazes are required for customers. This book offers guidelines for developing and altering glazes, understanding where problems with glazes come from, and standard procedures for testing and developing glazes when there is no laboratory equipment available. It has been written for potters who have little knowledge of chemistry and mathematics.
<section>1.1. Glaze making using local materials as far as possible</section>
Most small producers of glazed ceramics will use glazes that are prepared by a company specializing in supplying industry. However, these glazes are often unreliable, as big companies tend to serve large-scale producers and have little interest in the special glazes needed by small industries. For that reason, the small producer is often forced to rely on his own glaze production, with little or no laboratory equipment available. Additionally, the small producer does not usually have access to raw materials at reasonable prices, so he must use locally available raw materials that do not have an accurate chemical analysis.
<section>1.2. Glaze and clay systems</section>
The producer must think carefully before starting production. When a particular glaze is wanted, it must work with the available clay body, production system and firing system. For example, if you only have low-temperature red clay available, your glazes must work at around 1050°C. If you only have coal available for firing, you must make sure that it will work for your product. The following chapters provide information which will help you to make these decisions.
<section>2. The nature of glazes</section>
<section>2.1. Glass and glaze, benefit of glaze</section>
Glass is a useful material that has been known for thousands of years. It can be produced in many different shapes for many purposes, and it has many useful qualities: it is transparent, hard, resistant to chemicals, and can have many colors.
Glaze is a special type of glass, made for coating ceramic products. Whereas glass is suitable for forming into bottles or windows, glaze is different because it is applied on a ceramic surface and must form a hard, durable coating after being melted in the kiln. It must not run off the product and must stay on the product after firing without cracking.
<section>2.2. Glaze making is difficult</section>
Because glaze before firing looks nothing like the finished product and because we are not able to directly understand what happens when glaze melts at high temperatures, making glazes is very difficult. We must try to understand which materials melt at certain temperatures and what happens when materials are combined. It requires a lot of direct experience before you start to understand causes and effects. In this way it is like cooking: we are familiar with cooking because we know the raw materials, and by trial and error we have a good idea of what the finished meal will be like. However, imagine that you are in a foreign country with unfamiliar food in the market and you want to make a meal: How do you start? The best way is with a cookbook full of recipes and a local friend to tell you if the result is correct or not. This book is intended as a cookbook for the independent potter.
Although by just reading this book and experimenting with it you will probably be able to make glazes after some time, there is no substitute for learning about glazes from an experienced teacher, who can save you a lot of time by guiding you in proven directions.
<section>2.3. History of glazes</section>
Unglazed ceramics have been in existence for over 10,000 years. It has only been in the last 2000 years that there have been glazed ceramics and only in the last 100 years that a scientific approach to glaze making was developed. For that reason, glazes still occupy a mysterious area somewhere between science and magic.
The first glazes were probably invented in middle eastern countries, where there naturally exist deposits of sodium and potassium compounds (soda ash and pearl ash) that melt at low temperatures (800°-1000°C). By chance, early potters discovered that some clays when put in the fire developed a shiny surface. These self-glazing clays are known as "Egyptian paste". They are not very useful for making household items, being difficult to form.
The next step was to develop these substances so that they could be applied to the surface of pottery clay in order to give it the desirable qualities of a hard, shiny, easy-toclean and durable surface. Because early potters did not have the technology to reach high firing temperatures, they had to use materials with low melting points, mainly sodium, potassium and lead compounds. Glaze development had to be done by trial and error, since these early potters had no idea of chemistry. This took a lot of time and effort, and naturally successful glazes were closely guarded secrets. These early glazes were often soft and not durable, and had problems such as cracking and eventually falling off the pot. Additionally, glazes based on lead were poisonous both for the potters who worked with them and for users.
It was only when potters learned to reach high temperatures that truly permanent ceramics were developed. There are many more common chemicals and minerals that melt above 1100°C to form glazes, and clay that is fired to these high temperatures is also much stronger and resistant to water.
<section>2.4. Classification (earthenware, stoneware etc.)</section>
Although there are many different ways to classify glazes, the simplest way to understand them is according to the firing temperature. The useful range of temperatures for glaze melting is from 900°-1300°C. In this book, we talk about two different categories of glaze:
- low temperature from 900-1100°C, called earthenware;
- high temperature from 1100-1300°C, called stoneware.
These two categories are used because they require different raw materials as the main ingredients of the glaze.
<section>3. Temperature ranges and requirements</section>
<section>3.1. What is temperature?</section>
Temperature means the amount of heat energy in a material. We raise the temperature of a material by providing it with heat energy, using a fire or electricity. What effect does this have on a material? We know that many familiar substances can exist in different states of solid, liquid and gas. For example, water can exist as ice, liquid water or steam. What is different about it? Only the temperature. All materials consist of atoms and molecules which are in constant motion. The amount of motion depends on the temperature. Cold materials have less motion and therefore appear solid to us (e.g. ice). When the temperature is increased, the motion of the molecules becomes greater and they can move more freely around each other (e.g. water). When the temperature is increased even more, the molecules become very active, as we can see when water boils. Then the molecules are even less bonded together and we see gas (e.g. steam).
Similarly, glazes are solid when they are cold (at room temperature), liquid when they are heated sufficiently (in the kiln), and become gas when they are heated too much.
It is also important to understand the relationship between clay and glaze. Most common red clay (such as brick clay) melts by 1100°C. This makes it useful for forming low temperature products. 1200°C, it can be used as a glaze.
<section>3.2. Low temperature range 900-1100°C</section>
3.2.1. ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES
3.2.2. APPROPRIATE PRODUCTS
3.2.3. CLAY/GLAZE CHARACTERISTICS
3.2.4. RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Products called earthenware, whiteware, low-temperature ceramics, and terra cotta are all fired in the range of 900-1100°C. We will call these products generally "earthenware". What they have in common are clay bodies that develop their maximum strength in this range, and glazes that are based on low-melting compounds such as lead, sodium and potassium.
3.2.1. ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES
Advantages: low temperature ceramics have the advantage of easy firing -it is much simpler to construct kilns and burner systems that have to reach no more than 1100°C, and fuel costs are lower. Bright colors are possible in this range. Most common clays cannot be fired higher than this.
Disadvantages: earthenware is often not as strong as high temperature ware, because the clay does not become vitreous. This means that it also has some porosity (the property of absorbing water) with the result that earthenware products often do not hold water unless the glaze is perfectly fitted to the body. Also, it is easier to chip the glaze away from the clay.
Historically, many earthenware glazes were based on poisonous lead because it is easy to melt: nowadays this is not a problem because lead can be replaced by non-poisonous materials.
Modern earthenware glazes are usually based on frits, which are expensive -the lower firing cost must be compared to the higher cost of the glaze.
3.2.2. APPROPRIATE PRODUCTS
Earthenware is used for all common household containers -cups, bowls, storage containers, oil lamps etc. Ordinary wall tiles, most low-cost tableware, sanitary ware, common unglazed containers, bricks, roof tiles etc. are all made in the low temperature range. Many countries have a long tradition of glazed red clay products, which are still useful in modern times. Most modern factories have changed their production to white clay products, which have become more feasible with recent developments of white bodies that become strong enough at low temperatures.
3.2.3. CLAY/GLAZE CHARACTERISTICS
Earthenware clay
Common red-burning clay is normally used, often mixed with talcum powder to increase its firing range. In many countries, red clay which contains lime is used because it makes it easier to formulate glazes that do not craze (crack). White firing clay bodies are often based on talc, ball clay and fluxes to make them harder.
Earthenware glaze
Earthenware glazes are based on low-melting materials, mainly lead oxide (white lead oxide, red lead oxide), sodium and boron compounds (soda ash, borax, boric acid) and potassium compounds (pearl ash, also known as potassium carbonate). Usually it is necessary to use these compounds in the form of frits (see chapter on frits).
3.2.4. RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Most of the raw materials for low temperature glazes can be obtained from commonly available sources. They include: local clays, wood and rice husk ash, limestone, and even soap powder (based on sodium and boron compounds). Materials such as borax must be obtained from chemical suppliers. Ready-made frits can be obtained from glaze suppliers, but in many locations it is necessary to make them from raw materials.
<section>3.3. High temperature range 1100-1300°C</section>
3.3.1. ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES
3.3.2. APPROPRIATE PRODUCTS
3.3.3. CLAY/GLAZE CHARACTERISTICS
3.3.4. RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Types of ware fired in this range are known as stoneware and porcelain.
3.3.1. ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES
Advantages
High temperature products are generally stronger, more acid and abrasion-resistant. Raw materials do not require fritting. The clay is more vitreous and thus does not have problems of water seepage.
Disadvantages
Kilns for high temperatures require more sophisticated bricks and kiln furniture, and better burner systems. Fuel costs are higher.
3.3.2. APPROPRIATE PRODUCTS
High temperature products include stoneware utilitarian items, whiteware of various types, porcelain and electrical insulators.
3.3.3. CLAY/GLAZE CHARACTERISTICS
Clay
Clay body raw materials are limited to those clays which can withstand high temperatures without melting: fireclays, ball clays, china clays, "stoneware" clays. Most bodies also include feldspar to cause vitrification, which prevents water seepage through the body.
Glaze
High temperature glaze is easier to make than the low temperature sort, mainly because it is not necessary to frit the ingredients.
3.3.4. RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Most stoneware and porcelain glazes are based on feldspar, quartz, limestone and clay, with other ingredients to provide specific properties of surface, color etc.
<section>3.4. Firing systems and glaze effects</section>
3.4.1. OIL, GAS, WOOD, COAL, ELECTRICITY, OTHER
3.4.2. OXIDATION/REDUCTION
3.4.3. VAPOR GLAZING
Different types of kilns and fuels have specific effects on glaze color and surface.
3.4.1. OIL, GAS, WOOD, COAL, ELECTRICITY, OTHER
These are the main options for fuel. Each fuel requires a different kiln design and burner system. You must first decide which fuel is most available and most economical. The choice of fuel will determine whether products can be open-fired on shelves, or whether it is necessary to use saggers to protect the glaze from ash and contamination from dirty fuel.
The cost of fuel should be thought about very carefully. One kg of fuel produces a certain amount of heat. Heat is usually measured in calories or in British Thermal Units (BTU). One calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one cubic centimeter of water 1°C. The table at page 170 shows the heat value of different fuels. Because a calorie is very small, the usual unit of heat is expressed as kilocalories (kilo = 1000, so 1 kilocalorie = 1000 calories).
A particular kiln, loaded with an average number of products and fired to a specific temperature, will usually require the same amount of fuel each time, since it requires a specific number of calories to convert raw clay and glaze into finished ceramics. When you know the total kg of products and the total cost of one firing, it is easy to calculate the cost per kg of product:
Total cost/Total kg = cost per kg
You can also calculate the total number of calories required to do one firing. If you are using kerosene, you can find from the table that one lifer of kerosene supplies about 12,000 kilocalories of heat. So, if you use 80 lifers to do a firing, the calculation is:
(Total fuel) X (kilocalories per unit) = total kilocalories required
80 X 12,000 = 960,000 kilocalories
When deciding on the type of fuel to use, you should find out the cost per kilocalorie for different fuels in your area.
Oil
Oil is available in many different forms, all of which can be used by the potter, including kerosene, diesel, furnace oil, and waste crankcase oil. Kerosene is the most clean-burning (without too much smoke or impurities), and waste crankcase oil is the dirtiest to use. Normally, products can be open-fired, but oil will produce some discoloration. For high quality whiteware, saggars may be necessary. Oil is suitable for high or low temperatures.
Oil provides between 9000 and 11000 kilocalories per kg.
Gas
Gas is available as natural gas, producer gas or liquid propane gas. Where gas is available at a reasonable cost (compared to other fuels), it is the easiest fuel to use. Gas is very clean-burning, does not require saggars, and the burners are also simple to manufacture locally. It is suitable for any temperature.
Wood
Almost any kind of wood can be used for firing kilns. Nowadays, wood is a scarce resource in most countries and more and more it is being replaced by other fuels. Firing with wood is labor-intensive. Because it produces a large volume of ash, it is usually necessary to fire the ware in saggers. It is suitable for any temperature.
On the other hand, wood is a renewable resource and in many areas of the world it is produced as a cash crop, which makes it appropriate to use.
The calorific value of wood is difficult to calculate, because it depends on the type of wood, whether it is wet or dry, and the efficiency of burning. Dry wood can supply between 3000 and 4500 kilocalories per kg, whereas the same wood when wet may produce only half the calories.
Coal
Coal comes in many different grades, all of which are suitable for firing kilns. Firing with coal is labor-intensive, but in many countries it is the cheapest fuel available. Coal also produces ash and impurities, so it is usually necessary to fire the ware in saggars. It is best for high temperatures, but can be used at any temperature.
Coal can provide between 4500 and 7700 kilocalories per kg.
Electricity
Electric kilns are practical for the small producer where there is a reliable source of electricity. Because there is no combustion, electricity is the cleanest fuel of all. Electric kilns fire very evenly and do not require saggers. Electricity is best for temperatures up to
1100°C.
Other fuels
These include tires, which burn very well but produce a lot of smoke, and also produce poisonous gases. They can be used in kilns designed to burn wood or coal. Some brick industries use scrap asphalt from roads as fuel. Also in this category are such fuels as brushwood, sawdust and rice husk. Most of these are dirty-burning, so require the use of saggers. They are best for low temperatures.
3.4.2. OXIDATION/REDUCTION
To understand oxidation and reduction, it is necessary to know how fuel burns. All fuel produces heat when it combines with the oxygen in the air. As anyone knows who has made a wood fire, if there is plenty of air the fire burns hot and clean, with little smoke. This is called an oxidation fire. If the air is reduced, there will be less heat and more smoke. This is called a reduction (or reducing) fire, which simply means reducing the amount of oxygen. So:
- Oxidation firing means there is plenty of air and no smoke.
- Reduction firing means there is little air and more smoke.
Glazes will have different colors and surfaces depending on whether they are fired in oxidation or reduction conditions. Oxidation has its greatest effect on the metallic oxides that are used to create color in glazes. For example:
OXIDE
OXIDATION
REDUCTION
red iron oxide
brown
red-brown, black
copper oxide
green, blue
red
Iron also changes from a grey color to a red color when it rusts. This is because oxide from the air-combines with the metal and forms iron oxide.
In firing, it is difficult to exactly control the amount of oxidation or reduction. Many beautiful glazes can be obtained in reduction firing, so it is widely used for decorative stoneware, and for lusterware. However, the results are variable and difficult to reproduce every time, and even in one kiln-load there will be differences. For that reason, most producers who need to supply a uniform product use oxidation firing.
3.4.3. VAPOR GLAZING
In vapor glazing techniques, the glaze is not applied to the product before firing in the usual manner. Instead, glaze is introduced into the kiln through the firebox at the end of the firing, when there is enough heat to change the glaze into vapor form. The most common material for vapor glazing is ordinary salt. At temperatures above 1100°C, salt breaks down into sodium and chlorine vapor, which circulates through the kiln. The sodium is attracted to silica in the clay and forms a strong, durable glaze. Salt glazing is used mainly for sewage pipes, because it is cheap and a perfectly glazed surface is not necessary. In Europe, it was once used widely for household items, even including beer bottles. Nowadays, salt glazing is less popular because it produces toxic smoke that harms the environment.
Salt is sometimes replaced by soda ash and sodium bicarbonate, which produce a similar vapor glaze without the poisonous side effects. Vapor glazing is not recommended for the small producer, except for making specialized art ceramics.
<section>4. Decisions</section>
As a ceramics entrepreneur, you must start by making decisions: what product? what temperature? how much technology? These decisions depend on your market, raw material and fuel availability. In industrialized countries, where everything is easily available, the decision will usually be based first on the market, and then the best combination of clay body, glazes and kiln can be decided on.
In developing countries, it is usually necessary to start by thinking about raw materials and fuel. Then the product can be selected.
Usually, it is easiest to use the same technology as other producers, as most of the problems will have already been solved. On the other hand, a new type of technology can capture a new market sector with no competition. However, a new technology may cause technical problems that a potter cannot solve without outside help.
Some typical questions for the entrepreneur to answer are given below.
<section>4.1. Selecting your best firing temperature</section>
Is high-firing clay available?
If so, it may be best to decide on high temperature ceramics (stoneware or porcelain), as producing reliable glazes will be easier.
Is only low-firing clay available?
If so, it will be necessary to select a low temperature system and to make frits or purchase ready-made ones.
Are ready-made glazes available?
If there is a reliable source of glazes nearby, a lot of trouble can be saved by using these.
What are the fuel constraints?
If only electric firing is available, then only low temperature systems will be practical. If oil or coal is available, the additional costs of using saggers should be compared with the cost of clean-burning fuels.
<section>4.2. Market factors</section>
Most producers decide to enter the ceramics sector because there is already a good market and not enough local supply or because they think they can create a market for products that are not yet common in their area.
What is the existing market?
For example, if there is already a good market for glazed white earthenware (perhaps imported), the potential producer will have to find out if he can produce similar products at competitive prices. If he wants to compete directly, he will have to take up the same clay/glaze/firing system.
Is there a possible new market?
On the other hand, it may be possible to produce a product with the same function, but using a less costly technology. For example, it may be possible to produce glazed red clay earthenware cheaper than the whiteware on the market and thus to create a new market.
Small-scale vs. large-scale
Large-scale ceramics industries are able to produce a large volume at a low profit margin. For this reason, it is difficult for the small producer to compete directly. The small producer has an advantage of flexibility - he can produce a variety of products on demand and thus can supply local customers with special requirements.
For example, the modern tile industry is mostly very large-scale and can supply very cheap tiles of a uniform quality. The small producer can never compete directly with this. However, there is a growing market for specialty tiles, with decorations or relief designs, which the large producers cannot make. Many customers are interested in small quantities of special decorative tiles made according to their own design, even if the price per square foot is higher than mass-produced tiles.
Ceramics substituted for products made from other materials
In some countries, products like glasses for drinking tea may be produced more cheaply in ceramics. Or cement sewage pipes and toilet pans may be replaced by longer-lasting, more hygienic ceramic products.
<section>4.3. Strength requirements</section>
Household items
Most common tableware items (cups, plates) can be made satisfactorily using either high or low temperature systems. Low temperature ceramics are more easily chipped and broken, but their low cost may be an advantage. High temperature products are stronger, and most hotels and restaurants will prefer them, unless the lower cost of earthenware makes up for the higher rate of breakage.
Electrical insulators
Low tension insulators, fuse holders (kit-kats) etc. do not have to be very strong, so can be made in the low temperature range. High tension insulators have special requirements for porosity and strength, so must necessarily be made at high temperature.
Tiles
Glazed tiles are most commonly produced at low temperatures, which gives them sufficient strength for wall and floor applications.
Cold climates
Ceramic products to be used outdoors in freezing temperatures have special requirements, because of damage that can come from water freezing inside the product and causing it to break. These products are generally made at high temperatures, which make it possible to control water absorption.
<section></section>
After considering the above decisions, the entrepreneur must then make an analysis of investment and production costs. These calculations are not easy to do, as the production of ceramics depends on so many complicated factors. For the new entrepreneur, it is important to start small and as simply as possible.
Low temperature systems usually require a lower initial investment, as kilns and burners will be cheaper. Fuel is usually the highest cost of production, and firing at low temperatures can save production costs. On the other hand, the cost of high temperature glazes is lower, as it is not necessary to use expensive frits.
In preparing a scheme for a new business, it is best to get help from a ceramics expert' who can help to figure out the comparative costs of the various options. Besides the usual overhead costs, it is necessary to consider:
- cost of clay body
- cost of glaze
- labor costs in production
- capital investment for equipment
- fuel costs
- working capital requirements.
<section>5. Simple glaze theory</section>
<section>5.1. Basic chemistry</section>
5.1.1. ELEMENTS/COMPOUNDS
5.1.2. SOLID, LIQUID, GAS
5.1.3. CHEMICAL REACTIONS
5.1.4. SOLUTION/SUSPENSION
5.1.5. CRYSTAL STRUCTURES
Chemistry is the science which describes what substances are made of and how they combine with each other. This science uses special names and symbols which are described below.
5.1.1. ELEMENTS/COMPOUNDS
Elements
An element is made of only one kind of atom. It cannot be broken down into more simple substances. Oxygen (O) is the most common element on earth.
Compounds
A compound is composed of more than one element combined chemically. Water (H[2]O) is a compound made up of two atoms of hydrogen (H) and one atom of oxygen (O). Silica (SiO[2]) is another compound and consists of one atom of silicon (Si) and two atoms of oxygen (O). This is the most abundant material in the earth's crust. Two or more atoms combined form a molecule.
Ceramic raw materials are usually in the form of oxides: an oxide is a compound that includes oxygen (O). Minerals are compounds.
5.1.2. SOLID, LIQUID, GAS
Solid, liquid and gas are the three states of matter. Most materials can exist in all of these states, depending on their temperature. A familiar example is water, which is solid below 0°C, liquid from 0°C to 100°C, and gas above 100°C.
Making glaze depends on mixing solids together, applying them on a pot and then changing them to liquid in the kiln. Some of the glaze materials also become gas during firing and leave the glaze. On cooling, the glaze again becomes solid.
Mixture
A mixture is a physical, not chemical, combination of compounds (and sometimes elements) and each compound remains chemically unchanged in the mixture. Air is a mixture of oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and other gases.