<title>Towards a strategy for the full participation of women in all phases of the united nations global strategy for shelter to the year 2000</title>
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) Nairobi, 1990
<section>Foreword</section>
This document reports on the process initiated by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to promote the role of women in the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000. The main objective of the Global Strategy is to facilitate the provision of shelter for all by the year 2000. "Shelter for all" means affordable shelter for all groups in all types of settlements, meeting basic requirements of tenurial security, structural stability and infrastructural support, with convenient access to employment and community services and facilities.
Although each country will have to adopt its own timetable, the general framework for the GSS is as follows:
1989-1991 - Establishment of national policies and strategies, and design of new institutional arrangements;
1992-1994 - Introduction of new institutional arrangements, and strengthening of existing national programmes;
Enabling policies, whereby the full potential and resources of all governmental and non-governmental actors in the field of human settlements are utilized, must be at the heart of national and international efforts. The public sector, rather than attempt to shoulder the entire burden of shelter production and distribution, should concentrate on those needs, e.g., infrastructure provision, which people are usually not able to meet themselves, while encouraging and facilitating the shelter-production efforts of other participants, including the formal and informal private sector, small entrepreneurs, civic and community groups, voluntary organizations and private individuals. Women, as income-earners, home-makers and heads of households, have a crucial role, as contributors to the solution of human settlements problems, which should be fully recognized and reflected in equal participation of women in the elaboration of housing policies, programmes and projects.
This report is presented in three parts. The Introduction outlines the general process followed by UNCHS (Habitat) to define and create awareness of women's shelter issues. Part One presents highlights of findings and required actions identified during 1988-1989 at five regional seminars organized by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and funded by the Governments of the Netherlands and Norway. Part Two presents the strategy or plan of action which was developed and recommended by the Interregional Seminar to Promote the Full Paticipation of Women in all Phases of the Global Strategy For shelter to the year 2000, held at Nairobi, from 4 to 8 December 1989.
Dr. Arcot Ramachandran
Under-Secretary-General
Executive Director
<section>Introduction</section>
<section>A. Women and shelter</section>
Although there have been three United Nations International Development Decades, the role of women in the process of development did not capture the attention of international planners until 1975, when the General Assembly of the United Nations declared 1976 to 1985 to be the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. It was not until the end of the Decade, however, that shelter issues of concern to women began to appear on the United Nations agenda.
Shelter issues were brought to the attention of women's movements and of Member States of the United Nations in 1985, when the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development, Peace adopted the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women. These called on governments to:
"integrate women in the formulation of policies, programmes and projects for the provision of basic shelter and infrastructure. To this end, the enrolement of women in architectural, engineering, and related fields should be encouraged, and qualified women graduates in these fields should be assigned to professional, policy-making and decision-making positions. The shelter and infrastructural needs of women should be assessed and specifically incorporated in housing, community development, and slum and squarer projects.
"Women and women's groups should be participants in and equal beneficiaries of housing and infrastructure construction projects. They should be consulted in the choice of design and technology of construction and should be involved in the management and maintenance of the facilities. To this end, women should be provided with construction, maintenance, and management skills and should be included in related training and educational programmes.",
<section>B. The Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000</section>
The main objective of the Global Strategy is to facilitate adequate shelter for all by the Year 2000. "Shelter for all" means affordable shelter for all groups in all types of settlements, meeting basic requirements of tenurial security, structural stability, and infrastructure support, with convenient access to employment and community services and facilities.
Two important principles sustain the Strategy. The first is that governments must adopt an "enabling" approach - facilitating the activities of all the present and potential participants in the shelter production and improvement process. The second principle is that, while the main focus of the Strategy is on low-income population groups, it is not limited to any one group but, rather, is based on a comprehensive view of all demand actors.
The operational focus of the Global Strategy is on national strategies to be developed by all governments. International support is recognized as crucial for the success of the Global Strategy and must be directed towards enhancing national capabilities to formulate and implement national action components. The Global Strategy is a commitment by the world community and a mandate for the entire United Nations system.
The answer to the question of encouraging the participation of women in the Global Strategy is to be found in the very processes of social and economic development sweeping the countries of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, Latin America and Oceania. These processes have changed the roles and responsibilities of women. Women, as income-earners, homemakers, and heads of household, and women's organizations fulfil a crucial role as contributors to the solution of human settlements problems. This has to be fully recognized and reflected in the equal participation of women in the elaboration of housing policies, programmes and projects, and more specifically in the formulation and implementation of the Global Strategy for Shelter.
<section>C. UNCHS (Habitat) activities related to women</section>
Since the World Conference, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), which has always placed housing policies and programmes in the context of national development plans, has been actively engaged in the promotion of women both as beneficiaries and as agents of change in the area of human settlements. One of the Centre's first follow-up activities after the World Conference was an international seminar on women and shelter, organized jointly by the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs/Division for the Advancement of Women and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat). That Seminar, held in December 1985 in Vienna, brought together representatives of governmental and non-governmental organizations for women from many countries of the world.
The purpose of the Seminar was to familiarize women's organizations with key issues of settlements management. It was felt that, through familiarization with mainstream development issues, women's organizations could formulate proposals related to them for inclusion in national agenda for action. At the end of the Seminar, the participants had an increased appreciation of the broad scope of settlements but they felt that, in order to achieve the greatest impact, it was not enough for women's organizations alone to be made aware of the issues; policy-makers in the settlements sector also had to be familiar with women's perspectives on housing and residential environments. It was stressed that only through joint collaborative efforts could realistic and practical national plans of action evolve.
The Commission on Human Settlements, at its ninth session in May 1986, recommended that:
"regional or subregional seminars be organized ... in order to exchange experiences on pilot projects and to define and evaluate the role of women and the organizations that represent them..."
As a result, work intensified to promote the role of women in the management of settlements. In addition to the resources of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), funding required for regional seminars was received from the Governments of Netherlands and of Norway during and shortly after the tenth (Commemorative) session of the Commission which took place in April 1987.
The following regional and subregional seminars were organized by the Centre and the respective host countries in 1988 and 1989:
(a) Asia and the Pacific: 24-29 February 1988 in Indonesia;
(b) French-speaking African countries: 28 March to 1 April 1988 in Tunisia;
(c) Caribbean countries: 6 to 10 June 1988 in Saint Vincent and Grenadines;
(d) English-speaking African countries: 31 October to 4 November 1988 in Zambia;
(e) Latin American countries: 27 to 31 March 1989 in Argentina.
The participants, who were drawn from governmental and non-governmental organizations as well as from donor agencies, were all involved in human settlements activities, particularly those concerning women.
The objectives of the seminars were:
2/ See Adjustment with a Human Face (New York, United Nations Children's Fund).
(a) To provide policy and procedural guidance to high-level policy-makers, in such ministries as housing, public works and industry, on the incorporation of women's concerns in their programmes;
(b) To provide technical information to representatives of governmental and non-governmental organizations on means of ensuring the effective participation of women in human settlements development and management, with particular emphasis on community participation;
(c) To facilitate the identification of special problems concerning the participation of women in settlements development and management;
(d) To enhance communication and co-operation between institutions dealing with issues concerning women and those dealing with mainstream sectoral development Issues;
(e) To create a readiness in institutions to support policies, programmes and projects to mobilize the participation of women in the development and upgrading of settlements;
(f) To discuss the effectiveness of different communication and information technologies in promoting gender-awareness in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of policies, programmes and projects;
(g) To develop national advocacy strategies for the continuous promotion of the involvement of women in the development and management of settlements.
The following key issues were deliberated upon at each regional seminar:
(a) The role of women in the formulation and implementation of housing policies;
(b) Women and land;
(c) The participation of women in housing finance;
(d) The participation of women in the construction sector;
(e) The participation of women in shelter projects;
(f) Women, water, and sanitation;
(g) Community participation as a means of enhancing the role of women in the development and management of settlements;
(h) Communications and information as instruments to enhance the participation of women in the development and management of settlements.
Highlights of the findings and recommendations of the seminars are presented in Part One of this paper.
The Interregional Seminar to Promote the Full Participation of Women in all phases of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 was convened to give further impetus to the process begun by the earlier series of seminars. The participants (governmental and non-governmental), observers, resource personnel and donors were drawn from each of the five earlier seminars. The Seminar built on regional experiences to develop a plan of action for the continuation of the process which the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) had initiated. Part Two of this document provides an overview of the Seminar.
The process initiated by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) is directed towards the achievement of the following long-term development objectives:
(a) Involving women at all levels of the planning and implementation of human settlements policies and programmes;
(b) Improving the residential/work environment of women, especially urban and rural low-income women, their families and communities.
The strategy developed during the Seminar was formulated in the total United Nations context. In his introductory remarks at the regional meeting in Indonesia, the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) had pointed out that the declaration of 1976-1985 as the United Nations Decade for Women had been a result of the recognition that the scales of world equality had been out of balance. Not only had women experienced negative effects of the shift from traditional to "modernized" societies through the development process, they had been, by and large, excluded from the development planning process itself.
During the Decade, efforts had been introduced to improve the status of women, and, despite difficulties confronted by all countries, those efforts had resulted in substantial achievements, although they had been unevenly distributed between developing and industrialized countries and among sectors of the economy. Noteworthy among the achievements had been the increase in visibility of women's issues throughout the world; the growth of worldwide women's networks; the expansion of research, writing, and scholarship on the status of women and world development; progress in legislation; the rapid expansion of the female labour force; the narrowing of educational gaps between men and women at the lowest levels of the education system; and a general acknowledgement of the need to include women in development policies and programmes not only for reasons of social equity, but in order to realize overall national development objectives.
The Fourth United Nations International Development Decade is about to be launched after a decade that has witnessed difficult and painful adjustments to the global economic crisis. As many studies have shown, the debt crisis has affected women and their dependent children especially. The prospects for the 1990s, according to international analyses, indicate that the trends of the 1 980s are likely to continue, given current policies. Macroeconomic trends, particularly the continuing world economic crisis, have negatively affected the shelter conditions of women. Fewer employment and income-generation opportunities have resulted in more homeless women: reduced social expenditures on child care and education have pushed women into marginal, temporary and low-paid jobs. in addition, continuing social prejudices against women keep their needs secondary to those of men, and the process of including women in decision-making is agonizingly slow. The increased fragmentation of the
family, because of migration, divorce, separation etc., has resulted in a greater number of households being headed by women, but the specific shelter needs of such households have been largely unrecognized.
For the majority of women in developing countries, the challenge is still one of survival and the satisfaction of the basic needs of their families. They still have to struggle for a bare minimum income, for food, for shelter and for employment. They still have to acquire literacy, an acceptable level of education and training, and health standards which will allow them to work productively and to enjoy the fruits of their work. However, there are signs that women and shelter issues have found a permanent place on the United Nations agenda if not in the reality of daily life. The first such sign is the process initiated by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to ensure the full participation of women in the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000.
Human settlements are where organized human activity takes place. They function as a system at the global, regional, sub-regional, national and sub-national levels down to the lowest unit of human habitation. Human settlements are not simply housing or the physical structure of a city, town or village but an integrated system of all human activities residence, work, education, health, culture, leisure - as well as the physical structures that support them.
Human settlements form an important component of a country's fixed capital assets. Public investment in human settlements development - unlike investment in so-called "productive" sectors which, more often than not, suffer rapid obsolescence - are rarely wasted. Investment in human settlements invariably contributes to improvement of a society's ability to respond to basic development needs, such as shelter, education, health, mobility, and (generally) productive output, as well as to conservation of the natural environment.
It might be said, therefore, that while the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) has a special interest in the provision of shelter (decent and affordable housing) for all, this is placed within a broad concept of human settlements which links the issue, as it should be, with almost every aspect of economic and social development. The strategy developed during the Seminar for the full participation of women, therefore, was squarely in this broad context - viewing women, the family and shelter as parts of integrated community development and the community in toto as a contributor to national development plans and the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000.
It is becoming apparent that national development targets can only be achieved if women are approached as the main agents of change. The total sum of their available knowledge and talent is indispensable to progress and the development of humanity. Therefore, in the interest of national development as a whole, the contributions of women to development, which have remained unacknowledged for so long, must be seen by national planners as a valuable resource to supplement and balance those of the long-dominant male.
As development planners and activists look to the participation of local communities in the development process, they are finding that it is the women in communities who are the main providers of food, water and energy for their families, who build houses and who care for children and the sick. In addition to child-bearing and child-caring, women are often engaged in small-scale businesses in the informal sector. Reaching women at the community level is reaching the prime "agents for change": when only men are targeted for action and provided with resources, women, families and communities do not automatically benefit.
Human settlements activity requires a specific focus on women, because, in the majority of countries the shelter needs of women are still subsumed under those of the family, even though there is ample evidence that the specific needs of women and the contributions they can make are distinct from those of men. If it is accepted that human settlements are more than physical structures accommodating people i.e., that they are "places to live and produce in, and a space within which the socialization process and social interaction occur, safeguarding the social fabric and social values of all its dwelles", as they were described by the Minister of Women's Affairs of Indonesia, H.E. Mrs. A. Sulaskin Murpratomo, at the seminar in Indonesia, it is essential to the social fabric of a country that the concerns and needs of women be taken into account in all policies, plans, programmes and projects related to human settlements. Women are, after all, the primary users and providers of
the infrastructural facilities in a settlement, i.e., water supply and sanitary and health services, carrying out income-generating as well as household and child-caring tasks in extremely difficult conditions within the home and, also, contributing to the informal construction of shelter in poor rural and urban areas.
The earlier series of seminars had addressed the concerns and needs of women in general, but the focus of the meetings and the priority of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) were given to urban and rural poor and low-income women. Further delineations will no doubt result from future national and sub- national studies, as the process of involving women in the Global Strategy for Shelter progresses. For example, during the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, two meetings on women and shelter (planned in consultation with the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)), identified additional categories of low-income women. A seminar held in Harare, from 30 November to 5 December 1987, delineated the categories: urban poor women, women on peasant farms, and women on plantations and other worksites. The United States National Congress of Neighbourhood Women Conference on "Housing Options for Women", held at Camden, New Jersey, in
October 1987, focused on another growing category: the increasing number of homeless women in industrialized urban centres.
<section>Part one: Overview of regional seminars</section>
This Part of the report draws upon the work of the five seminars in the earlier series organized by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and on selected papers on the subject: women and shelter. It highlights only the main findings of the seminars; detailed regional and country reports are in the Centre's archives for further reference. These highlights were also included in a background paper that provided a framework for the Interregional Seminar to Promote the Full Participation of Women in the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000. They are discussed below under housing policy, land, finance and construction, as they relate to women, and community participation and communications and information as means of enhancing the involvement of women in the development and management of settlements.
Women are central to the activities performed for the daily subsistence of families and communities, yet are unrecognized and, hence, are marginal in the sweep of development planning and programmes. However, it has to be emphasized that each community and country should be analyzed in the context of its own history and culture, in order to design appropriate responses to women's issues in human settlements. Thus, when this overview states that women, generally, are experiencing certain problems, it should be kept in mind that there are many distinctions not developed within the scope of this document. These differences need to be studied before making specific plans for action at national and community levels.
<section>A. Women and housing</section>
1. Findings policy
In the formulation of shelter-development policies, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) has identified two aspects of women's participation.
The first is the direct participation of women themselves in the formulation of the policies; the second is the inclusion of considerations specific to women in the formulation of policy. Both are essential but, with few exceptions, both were found to be poorly developed in all regions.
One reason for the low levels of participation by women is the assumption/hat women are only potential recipients of the benefits generated in the human settlements sector, not contributors. This implies a purely welfare-oriented focus on women, even in those national economies that can afford welfare programmes. Another consideration is that shelter is often viewed merely as a physical structure accommodating a group of people - the family. The provision of shelter to the family is, thus, misinterpreted as being the same as the satisfaction of the shelter needs of women.
Changing social conditions, which tend to disrupt the traditional patterns of family and kinship, are increasing the number of households headed by women in low-income urban settlements. Rural-to-urban migration is also increasing the number of woman headed rural households which must survive precariously on remittances from family members in urban areas, supplemented by income derived from subsistence-level agricultural production and/or paid agricultural work. The double burden of managing the household and generating income places women at a disadvantage in dealing with the complications of obtaining shelter through conventional housing programmes.
The gender-specific discrimination to which women heads-of-household are subjected costs society a great deal without benefiting any specific segment. Households headed by women are often excluded from programmes and projects simply because existing laws or statutes recognize only males as heads-of-household. In other cases, eligibility criteria for housing applications require a partner. Public announcements, application procedures, down-payment requirements and repayment procedures all discriminate against women - especially against women heads-of-household.
A particularly intractable difficulty identified at the seminars was the rapid rise in the number of people in need of housing at a time of a severe limitation on overall governmental resources, a situation exacerbated by adjustment policies being followed in many countries. It was pointed out that, in Latin America, economic stagnation and absolute poverty are spreading into the mushrooming spontaneous settlements (slums, shanty towns, ranchos and favelas) that girdle the urban centres of the region, casting doubt on the conventional belief that urban development and economic growth are positively linked. Rural poverty is being exported to the city, especially in the absence of positive urban-development programmes to raise the economic and social status of the poor, particularly women. This situation increases the need for national priorities and policies that will guide human settlements growth equitably.
The seminars addressed the question of why governments should single out women, in the face of the vast number of men and children who are also not benefiting from current housing programmes. The following points were made in this connection:
(a) Within the target universe of the disadvantaged population of a country (in many cases, as high as 80 per cent), the needs of the great majority of women are poorly addressed, even when policies generally correspond to the needs of the poor as a whole;
(b) Many women who are members of "conventional" households are at a disadvantage, because shelter programmes on the whole are not benefiting the poor, and, as a result, women suffer disproportionately;
(c) Women who are not members of "conventional" households are at a disadvantage, because programmes actively discriminate in favour of "conventional" households;
The removal of the first type of disadvantage was considered to be relatively easy, because it does not necessarily result in a confrontation over the allocation of limited financial resources. Nevertheless, it does create a confrontation over attitudes and power - essential elements for lasting change - which it might be very difficult to avoid.
The consensus also recognized that shelter policies are a compromise between conflicting aspirations of different groups in a settlement and their respective stakes in the decision-making process. There appear to be two prevailing ways of viewing and treating urban growth. One approach views the city purely in terms of its market value and land purely as a commodity, the price of which must be maximized in order to sustain municipal finances through property taxes. This approach dismisses the urban poor, their informal economy and their residences as low-value occupiers of urban space. The second approach looks at the city in terms of its use-value as a place in which to live and produce, and tries to safeguard the traditional social fabric and the residential and economic activities of the informal sector. This people-oriented approach, however, is steadily losing ground to conventional economic analysis.
Planning instruments, such as building codes, redevelopment schemes, zoning ordinances and land-use regulations, tend to further the objectives of large-scale influential businesses rather than those of poor and disadvantaged households. Mixed-use restrictions (which contribute to the destruction of traditional crafts and small-scale workshops to the advantage of corporate manufacturers), banning of street vendors (who are often perceived as a threat to organized trade) and the introduction of various licensing and regulatory devices (which favour formal over informal businesses) all claim priority in urban space for the corporate economy. It is obvious that the losers from such trends are the informal sector and people who obtain their work and their housing from it, particularly women.
The demand for urban space created by market forces, narrowly defined, has an important impact on the traditional residential-cum-working neighbourhoods inhabited by the poor. It particularly affects women who earn a large portion of their income in the informal sector as well as in home-based crafts and manufacturing activities. Removed from their traditional locations, their employment opportunities disrupted and their transport costs increased, the urban poor in developing countries are often impoverished by the very policies which were ostensibly intended to benefit them.
The seminars acknowledged that progress has been made in all regions towards the achievement of equality for men and women in access to housing, land and credit, but reiterated that women are under-represented at decision-making levels and, therefore, make but a minimal contribution to the formulation of housing policies. In Latin America, the Costa Rican Government was cited as an exception, because its official programme gives priority to the housing problem and expresses the need for changing the role of women in society through improved conditions for the participation of women in the production process, as well as in social, political, and cultural life.
During the seminar for French-speaking countries in Africa it was reported that in Tunisia women have had the benefit of advanced legislation since independence. Wives are not under the guardianship of their husbands with regard to the management of their possessions, the acquisition of land or access to credit. Participants at the seminar stressed the need for ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the United Nations in 1979, and for a popularization of women's legal rights - both of which require above all, a change of attitudes. A Moroccan woman stated that, in her country, laws currently in force were in women's favour and are not discriminatory, but that there was a difference between what the law said and the way things were actually done. Men were not ready to accept women in business, management or labour. Women's organizations still had a lot to do to sensitize women to the need to join together to
assert their rights and their opinions. She cited a positive example which was beginning to bear fruit in Morocco - that of co-operatives. Women were creating women's co-operatives which gave their members negotiating power with financial institutions and local-government authorities. A woman from Niger also posed the problem this way: "Theoretically women are wanted; their place is reserved and recognized. But because of their inferior level of education they cannot participate." This clearly underscores the inter-relatedness of all facets of development and the need to analyze and act on women and shelter issues within the scope of broad development policies and programmes.
It was also noted that, in recent years, efforts have been made by some governments in Asia and the Pacific to repeal laws and regulations which discriminate against women and to encourage the participation of women in th