<title>Energy research in developing countries</title>
Compiled by Stephen Graham
International Development Research Centre
Ottawa · Cairo · Dakar · Johannesburg · Montevideo · Nairobi
New Delhi · Singapore
Published by the International Development Research Centre
PO Box 8500, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1G 3H9
©International Development Research Centre 1994
Graham, S.
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
Compiled by Stephen Graham
International Development Research Centre
Ottawa · Cairo · Dakar · Johannesburg · Montevideo · Nairobi
New Delhi · Singapore
Published by the International Development Research Centre
PO Box 8500, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1G 3H9
©International Development Research Centre 1994
Graham, S.
Energy research in developing countries. Ottawa, ON, IDRC, 1994. xvi + 307 p.
/Energy sources/, /energy resources/, /energy consumption/, [energy demand/, /research!, /developing countries/-/energy economics/, [electric power/, /fuels/, /biomass energy/, /human power/, /planning/, /models/, /Africa/, /Asia/, /Latin America/, /case studies/, references.
UDC: 620.9.001.5 ISBN: 0-88936-709-4
A microfiche edition is available.
All rights reserved. NO part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without the prior permission of the International Development Research Centre.
IDRC BOOKS endeavours to produce environmentally friendly publications. All paper used is recycled as well as recycleable. All inks and coatings are vegetable-based products.
The assistance and contribution of the following individuals in compiling this book is gratefully appreciated: Steven Diener, Tony Friend, Dorothy Lele, Brigid Rowan, Jack Ruitenbeek, Brenda Segal, Nancy White, and Roger Young. The names of the scientists who contributed to the original publications are listed just below the title of each paper. Their hard work and dedication to the Energy Research Group is remembered and acknowledged.
About the Institution
The International Development Research Centre (IDRC) is a public corporation created by the Parliament of Canada in 1970 to support technical and policy research to help meet the needs of developing countries. The Centre is active in the fields of environment and natural resources, social sciences, health sciences, and information sciences and systems. Regional offices are located in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East.
About the Publisher
IDRC Books publishes research results and scholarly studies on global and regional issues related to sustainable and equitable development. As a specialist in development literature, IDRC Books contributes to the body of knowledge on these issues to further the cause of global understanding and equity. IDRC publications are sold through its head office in Ottawa, Canada, as well as by IDRC's agents and distributors around the world.
<section>Introduction</section>
David B. Brooks
The Energy Research Group (ERG) was a joint project of the International Development Research Centre and the United Nations University. Conceived in 1981, at the same time as the United Nations
Conference on New and Renewable Forms of Energy, ERG consisted of a panel of 11 scientists from as many developing countries. Because the bulk of energy research was both funded by and carried out in developed countries, ERG chose to suggest how to focus that research more directly on the needs and priorities of developing countries and, if possible, how to shift some energy research to those countries.
The broad conclusions of ERG were published in 1986 (ERG 1986) and fulfilled the two main parts of its mandate, which were to
· Recommend priorities in the conduct and use of energy-related research and present its findings to decision-makers, researchers, and other interested parties, and
· Recommend ways to determine the allocation of resources for energy-related research and ways in which this allocation could be improved, both nationally and internationally.
The preface to Energy Research: Directions and Issues for Developing Countries (ERG 1986) provides a history of the project and a summary of its approach and conclusions.
The two main parts of the ERG mandate were supported by several other elements, which allowed ERG to
· Carry out a thorough review of energy-related research and technology relevant to developing countries,
· Survey the existing and likely capability in developing countries to conduct, finance, diffuse, and use energy-related research and development, and
· Survey energy-related research and technology in developed countries, its relevance to developing countries, the terms under which access was available, and the ways of using this information for the greatest benefit of developing countries.
These three elements of the ERG mandate were essential to its main work. However, they required knowledge of such a wide range of technologies, geographies, and issues that the 11 members of ERG could not hope to know all or even most of what was required. To fulfill these three supporting elements of the ERG mandate, over 100 state-of-the-art reviews were commissioned. The list of authors reads like a "Who's Who" of energy analysis in the 1980s. A full list of these reviews appears in the Bibliography. Copies of the typescript versions of all reviews are housed in a special collection at the IDRC Library.
The final element of the ERG mandate was to
· Disseminate the views of the Group, invite informed opinion, and provoke discussion on the energy-related issues facing developing countries.
This part of the mandate was fulfilled, in part, by the publication of the main ERG report (ERG 1986). As well, 14 additional volumes were published under the general editorship of Ashok V. Desai, a member and the coordinator of ERG. These volumes were organized by subject matter (according to commodity, region, or issue) and contained information from 60 of the original 103 commissioned reviews. In a number of cases, several reviews were combined into a single paper.
All studies were subject to peer review by two, or in some cases three, energy experts. Comments were also received from staff at the World Bank Energy Policy Program and at the Science Policy
Research Unit at Sussex University. In principle, those studies selected for publication were considered by the reviewers and by the ERG panel as methodologically sound and as a contribution to their field. However, some subject areas (notably environment and institutions) were not included.
This book is a one-volume summary of the 14 volumes of research reviews. These reviews, despite their gaps, present a reasonably complete picture of the relevance of energy knowledge to developing countries from the perspectives of the natural and social sciences in the mid-1980s. As such, the book completes the final element of the ERG mandate.
Each chapter in this summary volume represents one of the original 14 volumes. Within each chapter, the main points and conclusions of each review are summarized. The summaries were prepared in 1992 and 1993 by a number of energy specialists under the general direction of Stephen Graham, a consultant to the ERG. They were subsequently edited to their final format by Michael Graham.
Energy specialists may wish to explore the full studies; however, this book should be useful to a wide audience. No attempt is made to summarize the main ERG report, which stands on its own.
Relevance Today
Energy Research: Directions and Issues for Developing Countries was published in 1986. However, for a number of reasons, largely related to communication with globally dispersed authors and copublishers, publication of the 14 commodity-, region-, and issue-oriented volumes was delayed. When they appeared in 1990, interest in the issue of energy had waned considerably, particularly in the North. The issues that had led to the oil-generated energy crisis of 1973 (and the less widely recognized but more traumatic crisis of 1978-1979) were no longer as pressing because energy supplies had grown and sources had become more diversified.
Economic forces also pushed energy to an issue of secondary importance. Income growth lagged behind the optimistic expectations of the early 1980s (throughout the world but notably in developing countries), and, as a result, growth in demand for commercial energy lagged. As well, because large blocks of capital were no longer as readily available, projections that energy investments in developing countries would double from 2 to 4% of gross domestic product (GDP) (World Bank 1983) were not fulfilled. Certainly, energy prices never again reached the levels of 1979. Today, most forms of energy cost little more in real (inflation-free) dollars than they did in the 1960s.
However, these reviews are still relevant because of
· The perspective they offer on the history of energyin-development as an issue,
· The information they contain on energy technologies and options, and
· The gaps that are now evident in both perspective and content.
This threefold relevance is, in some ways, more evident in this single summary volume than it was in either the main report or the 14 separate volumes.
Perspective
The main ERG report, the 54 reviews published in the 14 volumes, and the remaining unpublished studies represent an important stage in the history of energy analysis. They indicate how energy-in-development was seen by competent and involved scientists from developing countries during the mid-1980s. Notable is the broad shift in perspective that is represented by the three explicit premises on which the ERG study was conducted and the reviews were commissioned (ERG 1986, pp. 1-3). These premises were that
· Energy research must be related to research on the entire economy and society,
· Energy sources must be studied in the context of the demand for them, and
· Energy saving is as important as energy production.
ERG deserves enormous credit for basing its work on these premises, which are, if anything, even more important today than they were when the group was active. The fact that the collection of reviews does not fully live up to the challenge of these premises - energy saving received less attention than energy production, and social issues received much less attention than technical issues - is less relevant than the cast they put over the whole body of work. The work of ERG represented a significant advance over most of what had come before.
The ERG program of work was designed in the early 1980s, at a time when conventional wisdom held that large increases in energy capacity would be needed to power development in the South. Therefore, its perspective on the energy problematique was almost radical. A similar perspective was also emerging in the industrial world, where more and more studies were, implicitly or explicitly, based on the same three premises. However, with the partial exception of "soft energy path" analyses, these studies fell equally short.
Content
Research funding, and to a lesser extent research interest, follows political and economic trends. Because interest in energy as an issue waned during the latter half of the 1980s, funding and interest in energy research slipped. Advances continued to be made, particularly in end-use efficiency and in some new supply technologies (for example, fuel cells). However, for the most part, the reviews commissioned by ERG have stood up remarkably well over the last decade. If they were offered for publication today, they would require little revision to provide an accurate reflection of current methods to assess options for the use of energy research in development planning. In short, the ERG work provides sensible, clear information on such topics as patterns of energy use in developing countries, alternative liquid fuels, and energy in Africa.
Gaps
Despite the breadth of perspective, and the deliberate look for alternatives, some aspects of the energy-development discussion are missing from the research reviews and, to a lesser extent, from the main ERG report. The two gaps that deserve specific attention are energy and environment, and energy and politics.
Only two of the studies commissioned by ERG could be considered environmental. One was by El-Sayed (Health and Environmental Impacts of Energy Systems), and the other was by Smith and Ramakrishna (Traditional Fuels and Health: Social, Economic, and Technical Links); neither was published. Although some of the other studies did refer to environmental issues, they did so only in passing and without any overall perspective on the nature or extent of environmental impacts resulting from energy use. Much better work on energy and environment was available than is reflected in the research reviews, although little of it was specifically focused on developing countries (for example, Holdren et al. 1980; UNDP 1985).
In the main ERG report, environment does get a fair bit of attention-certainly more than would be expected from its comparative neglect in the research reviews. One must surmise that, in the late stages of their work, the members of ERG realized that
· Environment was a more critical development issue than had been recognized at the start, and
· Energy production and use were among the most serious sources of environmental degradation at the local, regional, and global levels and were closely tied to development problems.
Perhaps, too, the notion that "environment" was more a Northern than a Southern issue had begun to lose the credibility that it unfortunately held for some time after the United Nations conference in Stockholm in 1972.
If environment was neglected as an issue in the ERG reviews, it would appear that politics was deliberately avoided. With the partial exception of some references to women's issues, fuelwood and nuclear proliferation, the role of energy availability as a form of empowerment at the local level was almost totally ignored. Also ignored was the role of large and typically transnational corporations in energy supply at the global level.
There was no discussion of various collective approaches to energy supply and delivery (for example, village-scale electrical cooperatives). Absent, too, were references to workers' actions aimed at the oil industry in Nigeria (for example, Turner 1990) as well as reviews of the ways in which both private and public energy corporations organize to protect their interests. There was also no discussion of the fact that alternative transportation fuels imply not merely different energy systems but also a different distribution of economic gains and environmental losses. In a few cases, political aspects were emphasized. However, these reviews by Peter Hayes, Wereko-Brobby, and a few other analysts were neither published nor cited in the main ERG report.
In the selection of reviews to publish, and in the editing, almost all political discussion was eliminated (for a perspective on Hayes' political views, see Hayes (1981); Wereko-Brobby's views can be found in a number of reports he prepared as Director of Ghana's National Energy Board, for example, Wereko-Brobby (1988)). In contrast to the environment, politics received no greater attention in the main ERG report. It was rather as if the world was seen as a very orderly place, where the only difference between rich and poor nations was that the former were rich and the latter poor-a world in which the politics that linked energy and development could be left safely to nongovernmental organizations (typical examples involving electricity include Goldemberg et al. 1988; Butera 1989; Foley 1990; Geller 1991).
With the benefit of hindsight and of the considerable shift in perspective after the publication of the Brundtland Report (WCED 1987), it is now apparent that the absence of environmental and political aspects weakened the impact of ERG's work. More broadly, it reflects the Group's failure to recognize a still only partially emerging new development paradigm. As Gus Speth said in an address to UNDP staff after he assumed his post as Administrator in mid-1993:
What is this new paradigm? ...it says that development that does not improve the lives of the great mass of the poor has no soul, that development that impoverishes the environment has no vision. It says that development does not occur in a political vacuum but depends both on effective governance and also on the empowerment of the many communities in civil society to participate in the decisions that affect their lives.
These were just the areas ignored or downplayed by ERG in what was likely an attempt to constrain the energy-development debate within reasonable bounds and to ensure that South-North consensus would be as strong as possible. The goal was to emphasize the potential benefits of cooperation in energy research, not to focus on the political conflicts implicit in their patterns of development.
Nonetheless, this one-volume overview of the ERG research reviews brings out the merits of the 14 separate volumes. Despite the caveats, the effort represented by the sum of the main ERG report and the reviews was, and is, impressive. For the most part, the work stands up well to inspection nearly a decade after most of the analyses were completed. This is certainly a tribute to the individual researchers, the members of ERG, and the secretariat that managed the process for 4 years.
<section>Volume 1: Patterns of energy use in developing countries</section>
<section>Energy consumption patterns and their implications for energy planning</section>
Joy Dunkerley, with the assistance of Michele Gottlieb
Overview
This paper uses an energy balance, which is an accounting system that defines energy flows at the national level, to review patterns of energy consumption. There are four demand sectors (industry, transportation, household, and commercial) and a nonenergy or petrochemical feedstock sector. Energy flows are influenced by the primary factors that affect the demand sectors and by energy transformation processes. Energy conservation and fuel substitution can further influence the energy balance.
Analysis
The Energy Balance
Data on energy supply-demand from the United Nations, the International Energy Agency, and the Latin American Energy Agency for 55 countries provide useful comparative information in an energy balance format. This format produces energy information on total consumption of each primary fuel, transformation of primary to secondary energy, and energy demand for four sectors. Variations in the energy balance formats, the treatment of electrical conversion, and the units of measurement can lead to different methodologies. Final energy demand and useful energy, which incorporate the concept of the efficiency of conversion and the notion of energy embodied in trade commodities (particularly steel), are conceptually important to understanding the methodology.
The Sectoral Energy Demand
Energy intensity, or energy (E) consumed per unit of gross national product (GNP), appears to be higher in developing countries. However, when a correction is made for "exchange rate bias," which understates the level of income in developing countries, the E to GNP ratios are comparable (with some variations) with those of developed countries.
There are considerable differences in the structure of energy demand among low-, middle-, and high-income countries. In low-income countries, the highest demand sector is the household because the largest energy use is cooking and the devices are inefficient. As incomes rise, energy consumption for cooking may decrease because more efficient cooking devices and more efficient fuels are used. Fuel subsidies, commercialization of fuelwood, and access to modern fuels affect the energy demand of the household sector.
Industrial energy use is correlated to the size of the industrial sector, the types of industry, and the energy intensity of the individual processes used by industrial plants (for example, open-hearth burners or basic oxygen burners for steel, and either the wet or dry process for cement). The most important factor in determining industrial energy demand is the type of industry. India and Jamaica are examples of heavy-industry countries with large industrial energy demands. The mix of fuels used in the sector varies by industry type because the agroindustry may continue to use traditional fuels. whereas heavy industry requires modern fuels.
The transportation sector has the widest variation in energy demand within developing countries. Most of this variation can be explained by income or GNP because economic development requires or causes wider transportation networks for goods, and higher income causes a shift to a higher intensity transportation mode (for example, cars) for personal travel. Country size and geographical conditions, as well as government policies, regulations, and taxes, also help determine the energy demand in the transportation sector.
The transformation sector, principally the generation and distribution of electricity, becomes a large consumer of energy in middle-income countries when the requirement for electricity grows, principally in the industrial sector. In turn, electricity pricing and other government policies (for example, rural electrification) are the prime determinants of electricity demand.
The Potential for Conservation and Fuel Substitution by Sector
There is limited possibility for petroleum substitution in the transportation sector because rail transportation is appropriate only for high-volume routes. However, liquefied coal, ethanol, and methanol may be substitutes that require limited costs for vehicle conversion. Improving the efficiency of each mode that uses petroleum products is a more feasible option for petroleum conservation. Conservation measures include improved public transit and traffic flows in cities and the use of taxes to reduce demand for inefficient cars. The industrial sector provides the greatest possibility for substitution of fuels, but it requires a large capital investment. However, correct pricing policy and training in industrial management for energy "housekeeping" could also help conserve energy. In the household sector, access to free fuelwood and resistance to new cooking devices retard improved energy efficiency. Subsidies for kerosene use worsen the problem because the subsidy is
abused by the middle class. However, this demand sector has large substitution and conservation potential.
Suggestions for Further Research
Research is needed to analyze
· Sectoral energy demand (with particular attention to the impact of price),
· Possibilities for interfuel substitution,
· The determinants of biomass use and its substitution potential,
· The impact of development strategies on energy demand,
· The relationship between economic development and transportation services,
· The determinants of energy demand in households and the substitution potential of fuels in this sector, and
· The potential to substitute other fuels for oil and other factors of production, such as labour, for energy.
<section>Energy use in industry</section>
B.G. Tunnah
Overview
This paper reviews the major processes that consume energy in an energy-intensive industry and focuses on thermal processes (for example, combustion, drying, and distillation). An energy audit, which measures and monitors energy use, can be used by industry. Inefficiency in energy use can be addressed by conservation techniques and government policies. The conservation programs of six developing countries demonstrate the effectiveness of these approaches.
Analysis
The three industrial energy processes are thermal, mechanical, and chemical. The highest proportion of industrial energy is used in thermal processes (for example, combustion, steam generation and distribution, heat exchange, electricity generation, evaporation, and melting). In the conservation of thermal energy it is useful to understand the terminology (for example, complete combustion, coefficient of heat transfer, boiler efficiency, and distillation towers). Other energy processes include gas compression, space conditioning, grinding, refrigeration, and electrolysis. Examples of typical energy intensities in the industrial sector are 2-6 MJ/L of beer, 3.3 MJ/kg of sugarcane, 5.6 GJ/t of wet cement, and 4 GJ/t of bricks.
Energy Audit
An energy audit is the first step to reducing the energy intensity of an industry. There are nine steps to planning and conducting an energy audit. Measurements of energy use focus on the efficiency of boilers and heat exchangers and on heat loss from pipes and vessels. Measurements can be made of energy use in dryers and distillation towers.
Common areas of inefficiency often include
· Energy management-lack of commitment by top management, lack of proper instrumentation, lack of accurate reporting, and lack of acceptable standards of plant housekeeping,
· Combustion processes-poor instrumentation, lack of air control, and poor maintenance,
· Heat transfer-failure to monitor performance, poor or inadequate insulation, and poor maintenance,
· Steam generation-poor water treatment and inefficient or leaking steam traps,
· Drying-poor control over product moisture and moisture of wet feed and poor insulation, and
· Evaporation-poor insulation and poor control of moisture.
Major differences in energy intensity within the same industry can be explained by the different processes used and by the age and size of the equipment. Management skill is one of the most critical elements.
Some constraints to improving energy efficiency are
· A lack of understanding of the equipment and techniques available,
· A lack of proven technology,
· A lack of capital for investment,
· Institutional constraints (for example, incorrect energy prices and price uncertainty), and
· A lack of decision-making and no commitment by management.
Energy Conservation Principles and Programe
A principal focus of any conservation program should be the recovery and use of waste heat. In any conservation program it is important to determine the potential heat sources, establish the potential quantities of heat that can be recovered, determine the overall costs (including investment and maintenance), and balance these costs with energy savings. Fuel substitution may also produce cost savings and should be investigated.
In the early 1980s, conservation programs for industrial energy were undertaken in China, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tunisia, and Uruguay. These programs provided useful demonstrations, although most only estimated potential savings and trained plant engineers in energy management.
The most important elements of any program of energy management are the commitment, communication, leadership, and expertise of management and the appointment of an energy manager to coordinate record-keeping, give technical advice, identify areas of waste, prioritize plant activities, and advise senior management.
Industrial activity must be supported by government policy on energy management. This policy should include sending correct price signals on energy and modifying market forces to achieve other objectives. It should also include regulations on mandatory equipment standards and energy reporting, incentives and subsidies for efficient equipment, demonstration projects and training, energy audits, and information dissemination.
Suggestions for Further Research
Applied research may present new opportunities for energy efficiency in multifuel burners, small-scale coal gasifiers, small-scale coal boilers, low-cost plate heat exchangers, low-cost heat pumps, and small-scale wood and biomass residue gasifiers.
<section>Energy-lntensive materials</section>
Alan M. Strout
Overview
This paper reviews the methods used to determine the energy intensity of materials and explores the importance of energy-intensive materials (EIMs) to overall energy demand. The relationship of ElMs to income or gross domestic product (GDP) is explored, and current KIM production sites are discussed. The theoretical impact of increases in energy price on KIM prices is calculated, and the potential for reducing energy intensity is discussed. The future of developing countries in the production of specific ElMs is explored.
Analysis
Discussion of the energy intensity of materials (measured as energy input per unit weight of commodity) has focused on a small number of commodities. However, a more accurate and complete view of energy intensity can be gathered from an input-output approach, which includes the indirect energy embodied in transportation, the capital equipment of production, and measurements or coefficients per dollar of output. Some studies also include the input of solar energy to production. The Energy Research Group has produced coefficients of energy intensity for 357 input-output sectors. Several paper and food products are among the most energy-intensive commodities, all of which consume more than 73.8 MJ/USD of output.
Industrial energy accounts for a significant share of all energy. The 17 most energy-intensive materials required just under 26.9% of all the world's energy from 1978 to 1980. Technological improvements may have reduced this figure, but new EIMs have been added. In terms of embodied energy in traded commodities, this may add 50% to the energy recorded in exports. About 50% of this embodied energy is in the most energy-intensive commodities.
Developing countries were low producers of EIMs. However, middle-income developing countries produce more EIMs than industrialized countries. In general, 52 countries account for 98% of the world's production of 10 ElMs and 95% of their consumption. Chile, Greece, Peru, and Spain were among the middle-level net exporters.
ElMs, GDP, and Increases in the Price of Energy
Consumption and production of EIMs grow until per capita GDP reaches about 2 000 USD (1970). The contribution of KIM to GDP then declines because of growth in the service sector, which is less energy intensive. Consumption of EIMs usually exceeds production in low-income countries as the demand for manufactured goods increases. The rate of consumption of EIMs decreases more quickly than the rate of production when per capita GDP is higher than 2 000 USD.
Based on the increases in the price of energy from 1976 to 1980, a 70% increase in fuel cost led to only a 6% increase in the price of EIMs (relative to an average index of commodity prices). An economy-wide model was constructed for the UN in the 1970s to show the impact of increased energy prices on energy-consuming goods. Technological improvements and substitution of other commodities for EIMs significantly reduce the impact of higher prices.
Rapid declines in energy intensity can be achieved (for example, in the cement industry before the 1970s). Energy-intensive sectors may experience some dramatic productivity declines, but gradual savings in energy over 40 years (from 1970 to 2010) should result in reductions of 21-40% in the energy coefficients.
Conclusions for Developing Countries
The demand for EIMs continues to be strong in countries that are developing their infrastructure. Surpluses in production capacity are still concentrated in industrialized countries. However, production capacity continues to increase in developing countries as income increases. It is likely that export capacity will shift to countries with lower energy costs and vigorous markets. In some cases (for example, Brazil, Indonesia, the Middle East, and Venezuela), the willingness to price energy (gas) below its economic cost will attract development of the aluminum industry.
The steel industry has developed mini-mills that are attractive to developing countries because of their lower investment cost per tonne of capacity, faster construction times, and lower energy costs. However, the optimum size of a steel plant is still considered much larger than mini-mill size, and the attraction of locating large steel mills in oil-producing developing countries (for example, Algeria, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela) was outlined by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in 1980. For the chemical industry, supply of feedstock may offset market proximity and may favour developing countries. For all three industries, the location of future capacity will be affected by the large markets of developing countries and by the fuel-cost advantages of oil- and gas-producing countries.
Suggestions for Further Research
KIM requirements must be 