<title>101 Technologies - From the South for the South</title>
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
Coordination
Robert Charbonneau
Conception
Jean-Marc Fleury
Research and Writing
Chusa Ginés
Yolande Mennie
Indexing
Sandra Garland
Production
Cathy Egan
Marie Saumure
Distribution
Corporate Affairs and Initiatives Division
IDRC
PO Box 8500
Ottawa, Canada K1G 3H9
© International Development Research
Centre
PO Box 8500, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1G 3H9
IDRC, Ottawa, Ont., CA
One hundred and one technologies. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1992. 231p.
/New technology/, /innovations/, /diffusion of innovations/ /developing countries/ - /agricultural innovations/, /agroforestry/, /fishery engineering/, /energy technology/, /environmental technology/, /industrial engineering/, /health services/, /educational technology/, /information technology/, /social participation/, /costs/, /research workers/, /manuals/, references.
UDC: 600.001.6 ISBN: 0-88936-656-X
A microfiche edition is available.
Il existe également une édition française de cette publication.
<section>Preface</section>
You are looking at proof that technological innovations originate in developing countries. This book describes over one hundred innovations, new methodologies and original conclusions, produced by many of the South's most brilliant minds.
When a problem occurs in a developing region, the local population and even governments tend, all too often, to turn to Northern "experts". This habit is encouraged by international aid agencies, which are often unaware of Southern achievements and skills. The resulting inappropriate, ephemeral solutions are depressingly familiar.
I hope that this book, with its many examples of tangible, practical results in the fields of agriculture, environment, education, information, health and communications, will contribute to raising the profile of the successes achieved by scientists in developing countries. Although we produced the book for all development officials, it is intended specifically for non-governmental organizations in the North as well as in the South. Sometimes these organizations have few opportunities to learn about the achievements of Southern scientists who can be reached by telephone, fax or a short trip.
I am extremely proud of this book. It shows the extent to which our cooperation has been productive, and presents just a fraction of the work done by the IDRC's scientific partners.
At a time when IDRC is mobilizing all its energies to implement the objectives of the Agenda 21 adopted at the Earth Summit, the tangible results contained in these pages augur well for future successes.
Keith A. Bezanson
President
<section>Agriculture</section>
<section>1. The jab-seeder a tool for manual seeding</section>
In the Northeast part of Thailand, poor soybean farmers who cannot afford power-driven farm tools spend long, tiring hours seeding their farms by hand. It is done in three steps: making the holes, dropping the seeds in, and covering them up. The task is laborious, time-consuming, unpleasant, and tiring.
The Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok has developed a new tool called the jab-seeder, which is a low-cost, simple, easy-to-operate alternative for manual seeding of farms. It increases productivity, reduces planting costs, and reduces the drudgery of the task.
The main advantages of the jab-seeder are that hole-making and seed-dropping are done simultaneously, and there is no bending or squatting. It significantly cuts down on the labour requirements (and therefore the costs) of the planting process. A farmer using the seeder punches it into the ground to make a hole and the seed is dropped into the hole as the seeder is lifted.
The jab-seeder has the following features:
· It is useful in various types of soil, including untilled (wet) soil, conventionally tilled soil (with or without residues from previous crops), sandy loam, loamy soil, or clay loam soil.
· It weighs 2 kilograms and is 1.5 metres long.
· It can adjust the amount of seed to be planted per hectare.
· It can seed soybean, mungbean, rice, maize, peanuts, and cotton.
· Its design can be adapted according to locally available materials.
· It has four different types of soil-openers (hole-makers) for various soil conditions.
The jab-seeder has been disseminated in Thailand through promotion on TV and through posters and pamphlets; training sessions with farmers and extension workers; and work with manufacturers and sales networks. There is interest in other Asian countries in disseminating the jab-seeder to small farmers.
Potential users
Small soybean, peanut, rice, maize, and cotton farmers who can't afford power-driven farm equipment.
Cost and availability
The jab-seeder costs approximately US $10.00. It is currently made by three Thai manufacturers:
· Ar-ree Ar-thorn, 253/1-3 Talad Chong-kae, Amphur Takli, Nakornsawan, Thailand.
· Kunasin, 107-108 Srisatchanalai Rd, Amphur Sawankalok, Sukhothai, Thailand. Tel.:
· Anusarn Co. Ltd, 94-120 Chareonmuang Rd, Chiangmai, Thailand.
Contact
Manual Seeder Project
Division of Agricultural and Food
Engineering
Asian Institute of Technology
GPO Box 2754, Bangkok 10501, Thailand
Telex: 84276 TH; Cable: AIT BANGKOK
Resources and publications
The Asian Institute of Technology has published two manuals in Thai and English:
· Operator's Manual - AIT Jab-Seeder
· Manufacturer's Manual - AIT Jab-Seeder
Engineering drawings and technical assistance in the manufacture of the seeder can be obtained from AIT.
<section>2. Promoting the use of soybeans</section>
The reduction in Nigeria's oil revenues has resulted in l a decrease in imports, including imported high-protein foods. Local production of high-protein foods has also been low, resulting in widespread malnutrition, especially among women and children.
The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture set out in 1986 to promote the growing and eating of soybeans, a high-protein food, to improve the nutrition of rural and urban people. Soybeans need no fertilizer, grow well on poor soil, store well, and can be intercropped with other species. Made up of 40% protein, a higher proportion than cowpeas, powdered milk, or groundnuts, they are less expensive and more nutritious than many traditional foods. While soybeans have the same protein content as dried fish, they are considerably less expensive. The sale of soybean products also provides new income possibilities for women.
The project developed a package of technologies for households and small-scale rural enterprises, including:
· Identification of appropriate processing equipment, such as an improved oil expeller and an extrusion cooker for developing commercial soybean products that are acceptable to consumers, easy to prepare and store, and economical to produce;
· Recipes for soybean-based foods suitable for local consumption and sale; and
· A program for introducing soybeans to communities.
Among the new foods that have been developed are soy vegetable soup and soy milk. Soy flour is also added to customary cowpea, yam and cassava flours in traditional foods such as gari, akara, and ogi. These foods made with soybeans taste similar to the traditional foods but have 10 to 20 times the protein content. They have gained wide acceptance both in rural and urban areas.
New recipes and processing techniques seek to reduce the workload and simplify the production of soybean-based foods. For example, a method was developed for making soy milk from flour at home in 15 minutes, instead of the overnight soaking and grinding required in the traditional method. New, faster methods for manual dehulling of beans at home have also been developed.
A number of booklets on soybeans have been published in English, Hausa, Ibo and Yoruba, using simple language and clear illustrations. These ínclude a step-by-step guide to planting, harvesting, storing and processing, and a booklet of recipes (see below).
The program has resulted in a sharp increase in the growing and use of soybeans in Nigeria. In areas where the project activities took place, the percentage of people eating soybeans rose from 0 to 54% since the project started, and 35% of the farmers now grow it. The number of retail outlets selling soy products has also dramatically increased, both in rural and urban areas. Small enterprises now produce soy milk, soy oil, and soybean-based baby foods and animal feeds. Several hospitals and clinics teach mothers how soybean foods can help improve and maintain their children's health. Many women now use soy weaning foods instead of buying commercial baby foods.
Potential users
Farmers, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), government, women's groups, co-ops, agriculturalists, small producers, particularly in areas where the diet is protein deficient.
Contact
Dr Kenton Dashiell, Project Leader
Mrs Sidi Osho, Project Coordinator
Grain Legume Improvement Program
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
Oyo Road, PMB 5320, Ibadan, Nigeria
Tel.: 400300 - 400314; Cable: TROPFOUND IKEJA
Telex: TDS IBA NG 20311 (Box 015) or TROPIB NG 31417
Resources and publications
· Soybeans for Good Health: How to Grow and Use Soybeans in Nigeria, 22-page booklet, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture.
· Soybean as Food in Nigeria, S.M. Osho, 50-page booklet, IITA.
· Soybean Recipes, S.M. Osho, 26-page booklet, IITA.
<section>3. The improvement of chickpea and lentil production</section>
In Jordan, lentils and chickpeas are an important part of the diet. However, production of these legumes declined dramatically in the 1980s. Originally an exporter of lentils and chickpeas, Jordan now imports 40% of local requirements for lentil and 50% of local requirements for chickpea. Farmers stopped producing lentils and chickpeas because of low yields and rising labour costs. Most lentil farmers use manual labour almost exclusively and get caught in a labour crunch at harvest. They are switching to other crops, mostly cereals, to increase profits. Cereal growing is more mechanized.
To increase the production of lentils and chickpeas, to increase farmers" incomes, and to reduce Jordan's protein food deficit, researchers developed improved strains as well as a package of improved technologies and agricultural practices.
The "full package" includes the following:
· Improved agricultural practices including the use of the chisel plow and sweep to prepare the seedbeds, the grain drill for seeding and fertilizing, and the roller;
· Improved varieties of lentils (called Jordan 1, 2 and 3) and chickpeas (called Jubeiha 1, 2 and 3);
· Optimum seeding rates for lentils (120 kg/ha for high rainfall areas and 80 kg/ha for low rainfall areas) and chickpeas (100 kg/ha);
· Optimum rates for fertilizer application (20 kg of nitrogen and 40 kg of phosphate per hectare);
· Early sowing for winter varieties, which significantly increases yields;
· Optimum methods for weed control;
· Recommendations on equipment adapted to the terrain, for use in mechanical harvesting, including a tractor back-mounted cutter bar (single or double knife), a self-propelled cutter bar, a plant puller, a grain combine and a whole harvester.
The most promising technique for chickpea so far is a modified conventional grain combine used at a slower speed. For lentils, pulling and swathing techniques are still being investigated to reduce straw loss, which is valuable for animal feed.
Techniques and machinery are adapted to local conditions and socioeconomic factors. The Jordan Cooperative Organization (JCO) rents the required equipment to farmers who request it. They also conduct demonstration trials on seeding and harvesting.
The technology has been demonstrated as a full package to farmers who possess landholdings large enough to introduce mechanization (five hectares or more), and as a minimum input (improved varieties and fertilizers) to smaller, poorer farmers. Seeds of the improved varieties are propagated by the Ministry of Agriculture and distributed to participating farmers. Use of the improved package has doubled the yields of some farmers.
Extension bulletins in Arabic, detailing the recommended practices, have been produced for farmers and extension workers. A 45-minute video in Arabic on mechanical lentil and chickpea production has also been prepared and shown at workshops and field days.
A similar program has been developed in Tunisia at the Institut national de la recherche agronomique de Tunisie, involving improved strains of lentils and chickpeas, seed production, and recommended agricultural practices. A publication in Arabic will be produced.
Potential users
Lentil and chickpea producers on rainfed farms. The package can be used by farmers with access to machinery, as well as very small farmers or farmers working on stony or hilly soils.
Contact
Mr Bassam Snobar
University of Jordan
Faculty of Agriculture
Amman, Jordan, T1X 21629
Tel.: 962-6-843655 ext. 2523
Fax: 962-6-832318; Telex: 21629
UNV JO
In Tunisia:
Mr Habib Halila
Institut national de la recherche
agronomique de Tunisie
Avenue de l'Indépendance, Ariana, Tunisie
Tel.: 231985 or 231 693; Fax: 216 1 711741
Resources and publications
· Pamphlets in Arabic describing all recommended management practices (University of Jordan).
· 45-minute video in Arabic describing recommendations (University of Jordan).
· Annual reports on the project are available in English.
<section>4. Beekeeping in rural areas</section>
"Honey hunting," or gathering wild honey in the tropical rainforest, has been a longstanding cultural tradition in Malaysia, from which beekeeping has slowly evolved. Honey and wax are widely used in medicine, as health food, and for traditional crafts such as batik. Malaysia only produces 3% of its local requirements in honey. The rest is imported from Australia, China, and the US. However, local honey at higher cost is preferred to the cheaper, imported honey. Honey hunting is therefore a lucrative business, with expeditions into the jungle bringing in between $300 and $600 a day.
Researchers in Malaysia have now developed technologies and methods to promote beekeeping as a cottage industry with many socioeconomic benefits for rural small farmers and landless peasants. Currently, some 1000 Malaysians maintain about 5000 bee colonies. Most of these beekeepers are small farmers with less than 2 hectares or no land at all.
The technologies that the research team developed include:
· Methods of hive management using movable frames mounted in wooden boxes to control the production of honey, wax, and pollen;
· Methods to control pests and disease;
· Methods for the treatment and storage of honey;
· Methods for breeding and rearing queen bees;
· A technique for the mass rearing of carpenter bees for crop pollination;
· An inventory of indigenous plants on which bees feed (in English and Bahasa Malaysia).
The main system that has been developed is the rearing of bees under coconut trees (called "coconut complex agroecosystem"). However, bees can be kept under coffee, pineapple, star fruit, rubber trees, and in orchards. The pollination activities of the bees increase yields of orchards and other crops.
Beekeeping has been shown to increase a farmer's income by up to 50% under favourable conditions; it requires little capital outlay, no land, and is not labour intensive. It is particularly suited as an income-generating activity for women, young people, and the landless. During the study, it was found that revenue from honey sales reached US $2160 per year; operating costs (labour, feed supplements, pest control, and bottles) cost $837. Net income was therefore $1322.
A major dissemination project has been funded by the Communications Division of IDRC with the following components:
· Publication of a manual on basic beekeeping, for semiliterate readers, in Bahasa Malaysia. The manual includes modules on hive design, catching wild colonies, hive management, honey collection, pest control, and the economics of beekeeping;
· Two training programs: basic beekeeping (this course is mainly targetted at women from coconut beekeeping areas), and a queen bee rearing course for more advanced beekeepers;
· Field days, seminars, etc.
As a result of the success of this project, an Asia-wide network is being considered to promote and extend beekeeping to other countries.
Prerequisites
Cost of 36 hives and beekeeping equipment (hat and veils, bee blower, gloves, cleaning tool, and bee brush) is approximately US $2488. Pay-back period has been estimated at 2 years. The system works best under coconut trees. The bees themselves can be purchased or colonies caught in the wild (the beekeeping course provides instruction on catching wild colonies).
Potential users
NGOs, co-ops, small farmers, women's groups, and youth groups, particularly in coconut-growing regions of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam.
Contact
Dr Makhdzir Mardan
Malaysian Beekeeping Research and Development Team
Universiti Pertanian Malaysia Faculty of Agriculture
43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia
Tel.: 9486101; Telex: MA 37454
<section>5. Forage system for semi-arid areas</section>
In Bali, Indonesia, it is common for farmers to mix crop land animal systems. In the dry regions cattle are very important, bringing in up to 43% of the total farm income. Native grasses, tree leaves, and cereal straws are used as feed, but the supply is often inadequate.
To increase the availability of animal feed in dry areas, researchers have been working on a new forage production system based on three strata: grasses and native legumes, shrubs, and fodder trees. The system has the potential to reduce erosion and promote a sustainable system for crop and animal production.
The system, as developed by the researchers, uses 0.09 hectares of land on the perimeter of a 0.25-hectare crop field. This land is used to grow grass and legumes (stratum 1), shrubs (stratum 2), and fodder trees (stratum 3). Cattle are kept in stalls and fed exclusively with forage from the plot, unlike traditional systems where the cattle are tethered on grass during the day. Modified versions of the system are operating in India and Southeast Asia. Farmers adapt the system by choosing appropriate forage species and deciding on the amount of land to be allocated to fodder production.
The researchers found that the three-strata system has the potential to:
· Produce more forage than other systems;
· Increase the number of animals that can be sustained on a given farm;
· Increase farmers' incomes from animal production;
· Reduce soil erosion and increase soil fertility;
· Provide up to 64% of a household's needs in firewood.
Other potential benefits associated with the system are increased poultry and snail production, the possibility of honey production, and protection of the local ecosystem.
Specific grass and tree species were found to be particularly suited to the semi-arid regions of Indonesia, including Stylosanthes, Acacia, Gliricidia, and Leucaena (trees and shrubs) and Cenchrus, Panicum, Centrosema, Verano, and Urochioa (grasses and legumes). Through the introduction of goats and more complete utilization of the available feeds, the researchers are seeking to improve the economic benefits of the system further in relation to traditional systems.
Prerequisites
Access to seed or seedlings of appropriate species.
Potential users
Small farmers, NGOs, extension services in semi-arid areas where mixed crop-animal systems are used.
Contact
Dr I.M. Nitis
Department of Nutrition and Tropical Forage Science
Udayana University
Jalan Jendral Sudirman, Denpasar
Bali, Indonesia
Tel.: (0361) 23791 ext. 114; Cable: MATER,
FAPET, UNUD
<section>6. Women and integrated pest management</section>
The widespread use of pesticides in agriculture has resulted in new problems including poisonings, insect resistance to the chemicals, and the loss of the pests' natural enemies. In the Philippines, it is usually the women who decide on and buy agrochemicals for the farm.
Filipina researchers have been introducing to rural women a new system of integrated pest management (IPM), an environmentally and economically sound way to control agricultural pests.
IPM controls pests using a combination of techniques: the natural enemies of a pest; special cropping practices (such as proper timing and rate of fertilizer application, and synchronized planting, rodent control, and harvesting at the community level); pest-resistant varieties; and minimal use of chemical pesticides based on regular monitoring of the fields to diagnose pest damage.
In the Philippines, IPM was first developed for rice and vegetable plots. Like most technologies, IPM must be fine-tuned and adapted to specific agricultural, ecological, and economic conditions, as well as to the felt needs of the farmers. It has the potential to lower the risks to human health and the environment significantly while providing higher yields and profits.
Because IPM is a people-oriented and knowledge-based technology, a communication strategy is essential to its success. Various methods are used to bring the IPM message to rural communities and specifically to women: radio programs, audio cassettes, and local "resource centres" with exhibits and educational materials, including videos recording local people's experiences with IPM, comic books, leaflets, and posters. Intensive on-farm, hands-on training is needed to acquire the necessary decision-making skills that will make IPM effective. Education on the health hazards of pesticides is also an important component to convince people of the importance of IPM after they have been repeatedly told that pesticides are essential to their farming practice.
Although educating the women in IPM increases its chances of success, it also provides them with the opportunity to increase their participation in decision-making and their self-esteem. A participatory approach with built-in feedback mechanisms is essential.
When many farmers complained that monitoring the fields took too much time and was difficult for them because of poor eyesight, training in field monitoring was given to young "IPM scouts" who could then be hired by farmers and earn an income.
Prerequisites
IPM must be developed and tested for different locations and crops according to local conditions. Information must be available on local pests, their natural enemies, pest-resistant crop varieties, as well as social, economic, and ecological factors.
Potential users
Farmers everywhere. In Asia, four countries have encouraged IPM as official policy on crop protection: India, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
Contact
Dr Candida B. Adalla
Department of Entomology
University of the Philippines at Los Baños
Laguna 4031, The Philippines
Tel.: KO 225-3527/2594; Fax: 632-817-0598
Resources and publications
The Philippines program has produced a number of materials, mostly in Tagalog (the local language) and some in English. These include comic books, pamphlets, leaflets, and other publications on various aspects of big-intensive gardening and agriculture. It also developed a slide-tape show on the project which is available for the cost of reproduction (US $95.50). Mailing costs for the slide show or the set of print materials is US $25.50 airmail or US $1.20 surface mail.
<section>7. Mulbud a computerized calculator for multi-crop farm budgets</section>
Farmers who integrate tree crops into their farms are making a long-term investment that commits them to a course of action for decades rather than one or two seasons. Because of this, it is important for them to be able to do an economic assessment before designing their tree cropping systems.
To facilitate this, a computer package has been developed for the economic analysis of multi-period and multi-crop farm budgets. Called MULBUD (for MULti-crop and MULti-period farm BUDgets), it is an interactive, user-driven simulation tool designed for users with little or no experience with computers and minimal training in economics. It is user friendly and "fail-safe."
The program is used to build farm budgets from data entered by the user. As a simulation tool, its aim is to provide alternatives, rather than fixed solutions. It helps to do rapid calculations of expected future earnings versus current costs, and to decide if the proposed crop combination is advantageous.
The software has the following features:
· 60 possible time periods;
· Years and "seasons";
· A built-in editor;
· Multiple enterprise budgets;
· Multiple products per enterprise;
· Sensitivity analysis;
· Loans/credit scheduling;
· 15 different displays;
· Final report tables and graphics;
· Extensive HELP functions;
· A detailed user's manual.
The first system was developed in 1983 for use in Southeast Asia and the Pacific. In 1984, MULBUD version 3 was developed and disseminated in Africa as part of an extension tool kit distributed by the International Council for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF). A version for use with DOS was subsequently developed, and MULBUD version 5 was released in April 1990.
A detailed user's manual in English accompanies the software, and ICRAF has produced a training manual.
Prerequisites
Version 3 can be used on a 808 chip or Z80 computer with 63K RAM and CP/M 1.4 or higher operating system. The version for PC microcomputers requires an XT with 192K RAM and DOS 2.0 or higher operating system.
Potential users
Agricultural researchers, planners, consultants, and extensionists working with smallholder farmers in the tropics; agricultural economists, foresters, agroforesters, government, universities, credit agencies, large-scale farmers involved in orchards, vineyards or agroforestry.
Some examples of the way MULBUD has already been used include: teaching in forestry and agroforestry courses; an economic analysis of options for intercropping under coconuts; development of credit and subsidy policies for banana farmers; analysis of alley cropping of maize and beans between rows of Leucaena; analysis of intercropping coffee with food crops; silvo-pastoral alternatives in areas suffering overgrazing. The system is in use in about 60 countries.
Cost and availability
The copyright is held by D.M. Etherington and P.J. Matthews in Australia. The package is available from:
· Anutech Pty Ltd, PO Box 4, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. Cost of the package is US $296.
Contact
International Council for Research in Agroforestry
PO Box 30677, Nairobi, Kenya
Tel.: 29867; Telex: 22048 ICRAF;Cable: ICRAF
Fax: 521001; E-mail: 157:CGI236
Dan Etherington
Economics Department
Research School of Pacific Studies
The Australian National University
PO Box 4, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
Tel.: 616-06-249-3387; 249-2188; Fax: 616-06- 2671893 Telex: AA 62694 SOPAC
<section>8. The rubber-tire groundnut sheller</section>
Groundnuts, or peanuts, are one of the major cash crops in some regions of Thailand and are an important source of protein for rural people. Thousands of Thai farmers work farms of less than 1 hectare, producing groundnuts by manual methods. This is a labour-intensive process which, along with the low productivity of the land and the low quality of the nuts, results in a low income for farmers.
Traditional groundnut cultivation requires substantial time for land and seed preparation, planting, cultivating, and harvesting, as well as drying, dehusking, and cleaning the nuts for selling.
The manual peanut sheller benefits farmers by reducing time and processing costs for both commercial shelling and shelling for seed. Shelling the nuts by hand produces 7-10 kg of shelled nuts per day, whereas the sheller has a capacity of 30-60 kg per hour. It can potentially increase farmers' incomes as shelled nuts bring in twice as much as unshelled nuts. The initial investment can be recovered quickly, often within the first year of commercial shelling.
The peanut sheller is made of a used rubber tire mounted in a metal housing with a concave wire screen bottom. As the wheel is cranked, the nuts enter the space between the tire and the screen, are dehulled, and drop through the screen into a trough. Winnowing can be done by hand or with a fan. The sheller is 95% efficient and only 3-5% of the nuts are broken. It requires very little maintenance (average cost per year for maintenance is $3 to $5), and spare parts are easily available. During trials, a single machine processed 22 tonnes of nuts in one season without any repairs.
An "economic version" of the sheller has also been designed. It has a simpler and smaller frame and no trough (the nuts fall through the screen directly to the ground below). Its capacity is 25-30 kg per hour, and it has the same efficiency as the larger version.
As well, a motorized rubber-tire sheller with an integrated winnowing fan has been designed for use by large-scale farmers, co-ops, and local traders.
Mechanized equipment developed and designed in Thailand to modernize peanut farming is now being introduced in Africa, Indonesia, and the Philippines.
A dissemination plan for farmers, extension workers, and traders has also been undertaken in the groundnut-producing regions of Thailand. A booklet entitled Construction Handbook for Groundnut Machinery has been published in Thai and English. It includes instructions on building the manual sheller as well as other groundnut equipment such as a stripper/winnower, a motorized peanut sheller, a grinder, and two types of planters.
Potential users
Small-scale groundnut farmers and traders.
Cost and availability
The sheller costs approximately Can $150 for the manual version and $600 to $700 for the motorized version. Some 160 shellers are in use in Thailand and elsewhere. The sheller is available from the following manufacturer:
Kunasin Manufacturing, 107-108 Sri-Satchanalai Road, Sawankalok, Sukhothai, Thailand, Tel.: (055) 642119
Contact
Dr Winit Chinsuwan
Vice-President, Research Affairs
Khon Kaen University
Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand
Tel.: (66-043) 237604; Telex: 55303
UNIKHON TH
Resources and publications
· Construction Handbook for Groundnut Machinery, booklet in Thai and English with engineering drawings.
· Machinery for Groundnut, leaflet in Thai and English.
· A 20-minute promotional video has been produced by the project, and covers the range of groundnut equipment developed at Khon Kaen University. In English or Thai, PAL standard.
For all of the above, contact Dr Chinsuwan at Khon Kaen University.
<section>9. Hand-operated wooden groundnut shellers</section>
Groundnuts are one of the most important crops in Malawi. They currently are the fourth largest export crop and provide smallholder farmers with more than a quarter of their annual agricultural cash income, while supplying about half of domestic oil needs. Both confectionery and peanut oil varieties are produced in the country.
Groundnut shelling in Malawi's smallholder sector is predominantly done by hand. While hand shelling keeps the rate of kernel breakage low, it is labour-intensive and leads to "sore thumb syndrome" when large quantities of groundnuts are handled. The low productivity (1-3 kg/ hour) of hand shelling puts enormous pressure on farmers, as they need to shell their groundnuts before the marketing season (June-September) ends. At the same time they are processing and marketing other crops. It was therefore important to search for a simple, efficient, low-cost machine to replace hand shelling.
The Farm Machinery Unit of Malawi, in conjunction with the Tropical Development and Research Institute developed the first model of a hand-operated wooden groundnut sheller. IDRC funded further testing and modification of the sheller, and initial trials were run for a confectionery groundnut variety. Market standards (90% average whole kernel efficiency, WKE, or 10% visible kernel damage) were met.
The sheller was later adapted to work with two other common peanut varieties - one confectionery and one oil. On-site development and testing established optimal factors such as the size of the grid gaps. Depending on the variety, the sheller attained WKEs of 92-96% with shelling rates of 21-42 kg/hour. A larger model of the sheller (twice as wide) more than doubled the shelling rate of the smaller sheller, while achieving similar WKE.
Before shelling is done the groundnuts are pre-graded by size using grading sieves. The sheller is operated by two people, one at each end pushing the sheller back and forth. Groundnuts are placed in a hopper, fall through an opening called the throat, and settle into the gaps in the removable grid, which is placed in a slot in the bas