<title>Environmentally sound technologies for women in agriculture</title>
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
The many partners and participants listed below provided generous financial and technical support to the workshop. Their valuable contributions are gratefully acknowledged.
Dr. Julian Gonsalves, Executive Vice-President for Program, IIRR, for the concept
Dr. C. Prasad, Secretary General, IF WA, for strong support and involvement
Dr. M. S. Swaminathan, Chairman, IFWA, for support for this activity
Dr. B. N. Chaudhary, Member Project Advisory Committee, for help in accounting
Funding agencies
International Development Research Centre (IDRC), New Delhi
Mr. Ravi Maithel
Principal Program
Officer, IDRC
New Delhi
Citibank
UNESCO
All members of the Central Advisory Committee
Dr. (Ms.) Ruth Alsop, Programme Officer, Sustainable Agriculture, Ford Foundation, New Delhi
Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhagat, Senior Scientist, Division of Agriculture Extension, Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi
Mrs. Anjali Capila, Senior Lecturer, Department of Community Resource Management and Extension, Lady Irwin College, New Delhi
Mrs. Neelam Chhabra, Editor - English, Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. B. N. Chaudhary, Assistant Director General (Lab to Land Programme), Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. Julian F. Gonsalves, Executive VicePresident for Program, IIRR
Dr. M. Y. Kamal, Assistant Director General (Inland Fisheries), ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamala Kumar, Director, Department of Science and Technology, Technology Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. P. N. Mathur, Joint Director (Extension), Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi
Dr. A. C. Mathur, Ex-Assistant Director General (Animal Science), ICAR, New Delhi
Dr. (Mrs.) Minnie Mathew, World Food Programme, New Delhi
Dr. C. Prasad, Secretary-General, IFWA and Ex-Deputy Director General (Extension),
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. R. D. Sharma, Director, Publications and Information, ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan
Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. K. N. Singh, Assistant Director General, National Agricultural Research Project,
ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi
Dr. Vijaylakshmi, Managing Director, Canadian Cooperative Association, New Delhi
All members of Regional Advisory Committee
Arid and semi-arid region (Udaipur)
Dr. Ajit Gupta, Zonal Coordinator Transfer of Technology (TOT), ICAR, CAZRI, Jodhpur
Dr. (Mrs.) Pushpa Gupta, Dean, College of Home Science, Rajasthan Agricultural University, Udaipur
Dr. H. C. Sharda, Chief Training Organizer, Vidya Bhawan, Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Badgaon, Udaipur
Plains (Indore)
Dr. P. Das, Ex-Zonal Coordinator (TOT), ICAR, JNKVV, Jabalpur
Dr. W. R. Deshpande, Ex-Joint Director (Re search and Extension), JNKVV, Indore
All participants in Regional Advisory Committee meetings
All workshop participants (See page 205-207 for full addresses.)
Artists
Ms. Indrani Biswas
Mr. Ric Cantada
Mr. Neeraj Kochar
Editors
Mr. David Abbass
Mr. Scott Killough
Dr. Paul Mundy
Mr. Jaime Ronquillo
All manuscript contributors (See page 208-209 for full addresses.)
IFWA staff
Ms. Shilpi Gupta
Ms. Abhilasha Mathur
Ms. Puja Wadhwa
Desktop publishing staff in the
Philippines
Ms. Mamet Magno
Ms. Jel Montoya
Ms. Angie Poblete
Staff of the Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division, IIRR
Farm women, extension workers and scientists who have assisted in the development of these materials
<section>Preface</section>
Women are critical to the well-being of farm households. Aside from raising children, women are expected to prepare all meals, maintain the homestead, and assist in crop and animal production, all the while tending to the general health of their families. Perhaps, ironically, it is because women have so many responsibilities that they have been over-looked by agriculturalists and policy makers-it has been more convenient to label men as farmers and women as child raisers and cooks. In truth, women are involved in all aspects of agriculture, from crop selection to land preparation, to seed selection, planting, weeding, pest control, harvesting, crop storage, handling, marketing, and processing. Whatever the reason for this neglect, the importance of developing farming technologies relevant to women has only recently been recognized.
In 1992, the International Federation for Women in Agriculture (IFWA), New Delhi, and the International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (IIRR), Silang, Cavite, Philippines, agreed jointly to develop simple, science-based resource materials which could be used by female and male extension workers. The result is a manual of 60 simple environmentally sound technologies which will help reduce drudgery and increase efficiency while helping to maintain a clean and healthy environment.
The manual was produced using a modified version of an approach developed by IIRR to prepare information and training materials quickly and efficiently. Topics were solicited from author experts all over India. They represent national institutes such es the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi; the National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal; the Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Bombay; Haryana Agricultural University; Delhi University, and several other agencies. A number of manuscripts were also contributed by respected NGOs. Still others were gleaned from published works. The raw manuscripts were presented, critiqued, and revised in a sixday editorial and illustration workshop in New Delhi in June 1995. The revised manuscripts were taken to IIRR's headquarters in the Philippines where they were edited, laid out, and scrutinized again by IPWA and IIRR specialists. The camera-ready product was then sent to India for printing.
The topics have been edited and laid out with care to make them interesting and easy to understand. Illustrations have been used wherever possible to explain technologies. While it was written for extension agents, it is hoped that even neo-literates will be able to make good use of this manual.
A complete list of participants, contributors, and contributing agencies is given at the back of this manual.
<section>Animal husbandry and dairying</section>
<section>Selection and breeding of cattle buffaloes</section>
Animal management in rural areas is generally the job of farm women. Their opinion. therefore is important when selecting and breeding livestock. When you select an animal for purchase, consider the following points.
General health
The animal is in good health if:
- it is taking its feed and water well with normal rumination.
- it passes normal dune and urine.
- its eyes are bright, it appears alert, and its muzzle is moist.
- its skin is smooth, its coat glistens, and the animal twitches its skin and swings its tail around to drive off lies..
- the animal walks normally with no signs of lameness.
Age
Count the animal's teeth to determine its age.
Teeth
Approximate age
8 milk teeth
birth to 2 years
1st pair of permanent teeth
2-3 years
2nd pair of permanent teeth
3-4 years
3rd pair of permanent teeth
4-5 years
4th pair of permanent teeth
5 or more years
Testing
If you are considering purchasing a milch cow, milk the animal two consecutive times in order to determine its daily milk production.
Milch animals
For milch animals, look for the following:
- Udder should be large and well developed with a prominent milk vein leading from the udder to the abdomen.
- Four teats, well separated, without cracks or blockages.
- Normal milk flow from all four teats.
- Hind legs should be parallel and spaced well apart, allowing enough room for the udder.
- Angular body, high and wide in the back and sloping slightly downward to the neck.
- Deep chest, well supported.
Reproduction
Here are some questions which will help you choose a good animal.
- How many times has it calved? Preferably, buy an animal which has calved once or twice. Buy freshly calved animals.
- Is it pregnant? If the animal is pregnant, try to determine the stage of its pregnancy.
- What was the time gap between previous carvings? Avoid animals which have aborted.
- How often does it come into heat? Cows (cattle and buffaloes) should come into estrus 45-60 days after calving. A cow should come into heat regularly, every 3 weeks, until conception.
When to breed
If you notice signs of estrus in the morning, mate the animal (or have it artificially inseminated) in the afternoon. If signs of estrus are noticed in the evening, mate the animal early the next morning, 10-12 hours after the onset of estrus.
Have a veterinarian examine your animal 2-3 months after breeding to make certain that the animal is pregnant.
Signs of estrus
- Bellowing Animal becomes restless
- Animal's vagina becomes swollen and discharges mucus Animal mounts other animals
- Animal stands still when mounted
- Frequent urination
<section>Selection and breeding of goats and sheep</section>
When selecting a goat or sheep for purchase, consider the following points:
General health
The animal should:
- take its feed and water regularly and display normal rumination.
- have normal skin and coat, bright eyes, alert ears, and moist muzzle.
- pass well-formed, normal dung, and normal urine.
Age
Always select young animals. Count their teeth to estimate their age.
Number of teeth
Sheep
Goats
8 milk teeth
birth to 1 year
birth to 1 year
1st pair permanent teeth
1 year to 1 year and 9 months
1 year and 2 months to 3 years
2nd pair permanent teeth
1 year and 9 months to 2 years and 6 months
3 to 4 years
3rd pair permanent teeth
2 years and 6 months to 3 years
4 to 5 years
4th pair permanent teeth
3 years and above
5 years and above
For milch goats For milking goats, look for:
- a well-developed udder with two teats, without defects or disease.
- an angular body, sloping slightly downward from the hind section to the neck.
- hind legs well-apart, allowing ample space for the udder.
Reproduction
Some goats and sheep give birth twice a year, some once a year, and others three times in 2 years. Animals which give birth three times in 2 years are preferred. Choose animals which:
- have high twinning rates (produce twins).
- produce a lot of milk, for quick growth of offspring.
Offspring
Sell kids and lambs at between 3 and 6 months of age. Keep the best animals for replacement stock.
Breeding
Mate your animal 14-20 hours after the onset of estrus. Your breeding ram (male sheep) or buck (male goat) should be strong and healthy with a muscular physique, typical of its breed. Look for good loins, strong quarters, and well-developed testes. One male can serve 30-50 females.
Heat detection
A ewe in estrus will:
- bleat (cry loudly).
- wag its tail frequently.
- stand still when mounted.
- try to join the ram.
<section>Selection and breeding of swine</section>
Consider the following points when purchasing a pig:
- Look for sows (female) and boars (male) which are good examples of their breed. In particular, check their length and width.
- Make sure the animal has a good appetite for feed and water.
- The animal should be active, have bright eyes, and alert ears.
- Select a sow with 10-14 well-spaced, functional teats.
- Select sows which farrow (give birth) twice a year, with litters of 8-10 healthy piglets.
- Select sows with a breeding history of producing healthy litters of fast-growing piglets. Ask how many of the sow's piglets in a litter have died.
Breeding
Normally, a sow will exhibit the following signs of estrus 12 months after farrowing.
- Sow is mounted by young boars (but she will move away if not in full heat).
- Sow in full heat will mount other sows.
- Sow becomes restless.
- Sow's vagina becomes swollen and discharges sticky mucus.
- Sow stands still when mounted by other animals.
Mate your sow with a healthy boar 12-30 hours after the onset of estrus. Breed again every 12 hours for 1 1/2 - 2 1/2 days.
<section>Community pasture management</section>
Inadequate feed is a major constraint to livestock productivity. Little scope remains for putting more good lands into fodder production. One solution lies in improving the sustainable production levels of community pasture lands through better management. Women are often responsible for collecting fodder and raising livestock, especially dairy cattle. Improving pastureland can reduce the amount of time women spend collecting fodder and feeding livestock.
Management practices
It is possible to increase the productivity of community pastures through one or a combination of the following practices.
Rehabilitation and management
Rehabilitate pasture land with improved grass varieties and legumes for higher yield, higher nutritive value, and palatability. Grasses can be transplanted or grown from seed. Legume seeds are sown between grass lures. Multipurpose trees can also be planted to provide fodder, fuel, and timber. (See the glossary for a list of improved grasses and legumes.)
Protect pasture from overgrazing. Consider erecting a stone wall, making a trench and mound barrier, or planting a live hedge.
Adopt proper soil and water conservation measures to improve site quality. Field lands can be ploughed and developed across the slope to retain water and prevent soil from being washed away.
Surplus fodder during monsoon can be conserved in the form of hay or silage for use during lean periods. (See Make hay to preserve fodder and Make silage to preserve green fodder.)
Encourage stall feeding-feed livestock in their sheds without letting them out for grazing.
Management of grazing land
Regulated grazing is useful in locations where the regeneration capacity of perennial grasses is fast and prolific.
- Fencing. Use live hedges, stone walls, bamboo poles, and wire fencing to help regulate the movement of livestock.
- Bush cleaning. Remove thorny and unwanted bushes to improve forage production.
- Burning. Burn during the summa to destroy weed seeds and dried and cut bushes. Burning also promotes growth of grasses.
- Herbicides. Particularly heavy weed growth can be controlled with herbicides during early monsoon. Follow safety and application instructions carefully. Herbicides can be dangerous to humans and livestock.
- Fertilizer. Application of 40-80 kg urea per ha (20-40 kg nitrogen/ha) during the monsoon can increase forage yield by 30 to 70 percent.
- Grazing. Do not graze a pasture in the first year after fencing in order to allow perennial grasses to regenerate and produce seeds. Resume grazing in the second or third year, depending on the amount of regrowth. To prevent overgrazing, graze just one or two head of cattle (or 6-10 sheep or goats) per hectare. Or practice deferred rotational grazing: shift your animals from place to place, allowing each grazing site enough time to regenerate before returning.
Deferred rotational grazing
This grazing pattern uses three areas of pasture (A, B. and C in the diagram).
From July to October in the first year, graze the animals in pasture A. At the beginning of November, move them to pasture B. and graze them there until the end of February. From March to June, graze them in pasture C.
In July of the second year, instead of moving them to pasture A, put them back into pasture B. In November, move the animals to pasture C, and in March, return them to pasture A.
This deferred rotational grazing system allows each of the pastures to recover for more than a year.
Establishing improved varieties
Highly deteriorated pastures must be re-established. This involves ploughing and land-levelling, followed by sowing of improved varieties of grasses and legumes. Such pastures will give high forage yields for 5-6 years.
Improving germination. Legume seeds have hard seed coats. To improve germination, put seeds in boiling water for 60-90 seconds or soak them in acid (20-30 percent sulphuric acid) for 4-5 minutes.
Seed treatment. Legumes are able to take nitrogen out of the air. This is done in nodules on legume roots. To increase the growth of these nitrogen-fixing nodules, after soaking and just prior to planting, mix legume seeds with rhizobium culture powder.
To help grass seeds grow, make pellets out of a mixture of 3 handfuls of clay, 1 handful of seeds, 1 handful of sand, and I handful of farmyard manure.
Sowing. Seeds can be broadcast or sown in lines. For best results, sow alternate lines of grasses and legumes. Or, try planting alternate strips, each 1-2 m wide, of grasses and legumes.
Fertilizer application. 50-60 kg nitrogen/ha and 20-30 kg phosphorus/ha can be applied to the pasture during monsoon. Applying fertilizer increases forage yield of mixed pastures by 50-100 percent. The protein content of the forage is also increased.
Management of cutting. During the year of establishment, just one harvest is advised. In subsequent years, forage can be harvested every 50 or 60 days. Cut the forage 10-15 cm above ground level.
Conservation of surplus fodder. Surplus fodder can be conserved as hay or silage. Hay is made by drying harvested fodder under the sun. Silage is made by allowing harvested and chaffed material to ferment under anaerobic conditions (without oxygen) in pits.
Grazing. Graze animals according to a schedule which regulates the number of animals and where they graze. This is done to prevent overgrazing and to make good use of pasture growth.
Establishing pasture by rooted slips
Some grasses do not produce seeds. For these, rooted slips must be used (sprouts which grow from roots of some grasses during the monsoon). Transplantation of nursery-raised grass seedlings can also be very effective in establishing pasture.
Contributor Dr. Punjab Singh
<section>Cattle feeding</section>
Questions most often asked by farm women about feeding cattle
- What proportion of straw, green fodder, and concentrates should I feed my cattle?
- What can be done when green fodder is not available in the fields?
- Can green fodder be preserved for use in the lean months?
- Is there a way to make straw more nutritious?
- Are there less expensive substitutes for concentrates?
In the following pages, you will find answers to these important questions.
Generally, cattle are fed with dry straw mixed with some green fodder. Milch animals and draught bullocks need more nutrition; therefore, give them an additional ration of concentrates.
Green fodder
Green fodder is not only nutritious but also palatable and easily digestible. It is available in the form of green forages, such as berseem, lucerne, oats, maize, sorghum, pearl millet, cluster bean, cowpeas, grasses, and lappings of trees. Leguminous fodder crops, like berseem, lucerne, cowpea, and cluster bean, are more nutritious than non-legumes, such as oats, maize, and sorghum. Therefore, for better feed, mix legume fodder with nonlegume fodders. Do not feed animals only with legumes as this can cause bloat.
Cattle should be given about 30-3 5 kg of mixed green fodder daily. This should be chopped to avoid wastage.
Dry fodder
Dry fodder is available in the form of straw and stover. Though less nutritious, these are needed to meet the bulk or dry-matter requirement of cattle. Mix green fodder together with the dry fodder. Feed 3-4 kg of dry chaffed fodder daily. (See Improve dry fodder by adding urea. )
Concentrates
Oil cakes, rice and wheat bran, cereal grains, seeds, molasses, etc., make good concentrate mixtures. Concentrate is economically prepared by mixing cakes, wheat or rice bran, and grains or pulses in equal proportion There is not much advantage in adding expensive items, like cotton seeds, to the mixture.
Concentrates containing proteins and minerals are the most nutritious part of cattle feeds. Concentrates are especially important for growing calves, first carvers, pregnant and milch animals, and working bullocks.
On average, 1 kg of concentrate mixture is given daily to first carvers, especially cross-bred cattle. Pregnant cows should be provided with 1 to 1.5 kg of concentrate mixture every day during the last 60 days of pregnancy.
Important tips
- Chaff the green and dry fodder to avow wastage.
- Treat dry fodder with urea to increase its nutritive value. This will help reduce the quantity of concentrate required in the feed. (See improve dry fodder by adding urea.)
- When green fodder is scarce, supplement the diet with an increased quantity of concentrate mixture.
- You can reduce expenditure on concentrate mixtures by supplementing with ureamolasses liquid mixture. See Ureamolasses liquid mixture.)
- Mineral mixture and common salt should be fed at the rate of approximately 30 9 per animal per day, if not otherwise supplemented in the feed.
- Store concentrates under dry conditions. High moisture content encourages mould growth.
- Reject all feed which has developed mould or fungus. This could lead to poisoning.
- Make sufficient clean drinking water available to your cattle. Contaminated water will result in diarrhoea and other disorders.
Mineral mixture
Mineral mixture contains major and trace minerals. Feed 30-35 g of good mineral mixture to milch cattle, 20-25 g to heifers and dry animals per day.
Common salt can be provided in the concentrate mixture at the rate of 20-25 g per day, or separately in the form of a rock-salt lick
Water
Cattle need 30-40 litres of water daily. Clean water should be available to your cattle at all times. If this is not possible, offer water to your cattle at least three times a day. Allow them to drink as much as they want
Balanced feed Requirements for green fodder, dry fodder, concentrates, and minerals depend on:
- Size and age of the animal
- Growth stage and pregnancy status
- Climatic conditions
- Milk yield
- Nature and amount of work
Balanced feed for cattle Cattle feed generally consists of the following:
- Green fodder
- Dry fodder
- Concentrate mixture
- Mineral mixture
- Water
A good feed is palatable, nutritious, balanced, easily digestible, non-toxic, and economical.
A balanced feed is one which provides different components of feed in proper proportion to meet the needs of each animal- calves, milch cattle, dry-cattle, draught cattle, etc. More feed might be required in extreme hot or cold weather. As such, a balanced feed is different for different animals under different conditions.
Economical feeding
Cattle feed should also be economical. Feeding green fodder is more economical than providing concentrate mixture. You can reduce expenditure on feed by substituting green fodder for concentrate mixture.
A cow yielding up to 8 litres of milk need not be given concentrate mixture if it is fed 40-45 kg of mixed green fodder (such as oats + berseem, cluster bean + sorghum, or cowpeas + maize), 3-4 kg of dry fodder, and mineral mixture each day.
Higher yielding animals will require additional concentrate, perhaps 1 kg of concentrate mixture a day for each additional 3 litres of cow milk or 2. 5 litres of buffalo milk.
Feeding during lean months
Provide good quality dry fodder during lean months when green fodder is not available. The amount of concentrate fed should also be increased to make up for the lack of green fodder. As such, 9 kg of wheat straw mixed with 4 kg of concentrate mixture can be given to a cow yielding 10 litres of milk during the lean months. (See Make silage to preserve green fodder and Make hay to preserve fodder.)
Do not forget to add mineral mixture and common salt to the feed in all seasons.
Contributors: Dr. Ram Chand, Ms. Parvinder Sharma, and Dr. Jagdish Singh
<section>Make hay to preserve fodder</section>
Handle with care
Be gentle when raking ~ moving dry fodder. Rough handling will shake off nutrition legume leaves.
Green fodder is especially scarce during the summer and early winter. Try preserving surplus green fodder as hay for these times of scarcity.
What is hay?
Hay is any forage crop cut before it is mature and dried for storage. It is more nutritious and palatable than straw because hay preserves the entire plant.
Crops suitable for hay
All fodder crops (including most grass species) can be used to make hay, but clovers and oats are especially suited.
How to make hay
Harvest berseem and lucerne just before flowering. They are most nutritious at this stage. Cereal fodder crops, such as oats and sorghum, should be harvested at flowering stage. Young sorghum plants before flowering stage can be poisonous to livestock.
- Use the last few cuttings of berseem, lucerne, and oats. (The first cuttings are best fed as fresh fodder.)
- Leave the material in the field to dry in the sun. Rake it frequently for uniform drying. In case the field is to be used immediately, move the material to a suitable place to dry. Try drying it on a fence.
- Overdrying will result in loss of nutrients, such as Vitamin A. On the other hand, underdrying will result in growth of fungus during storage. Ideally, the moisture content should be reduced to 15 percent. To tell if fodder is dry enough to make hay, rub the material between your hands. The material should not feel wet. Hay should retain its green color.
- After drying, the material should be collected and stored under shade in dry conditions.
Contributor: Dr. Jagadish Singh
<section>Make silage to preserve green fodder</section>
One method at preserving green fodder is to turn it into silage.
What is silage?
Silage is preserved green fodder that contains moisture. It is made in an airtight structure called a silo. Well-made silage is greenish yellow in colour, and has a pleasant vinegar-sweet smell.
Crops suitable for silage
Cereal fodder crops, such as oats, maize, and sorghum, are most suitable for making silage because their high carbohydrate content results in good fermentation.
Method of preparing silage
- Construct a concrete or brick silo above the ground, or a pit silo. The latter is more economical and easy to handle for a small farm family.
- Select a piece of land at a higher level to prevent stagnation of rainwater.
- Harvest cereal fodder crops, such as sorghum, maize, and oats, at the flowering to milk stage.
- Legumes should be harvested just at flowering stage.
- Chaff the green fodder.
- Spread the chaffed material evenly in layers in the silo and pack thoroughly to remove all air.
- In the case of legume-only fodders, mix straw with the green fodder to reduce the moisture content.
- Fill the chaffed fodder 0.7 to 1 m above the soil surface.
- Cover the silo pit with polythene sheet. Spread a 5 cm layer of earth over it, and finally, plaster it with mud to make the structure airtight.
Silage is ready for feeding after 30-45 days.
Silage is nutritious and palatable. About 25 kg of silage is equivalent to 3 5 kg of green fodder. It can be used as cattle feed during the dry lean months.
Contributor: Dr. Jagdish Singh
<section>Improve dry fodder by adding urea</section>
When green fodder is unavailable, farm women are forced to feed their cattle poor-quality dry fodder, such as wheat and paddy straw, local grasses, and dry stalks of maize, sorghum pearl millet, and sugarcane tops.
Increasing the cattle's concentrate ration to make up for this shortfall is costly. There is a low-cost alternative. You can improve the quality of dry fodder by treating it with urea, a common fertilizer. Urea treatment is easy.
Materials required (for every 100 kg of dry fodder)
Urea
1.5 kg
Common salt
500.0 g
Mineral mixture
500.0 g
Vitablend
20.0 g
Water
10.0 litres
Method of treatment
Dissolve urea, common salt, mineral mixture, and Vitablend thoroughly in water by stirring it with a wooden stirrer.
Spread the dry fodder evenly under the sun in a 5 m x 10 m area.
Spray half the quantity of urea solution on the dry fodder, using a sprayer or garden watering can.
After about 30 minutes, turn the dry fodder upside down, and apply the remaining quantity of urea solution. The treated fodder can be fed immediately after it dries. If stored in a sealed plastic container, the material will ferment. Fermented fodder is more palatable. Use within 2-3 weeks.
Contributor: Dr. Jagdish Singh
<section>Urea-molasses liquid mixture</section>
Nutritious concentrates account for a large part of feed costs for ruminants. Depending on the cost of molasses, this expenditure can be reduced by replacing concentrates with a nutritive ureamolasses liquid mixture.
Materials
Urea
2 kg
Sugarcane molasses
100 litres
Water
2 litres
Mineral mixture
2 kg
Common salt
1 kg
Vitamin A supplement
20 g
(if green fodder is not available)
Method of preparation
1 Take 2 litres of drinking water in a pot.
2 Dissolve 2 kg of urea thoroughly in the water by stirring it with a wooden stirrer.
3 Put 100 litres of sugarcane molasses in a trough of galvanized iron sheet or some other metal.
4 Mix the urea solution slowly in the molasses, stirring it continuously.
5 Make a mixture of 2 kg of powdered mineral mixture and 1 kg of powdered common salt.
6 Mix the mineral mixture and salt in the urea-molasses mixture.
7 Mix in 20 g of vitamin A supplement. 8 Heat the mixture to boiling point. Continue stirring during heating to avoid charring and to facilitate uniform mixture 9 Allow it to cool.
Schedule of feeding
Introduce the urea-molasses mixture gradually over 2-3 weeks.
During the initial three days, give 500 g of the urea-molasses mixture daily; reduce the quantity of concentrate mixture by 25 percent.
During the next four days, offer 1-2 kg of the urea-molasses mixture; cut the concentrate to half the original amount, and reduce roughage by 25 percent.
In the second week, give 2-3 kg of the urea-molasses mixture daily and withdraw the concentrate mixture completely (for adult non-working animals as a maintenance diet). Roughage can also be reduced by 75 percent of the original amount.
From the third week onwards, you can increase the ureamolasses mixture to as much as l kg per 100 kg of animal body weight.
What animals can be fed ureamolasses liquid mixture?
Cattle and buffaloes over six months of age, and sheep and goats over four months of ace can be fed urea-molasses liquid mixture. Avoid feeding it to young calves, as their stomachs are still developing.
How much to feed
Growing calves (older than 6 months)
Green fodder, mixed straw, and 300 g of concentrate mixture.
In addition, 1-2 kg of the urea-molasses mixture for free-choice consumption.
Dry buffaloes and cows
Feed dry buffaloes and cows urea-molasses (5-6 kg) and dry fodder (5-6 kg) daily.
In addition, give green fodder at the rate of l to 2 kg or vitamin
A supplement in the diet.
Milch animals (producing about 10 litres of milk)
Feed green fodder (25-30 kg and straw mixed with 1-2 kg of concentrate mixture.
In addition, provide urea-molasses mixture for free-choice consumption.
Working bullocks
Feed dry fodder (5-6 kg) and urea-molasses mixture (5-6 kg) daily.
In addition, feed green fodder at the rate of 1-5 kg and concentrate mixture at the rate of 1-3 kg, depending on whether the work is light, medium, or heavy.
When not to feed ureamolasses liquid diet
Discontinue the urea-molasses mixture if the animal salivates excessively or appears sick, or is unusually slow to move.
Contributor: Dr. M. Y. Khan
<section>Urea-molasses-mineral lick</section>
Composition
Molasses
Urea
Salt
Mineral mixture
Bentonite
Groundnut cake
Cottonseed cake
Calcium oxide
Groundnut cake and cotton seed meal can be replaced with cheaper, locally avail able cakes and meals.
Ruminant animals, such as cattle, goats, and sheep, are able to convert nitrogen and fibrous feeds into protein and energy. Actually, the job of producing this protein and energy is done by bacteria which live in the rumen-one of the three stomachs of ruminant animals-in a process called microbial fermentation. Fibrous crop residues alone, a major feed for ruminant animals, are actually a very poor source of nitrogen, energy, and minerals. A urea-molasses-mineral (UMM) lick is an effective way to supplement nitrogen (necessary for making protein) and other essential nutrients lacking in fibrous feeds.
Advantages
- UMM licks contain all the nutrients essential for growth and production.
- Adult cattle and buffalo can be maintained by licking 300500 g of UMM lick and consuming whatever crop residues are available.
- For growing animals, 20-30 percent of concentrate can be replaced with UMM lick.
- UMM licks are good for underfed, growing animals. The licks provide all essential nutrients and minerals, especially those required by rumen microbes for fermentation of fibrous material.
- In low-producing and underfed lactating animals, UMM supplementation can increase milk production by 30-SO percent depending on the production level.
- The essential minerals provided from UMM licks help in reproductive development, redu