<title>Oilseed and vegetable oil economy of India: Sectoral policy issues</title>
RP Aneja,
KVSM Krishna,
SJ Phansalkar and VP Gulati
INSTITUTE OF RURAL MANAGEMENT ANAND
OCTOBER, 1992
<section>Contents</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Chapter 2 - Imperfections in the sector
Information imperfections
Supply estimates
Price behaviour
Market imperfections
Policy imperfections
Chapter 3 - Consumption of edible oils and nutritional perspective
Chapter 4 - Major interventions in the sector: Imports
1. Implications of issue of imports to PDS and vanaspati industry
2. Performance of public distribution system for edible oils
2.1 Spatial and temporal allocation, and leakage
2.2 Growth in Skewness
3. Impact of issuing low priced imported edible oils to vanaspati industry
3.1 Historical base
3.2 Use of Imported oils by the vanaspati industry
3.3 Price controls in vanaspati
3.4 Benefits accrued to the vanaspati industry
4. The net effect of import policy
Chapter 5 - Major interventions in the sector: NDDB and TMO
1. Oilseeds and vegetable oil project of the NDDB
1.1 Project funding
1.2 Project implementation
1.3 Project financing
1.4 Achievements
2. Technology mission on oilseeds
2.1 Achievements
2.2 Integrated policy on oilseeds
3. Market intervention operation
3.1 Objectives
3.2 Criteria for fixing price band
3.3 Implications of MIO type intervention
3.4 Progress of MIO
3.5 Achievements
4. The net effect of interventions by NDDB and TMO
Chapter 6 - Need for self-reliance
Chapter 7 - Conclusions
Policy implications
APPENDIX 1 - The role of the press in influencing market sentiments: Case of edible oils
Note
<section>Chapter 1 - Introduction</section>
India has the second largest area under oilseeds, next only to USA. However, it falls behind to the fourth place in terms of production due to comparatively low yields.1 Yields remain lower largely on account of dependence on dryland farming. During the early seventies shortages of edible oils led to substantial increase in the prices. Severe intra-year and intra-seasonal fluctuations in the prices are a common feature of the oilseed economy. Edible oil prices had contributed significantly to the national inflation levels during the recent years. Price movement in edible oils and oilseeds was perceived as a consequence of demand-supply gaps. Addressing these issue several policy options have been adopted in the last one and a half decade. Despite, the production remained stagnant until 1987-88. Only since then a resurgence has taken place.
Edible oilseeds mainly comprise groundnut, mustard, sesamum, nigerseed, safflower, soybean, and sunflower. Oilseeds contribution to GDP stands only next to cereals and milk.2 Edible oil accounts for about 5.5 per cent of the family budget occupying the third place, next to cereals and milk. India, a net exporter of oilseeds and oilseeds products for long, turned into a net importer during 1976-77 to 1987-88 consequent to edible oil imports worth about Rs.800 crores per annum. The main features of recent developments in the sector are:
i) Overall production of edible oilseeds has been steady around 17 million metric tonnes since last three oil years.
ii) Rabi production has been steadily increasing over kharif production.
iii) Mustard production has been taking rapid strides and mustard oil production has caught up with the production of groundnut oil.
iv) Contribution of South comprising Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka to the groundnut production has been quite high.
v) Imports of edible oils have been slashed on account of foreign exchange crunch.
vi) Price fluctuations have been substantially reduced.
vii) Difference between sowing and harvest time prices has been considerably reduced.
Table 1 shows the area, production and yield of edible oilseeds in India for the period 1971-91. From around 12 million metric tonnes in 1987-88 the production went up to 17 million metric tonnes in 1988-89 and has since then been more or less steady. At no point of time in the history of oilseeds cultivation in India, such a performance has been recorded. Further, the contribution of rabi crops have been only one and a half times. This is clearly demonstrated in Figure 1. It may be noticed that the difference between kharif and rabi production is narrowing down.This is attributed to increasing share of rabi groundnut, rabi sunflower, and safflower, and increases in the cultivation of rapeseed/mustard. A strong reason for increasing share of rabi oilseeds in the total edible oilseeds is the higher and growing in yield rates. Figure 2 depicts this trend. As the growth in the production of kharif oilseeds falls below that of the total edible oils, the growth in overall
edible oilseeds may be attributed to rabi oilseeds. Further, the growth in the yield rate is far higher with rabi oilseeds than that of kharif oilseeds.
As shown in Table 2, production of mustard has been steadily going up over the last two decades. It has increased by more than two and a half times whereas the production of groundnut has gone up by only 20-30%. In fact the ncrease in groundnut production is largely due to the shift from kharif to rabi. The yield rate of mustard has also shown a substantial improvement from 594 kgs/hectare in 1970-71 to 900 kgs/hectare n 1990-91. These figures for groundnut are 834 kg and 919 kg, respectively. However, yield being very high the growth of rabi groundnut has taken leaps and bounds. Production of groundnut and mustard and their oil equivalents for all India are shown in Figure 3. Both the curves for mustard are more steeper than that of groundnut. Further, while the differences between the production of the two oilseeds are narrowing down, the curves for oils have shown a reverse trend for the year 1991-92. This is due to the higher realisation of oil from mustard.
Productions for 1991-92 in Figure3 are estimates made by the Institute of Rural Management, Anand.
Southern India, comprising Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, which had more or less a stagnant production around 3 million metric tonnes between 1970-71 and 1986-87, has since then become a more important producer of oilseeds in the country (Table 3). For the last four consecutive oil years it has shown steady increment in the production and by 1990-91 reached as high as 5.6 million metric tonnes. The most interesting trend has been its contribution to groundnut production. This is clearly seen in Figure 4. Since 1984-85 the South has become dominant producer of groundnut over North. Although in 1988-89 share of North rose upto 50 per cent it steadily declined over the last two years.
Table 1: Area, Production And Yield of Edible Oilseeds (All India)
AREA (`000HA)
PRODUCTION (`000MT)
YIELD (KGsHA)
YEAR
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.
Table 2: Area, Production and Yield of Groundnut and Mustard (All India)
GROUNDNUT
MUSTARD
AREA (`000 HA)
PRODUCTION (`000 MT)
YIELD (KGs/HA)
AREA
PRODUC.
YIELD
YEAR
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
KHARIF
RABI
TOTAL
(`000HA)
(`000 MT)
(KGs/MT)
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.
Imported oils which had formed more than 30 per cent of the total available oil in the country until 1987-88 have been slashed to a mere 6.7 per cent of the total available oils for the last three years. This is largely due to foreign exchange shortages. Until 1987-88 edible oils ranked next only to petroleum products in the import bill of the country.
Given the sensitive and speculative nature of oilseed market and high variability in oilseed production, prices of oilseeds and edible oils display great erraticity even within the same season. The trend in fluctuation of prices has come down drastically by 1990-91. Figure 5 shows the intra-year fluctuations of groundnut oil prices at Rajkot market. The physical size of maxima bars shown in the figure are quite large for the period between 1985 and 1990. In comparison with these the variation in 1991 prices are much smaller.
The magnitude of intra-seasonal price variations can be understood with the help of Table 4. Normally, prices that prevail during the sowing periods get depressed by the harvest season leaving the farmers, thoroughly disappointed. Fortunately, this trend has also seen a reversal since 1988-89. Figure 6 depicts harvest time prices as percentage of sowing time prices in order to understand the phenomenon stated above. Prices of groundnut at Rajkot market have been depicted for this purpose. Harvest time prices have usually remained lower than sowing time prices, with sharpest negative variation of 10 to 20 per cent occurring during drought years of 1972-73, 1974-75 and 1987-88. The exception being 1983-84 when high imports coincided with high level of groundnut production. For the last two years of 1989-90 and 1990-91 harvest prices have remained higher than sowing price. These figures, however do not capture the "real" fluctuations in the prices as the actual differences in
prices have been lost because of averaging the prices for a month. This phenomenon is further discussed in Chapter 2.
Table 3: Production of Edible Oilseeds (South North)
Year
Production (`000 MT)
South
North
Total
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.
Table 4: Intra-Seasonal Price Variation (Groundnut At Rajkot)
(Rs./MT)
Oil
Sowing
Harvest
Support
Year
Price
Price
Price
Source: Economic Times for market prices, and Commission on Agriculture Costs and Prices for support prices.
While the policy interventions to stabilise oilseeds and vegetable oil sector have a history of one and a half decade, it is only during the last three years that the sector has been showing signs of self-reliance. In the present study an attempt has been made to analyse the impact of alternative policy options that have been adopted so far in context of several imperfections in the sector. The reasons for stagnancy in the production have been investigated. While attempting to understand the viability of alternative intervention mechanisms several policy implications have been drawn in order to strengthen the sector.
Chapter 2 details the imperfections in oilseeds and vegetable oils sector. The sector is characterised by information and marketing imperfections. A long chain of intermediaries in oilseeds and oils trade operate in such a way that the market transactions are kept non-transparent so as to appropriate a maximum share in the consumer rupee. While supply uncertainties result from monsoon dependency, the non-transparent behavior of the market leads to fluctuations in availability. The study concentrates on the latter phenomenon.
Nutritionists hold the opinion that no health deficiencies can be specifically attributed to low levels of consumption of edible oils. Further, excessive consumption of edible oils and consumption of hydrogenated edible oils would lead to cardio-vascular problems. Discussions on these viewpoints in the context of management of edible oil consumption have been presented in Chapter 3. Given the imperfections of the sector and considering the nutritional perspective, the potential and actual effects of State interventions, such as imports, buffer stocking operations, etc., have been analysed in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5. Chapter 4 discusses the role of imports and Chapter 5 concentrates on the role of National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) and Technology Mission on Oilseeds (TMO). Discussions on the need for self-reliance in the context of World Bank/ FAO recommendations have been presented in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 summarises and concludes with policy recommendations.
<section>Chapter 2 - Imperfections in the sector</section>
Oilseeds and vegetable oil sector in India has been characterised by several imperfections. Broadly, these can be classified as information imperfections, market imperfections and policy imperfections.
<section>Information imperfections</section>
Reliable information on supply, demand and prices are needed for efficient management of any commodity sector. Several sources of information on these three crucial factors can be identified, the most important being the government agencies. In edible oils, the inventories being extremely low, it may be presumed that demand equals supply and to that extent market clearance price may fluctuate along with the supply trends of edible oilseeds. This leaves only supply and price factors on which information is sought. Ideally every producer has to make his cropping decisions based on the competitors' behaviour. But, as things stand in India, producers act independently unaware of the competitors' behaviour. This becomes inevitable due to non-availability of reliable and timely information on supply trends. Further, the source of information on prices being the mass media, the cropping pattern, sales pattern, storing pattern , etc., could be potentially influenced by
the long chain of intermediaries between the two end players, viz., producer and consumer. In addition to supply decisions, the policy decisions such as support prices, imports and exports, buffer-stocking operations, etc., also need information on supply and price trends. Several efforts have been made to estimate the crop size well before the harvest. Similarly, attempts have been made to establish relationships between supply and price. On both the counts, the results have been unsatisfactory. As a matter of fact, vested interests keep forecasting both supply and price in a manner so as to appropriate a maximum share in the consumer rupee through exploiting the imperfections. The efforts and progress made in providing reliable information have been discussed below.
<section>Supply estimates</section>
Three factors bear major influence on the area under cultivation of any oilseed crop.
1. Allocation of area under oilseeds such as groundnut is dependent on not only the cash returns but also on the by-products like fodder. The farmer prefers to cultivate some amount of land for groundnut even in hostile circumstances in order to have fodder for his cattle. Precisely due to this behaviour there does not exist any linear relation between price and area under cultivation.
2. Expectations about the monsoon influence the cropping pattern during kharif. The time and intensity of rainfall are the major influences on production behavior in agriculture.
3. Fertility characterstics of the farm tend to create preferences for crops.
In accordance with the suitability of land, oilseeds cultivation is concentrated in a few areas. The yield of oilseeds in kharif is entirely dependent on rainfall, however, even during rabi season the yield varies considerably across various geographical areas. Any estimation of oilseeds crop has to take into account area sown, fertility of land, rainfall, producer prices, and fodder considerations.
Five methods of estimation have been in practice: Delphi's method, census method, sampling method, remote sensing applications and mathematical modelling. Delphi's method which has been used by almost every organisation in a rather crude form gives significant variation between several estimates. For example, estimates by several agencies for 1991 mustard crop ranged between 55 and 120 lack metric tonnes. Census method which has been adopted by governments is supposed to be more accurate, theoretically. But, the final information on the results are available only after a year of the harvest of the crop. Although information on area sown has been made available by the State governments within 2 months of sowing, it is subjected to changes across the year, and beyond, through revised estimates. Arriving at all India estimates becomes further difficult as the information gathering from all States would normally take substantial time. Certainly these belated data would serve no
purpose in policy formulations as well as in anticipating production and market behaviour. However, government estimates form the base for future research. It is felt that sampling method yields better results than Delphi method and gives more timely results compared to census method. Large multi-national Corporations like Hindustan Levers Limited (HLL) and Indian Tobacco Company (ITC), other organisations like National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), Operation Research Group (ORG) , and the Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) have adopted this method for oilseeds crop estimation. However, even these estimates differ substantially from the figures published by the Government of India. For example, IRMA estimate for 1990-91 Saurashtra kharif groundnut of 4.5 lakh metric tonnes falls short of the government estimate of 8.27 lakh metric tonnes. The estimate for 1990-91 for mustard of 60 lakh metric tonnes was on the higher side over the government figure of 51.5 lakh
metric tonnes. IRMA has been attempting to have more reliable estimates through an integrated approach of sampling method, remote sensing applications, and mathematical modelling. Remote sensing has a greater potential for accurate and timely estimates of area under oilseeds. Estimates for rabi crops such as wheat and mustard have yielded better results. However, estimation for kharif becomes difficult due to the cloud coverage. And also, this method does not have sophistication for estimation of the yields. Mathematical methods have been attempted by researchers to forecast agricultural crop area and yield.3 Particularly, yield models could be very useful in forecasting. The crop cutting estimates of the state agriculture departments contain valuable information for generating realistic yield models as well as other important parameters but the `secrecy' clause denies access to any outside researcher. Unlike the U.S. Department of Agriculture, there is no in-house
economic research service to undertake such studies in India. In the process, most valuable pieces of information have remained unutilised for years.
<section>Price behaviour</section>
Attempts of modelling price behaviour remain unfulfilled due to imperfect information on price trends. While at the core, demand and supply factors influence the price of the commodity, severe fluctuations in intra-seasonal and intra-year prices of oils indicate the futility of a mere economic analysis in understanding the price behaviour. Failure to capture the market sentiments through economic models necessitates an investigation to understand the relevant influential factors. On the whole, intermediaries between producers of oilseeds and consumers of oils play a very significant role in price movements and both the end players are mere residual receivers. To a large extent, the inadequate market intelligence of the intermediaries is responsible for price uncertainty, and the unfair practices of the trade help in appropriation of both consumer and producer margins. Among others, the press has been a strong source of influence. A less than 1% variation in groundnut oil
prices has many a times been covered in some daily newspapers and business papers by giving it a three column treatment. For the consumers as well as the producers, the source of information on prices is by and large the press. It follows then that press can potentially influence the price behaviour. Cropping patterns, selling patterns, storing, etc., are largely dependent on ruling prices. Also, there is ample scope for the press to politicise the issue of price movements in order to effect certain institutional factors which may be conducive to the trade. For example, sensationalising movement in commodity prices would certainly determine the behaviour of interventions such as imports, buffer-stocking etc. When a commodity like edible oil, whose share of consumer expenditure is only around 5 per cent, is given a comparatively high priority and a large coverage, then the role of the press needs to be analysed.
Coverage given by a typical business daily on the prices of groundnut oil, wheat, and toordal at Bombay market for the oil year (Nov.-Oct.) 1990-91 was selected to analyse the role of press in influencing market sentiments. Commodities have been chosen to represent one each from cereals, oils and pulses. Fluctuations in the prices have been computed with the help of coefficient of variation and that of the treatment given by press in terms of title size as proportion to the total space provided for the title on the prices of all commodities, comment size as proportion to the total space provided for comments on the prices of all commodities, and title size as proportion to comment size. While the first two measures of treatment given by the press show the focus on the commodity concerned, the latter draws the element of sensationalisation. In conjunction with the variation in the prices, these measures would explain the extent to which undue coverage has been accorded. All
the issues of the business daily falling within the period of study mentioned above have been surveyed and then aggregated to arrive at monthly and yearly averages. Monthly averages have been analysed to check whether the yearly trends are consistent throughout.
The results of the above analysis have been presented in "The Role of Press in Influencing Market Sentiments: Case of Edible Oils" by Aneja RP and Krishna KVSM (Annexure I) wherein it has been concluded that the press has been a major factor influencing edible oil and other commodity markets which are characterised by severe imperfections. The arbitrary coverage of price movements provide wrong information to the interest groups. A 3% variation in the prices of groundnut oil would get a 50% treatment while a 15% variation in the prices of relatively more important commodities like cereals and pulses would receive less than 3% treatment. This phenomenon adversely affects the functioning of vertically integrated business as well as market intervention operations.
Groundnut oil prices are deliberately depressed at the time of harvest by the trade so as to buy farmers' produce at low prices. It is generally felt that the farmers get the same sum of rupees (after adjusting for inflation) for their product whether they produce 30 per cent more or 30 per cent less. Farmers therefore, left with no incentive to produce more. For example, during 1976 groundnut oil was available at Rs.4/- per kg. in October-November, and the same oil was sold at Rs.13/- per kg. in June-July. However, the monthly data on the fluctuations in prices of groundnut/groundnutoil does not show this phenomenon. It is therefore hypothesised that the average of prices on a monthly basis does not capture the market sentiments and their adverse effect on the oilseed growers. Bulk of the crop comes out over a short span of 2-3 months and within this period there are days when the market yards are full and prices get depressed. Ideally, one should look at daily price
fluctuations, but then there is so much data to be handled. May by, due to this very reason, figures rounded off to the monthly averages were routinely used. An attempt has been made here to look at the amplitude of the variations in price fluctuations computed at daily averages and monthly averages in order to capture the loss of value of data in averaging. This exercising was considered important because averaging of price data on monthly basis does not give a true picture of the loss suffered by the farmers.
The price fluctuations in groundnut oil in Rajkot clearly brings out the fact that until massive imports of edible oils were resorted to in 1976-77, the flutuations in daily prices were much greater than the fluctuations in monthly average prices (Figure 7). The price spread calculated on the basis of daily average has been twice as much as the price spread based on monthly averages in certain years (1968-69, 1972-73). These fluctuations could be explained to be on account of either too little availability or too much availability of edible oils.
Between 1976-77 and 1985-86 daily price fluctuations in groundnut oil have been minimised. However, even this benefit was lost during the years 1987-88 probably because of too much availability of edible oils. Besides increases in the prices of groundnut oil, the general trend seems to show that the fluctuations in groundnut pod prices (Figure 8). Groundnut pod prices continued to remain unpredictable and the widest fluctuation was reached in the year 1987-88 in spite of massive imports. For the last two years, the difference between fluctuations computed in terms of the proportional loss in fluctuations of monthly prices over fluctuations of daily prices (Table 5). Table 5 shows fluctuations in the prices of groundnut and ground oil computed over daily average prices. The loss of value of data has also been shown both in case of groundnut and groundnut oils prices. The magnitude of the loss of value of data would suggest one of the major information imperfections. This
would also suggest the intensity of intra-month fluctuations compounded to the 12 months of a year. As is clear from the table, the loss of value of data is not uniform for groundnut and groundnut oil prices. This would imply that there is no integrated movements between the prices of groundnut and groundnut oil as revealed by a number of empirical studies.
<section>Market imperfections</section>
The source of price hike and price fluctuations lies in the supply uncertainties as well as imperfections of marketing. In turn, supply uncertainties arise broadly due to cultural practices of price-related incentives/disincentives. The production behaviour of oilseeds is dependent on both, acreage and non-acreage factors such as rainfall (or irrigation during growing season), use of fertilisers and pesticides, availability of quality (or improved) seeds and the subsidy programmes, price behaviour, etc. (In India more than 90 per cent of the area under oilseeds depends on rain-fed irrigation). The farmer's response to acreage allocation of oilseeds is dependent on the relative farm price and other non-acreage factors including the yield rate. However, the continued dependence on non-acreage factors indicates the influence of institutional and technological rigidities. While the harvest time price of oilseeds is a function of the wholesale prices of edible oils, an increase
in the wholesale price was associated with less than proportionate increase in farm harvest and retail prices.4 This suggestions an unwarranted appropriation of the share in consumer rupee by the intermediaries, in this case the traders and millers. Further, it was studied that for a given increase in wholesale price the increase in farm harvest price was much smaller than the increase in retailprice5 indicating more disadvantageous distribution towards producers of oilseeds than the consumers of edible oils. In India, there is strong tendency of traders/millers of oilseeds/edible oils getting united to form collusory oligopolistic markets to raise or manipulate prices in order to appropriate the maximum share of the consumer rupee. The speculative nature of the oilseeds market helps them carry out this goal. Since the consumer price has implications for the popular vote, it s likely that the tendency of appropriation is more towards the farmers' share than that of the
consumers. To that extent, the less numerous producers are reduced to the stage of price takers than price givers/bargainers. This in turn, forms a disincentive for cultivation of oilseeds crops.
Table 5: Fluctuations in the Prices of Groundnut and Groundnut Oil (Rajkot Market)
(Percentage)
Year
Fluctions in the Prices of
Loss of Value of Data
Groundnut
Groundnutoil
Groundnut
Groundnutoil
Source: Economic Times for price data
An examination of edible oil prices and oilseed prices would reveal that there does not seem to be any parity between them. This clearly hints at imperfections in marketing and the prevalence of dishonest trade. Most farmers have the option of selling their produce through three principal channels: directly to private traders/consumers, through regulated markets, and/or through cooperative system. A high proportion of the trade by-passes the regulated market. Small traders purchase the produce at farm gate and sell through brokers to oil millers. In many cases millers themselves engage procurers from villages. Often the prices offered in these deals would appear to be slightly higher than those at regulated market yards on account of the potential for tax evasion that these deals bear. In addition, the minimisation of transportation costs and time would prompt the farmers to dispose off the produce at the farm level. Millers/traders ocassionally engage in money lending for
cultivation purposes and in lieu would demand the sales of the produce to their parties. Since a decade or so, because of the efforts made by the NDDB, cooperatives have emerged as strong players in the trade. Farmers exercise the option of selling the produce through cooperative societies. In Rajkot a certain practice known as pooling system is in prevalence. Under this system the farmer retains the option of final sale through cooperative units. The produce supplied by the farmers is sold only at the market price at any time decided by the farmers. However, the procurement levels of these organisations would be constrained by the available storage facilities, lack of parities on account of the fact that cooperatives do not engage themselves in tax evasion and adulteration, nor deviate from the prices announced before harvest, etc.
With the easing of restrictions on cash crop cultivation as a part of the `Grow More Food Campaign' in the fifties, groundnut acreage rose at a fast rate. Particularly, in Saurashtra region of Gujarat State, five districts, namely, Amreli,Bhavnagar, Jamnagar, Junagadh and Rajkot have specialised in groundnut cultivation. With the growth in groundnut acreage, number of oil mills also has gone up. Over the years millers and traders have become economically powerful through engaging themselves in speculation activities, creating artificial scarcities to rig prices, purchasing oilseeds from farmers at low prices through information manipulation etc.6
Through effective communication in newspapers and posting notices at the market yards on the overall crop size, storing capacity, price behaviour etc., farmers' selling pattern is effectively influenced by the millers/traders. Thus, having ensured purchase of oilseeds at low prices, they would again resort to the media for maximum realisation on the finished commodity. The absence of a better estimate of the crop size would help them in running a parallel economy. Parities between seed prices and oil prices have been managed through the appropriate use of 'number one', 'number two' and `number three' accounts; and the options of marketing illegally blended two-three-five or two-five-eight; (the former notation implying the amount of castor, mustard and imported palmolein in kgs. mixed in a 15 kg. groundnut oil tin, while the latter being the composition of cottonseed, mustard and groundnut oils, respectively, in a 15 kg. groundnut oil tin). Further, evading taxes, and
stealing power also helps them in managing parities. In addition to adulteration and tax evasion trading in illegal speculation insulates them from fluctuations in prices arising out of supply uncertainties. Speculation in oil business became very strong with Rajkot and Dhoraji being two important nerve centres. Speculation or illegal satta continued on even after 1965 when forward trading was banned by the government. This activity prospered in the mid-seventies when large scale exports of groundnut oilcakes and HPS groundnut took place from the region. This led to the establishment of solvent extraction plants in Saurashtra and also vanaspati plants. Most of these plants were attached to oil mills. Several investigators have presented the functioning of illegal satta in groundnut oil.7 It is important to note that a small fraction of the well off farming community has also been engaged in speculation activities. The "jangad" method of purchases by the oil mill may have
prompted these farmers into speculative trade.8 This method is similar to the pooling system of cooperatives mentioned above with an additional provison that the produce of the farmer is crushed and sold at the convenience of the miller but the deal is settled at the ruling market price selected by the farmer. This form of transactions would help tax