global information and early warning system on food and agriculture.
FOODCROPS AND SHORTAGES.
No.3 August 2003.
AFRICA: In eastern Africa, recent food aid pledges for Eritrea and Ethiopia have boosted the food aid pipeline but accelerated deliveries and pre-positioning of food are urgently needed. In Tanzania, despite the overall stable food situation, there are serious food security concerns for the central, southern and northern coastal areas. In west Africa, the food situation remains alarming in Liberia, while emergency food assistance is still needed in Côte d'Ivoire and Mauritania. In DR Congo, a serious humanitarian situation persists in Ituri despite international intervention and formation of a transitional national government. ASIA: A large number of countries have been affected by tropical storms, typhoons, floods, and drought in Asia including China, India, Pakistan, Philippines, Bangladesh, Nepal, East Timor, and Mongolia. Hundreds of people have been killed and hundreds of thousands have had to be evacuated. Crops have been affected significantly. In Asian CIS, unfavourable weather conditions have affected cereal production. Georgia and Armenia will require some targeted food aid. A record cereal crop is envisaged in Afghanistan, but access to food remains a problem for a large number of vulnerable people. LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN: In Central America, food assistance is still required in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua for families affected by natural disasters of the past 5 years and recurrent economic shocks. The assistance should target affected women and children. In South America, the outlook is poor in Ecuador for the 2003 maize crop as a result of adverse weather. In Venezuela, prospects are poor for the coarse grain and paddy crops, mainly as a consequence of the reduced use of farm inputs due to the low purchasing power of farmers. In Haiti, food assistance will also be distributed to drought-affected farmers. EUROPE: Prospects for the 2003 cereal crops have deteriorated across Europe in the wake of several weeks of exceptionally hot and dry weather. Wheat output in the EU is forecast to fall 10 percent and that of coarse grains is also forecast down to about 10 percent. Among the CEECs even larger reductions are expected. Adverse weather conditions have also compromised cereal harvest in the European CIS. Ukraine will be a net cereal importer while Russia will remain a net exporter but not a significant player in the international grain market. NORTH AMERICA: Cereal production in North America is set to recover sharply in 2003 from last year's drought-reduced levels. A good winter wheat crop has been harvested in the United States, about 50 percent up form 2002. Prospects for the spring wheat and coarse grains are also favourable. Likewise, in Canada, the main cereal crops of wheat and barley are faring much better than last year and production should rebound.
OCEANIA: Reflecting a generally satisfactory winter sowing season, prospects for the 2003 winter cereal output are favourable. Outputs of wheat and barley are expected to rebound to more than double the drought-reduced levels in the previous year. However, the 2003 summer coarse grains and rice crops, which have already been harvested, were sharply reduced due to reduced irrigation supplies on account of last year's drought.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
COUNTRIES REQUIRING EXCEPTIONAL EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE (Total: 38 countries) Region/Country Reason for Emergency Region/Country ASIA (8 countries) Armenia* Afghanistan* Georgia* Iraq* Korea, DPR* Mongolia* Tajikistan* Timor-Leste Effects of recent droughts and economic structural problems. Effects of recent drought and war Structural problems and input shortages Recent war, shortage of inputs, effects of recent drought Economic constraints Harsh winters, flooding Effects of recent drought Drought, flooding Reason for Emergency.
AFRICA (23 countries) Angola Returnees Burundi* Civil strife, IDPs Cape Verde Drought Central Afr. Rep. Civil strife, IDPs Congo, Dem.Rep.* Civil strife, IDPs and refugees Congo Rep. of Civil strife, IDPs Côte d'Ivoire Civil strife, IDPs Eritrea Drought, IDPs, returnees Ethiopia Drought, IDPs Guinea* IDPs and refugees Kenya Drought in parts Lesotho Adverse weather in parts Liberia* Civil strife, IDPs Madagascar Drought in southern parts Mauritania Drought Mozambique Drought in southern parts Sierra Leone* Civil strife, IDPs Civil strife, drought in parts Somalia Sudan Civil strife, drought in parts Swaziland Drought in parts Tanzania Drought in parts, refugees Uganda Civil strife, IDPs, drought in parts Zimbabwe* Drought, economic disruption.
LATIN AMERICA (5 countries) El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Nicaragua EUROPE (2 countries) Russian Federation (Chechnya) Serbia & Montenegro Civil strife Refugees Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Drought Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks.
COUNTRIES WITH UNFAVOURABLE PROSPECTS FOR CURRENT CROPS Country Armenia Bulgaria China (8 southern Provinces) Cape Verde Central Afr. Rep. Côte d'Ivoire Czech Republic Ecuador Ghana Guinea* Guinea Bissau Hungary Liberia* Mauritania Main contributory factor Frost, drought Drought and heat wave Drought and floods Delayed rains Civil strife Civil strife, dry weather Drought and heat wave Adverse weather Dry weather Dry weather Grasshopper attacks Drought and heat wave Civil strife, dry weather Dry weather Country Moldova Mongolia* Philippines Romania Senegal Sierra Leone* Slovak Republic Tanzania The FYR of Macedonia Ukraine Venezuela Main contributory factor Drought and frost Floods Typhoon Imbudo Drought and heat wave Dry weather in the north Dry weather Drought and heat wave Dry weather Adverse weather Frost and drought Lack of inputs and inadequate water availability.
PURCHASE AND DISTRIBUTION OF LOCALIZED OR EXPORTABLE SURPLUSES REQUIRING EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE: Afghanistan, Russian Federation (Chechnya) ___________________.
1/ Both here and in the text, countries with unfavourable prospects for current crop and/or uncovered shortfalls are marked in bold and those affected or threatened by successive poor crops or food shortages are marked with an asterisk (*). Definitions can be found on the Contents page. This updates information on food emergencies in the June issue of "Food Outlook". Note: The maps on the front cover indicate countries with unfavourable crop prospects and/or those facing food emergencies.
Foodcrops and Shortages, August 2003.
-3CROP AND FOOD SUPPLY SITUATION OVERVIEW As of August 2003, the number of countries facing serious food shortages throughout the world stands at 38, with 23 in Africa, 8 in Asia, 5 in Latin America and 2 in Europe. In many of these countries the food shortages are compounded by the impact of the HIV-AIDS pandemic on food production, marketing, transport and utilization. The recently published joint FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessments highlight this factor (http://www.fao.org/WAICENT/faoinfo/economic/giews/english/fs/fstoc.htm). In eastern Africa, harvesting of the 2003 main season crops is underway in southern parts of the sub-region while in northern parts crops are at varying stages of development. In Kenya and Tanzania cereal outputs are expected to be lower than last year reflecting late onset and/or erratic rainfall. In Uganda the outlook is mixed while in Somalia, although lower than last year, an above average crop is anticipated. In Eritrea, Ethiopia and Sudan, improved rainfall conditions were reported but it is too early to have a clearer picture. Serious and widespread food shortages persist in Eritrea due to last year's drought, poverty and the lingering effects of the war with Ethiopia. About 2.3 million people are now reported to be facing severe food shortages. Of these, about 1.4 million were reported to be drought affected. Similarly in Ethiopia severe food shortages continue to be reported in various parts of the country, but is most severe in southern Ethiopia, due to a poor crop last year and extensive chronic poverty. A recent multi-agency assessment indicated that the number of people in need of food assistance is now about 13.2 million compared to the earlier figure of 12.5 million. In Tanzania, prolonged drought conditions in several parts of the country have affected large number of households with an estimated 1.9 million people in need of food assistance. In Uganda, the humanitarian situation in northern and eastern parts continued to worsen due to escalation of conflict. Recent fighting between Government forces and rebels has displaced more than 820 000 people bringing the total number in need of emergency assistance to more than 1.6 million people. In southern Africa, the 2003 cereal output is estimated at 21.5 million tonnes, slightly higher than the previous year. This reflects a decline in the largest producer South Africa, more than compensated by a recovery in other countries of the sub-region which were affected by poor crops in the previous two years. While there is a general improvement in the food security situation, substantial amounts of food aid are still required, mainly in Zimbabwe where the number of needy population is estimated at 5.5 million, but also in southern provinces of Mozambique, for returnees populations in Angola and in areas affected by localized crop losses and household vulnerability caused by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. In the Great Lakes region, in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), harvesting of the 2003 second season food crops is underway in eastern and north-eastern parts. However, favourable growing conditions notwithstanding, production is expected to be sharply reduced following the escalation of the civil war in these areas, mainly in Ituri District. The UN Security Council authorised in late May the deployment of a 1 500 strong multinational emergency force to Bunia, the main town in Ituri. In mid-June, FAO and WFP jointly approved an Emergency Operation to assist 483 000 worst affected in the northern and eastern parts of the country, including the internally displaced, returnees from neighbouring countries and vulnerable groups. The operation is for a period of six months starting mid-June 2003, and is to provide 32 236 tonnes of cereals and 9 934 tonnes of beans. In Burundi, harvesting of the 2003 second season foodcrops, mainly sorghum and beans, is well advanced. A good bean crop is anticipated in the main growing regions of Kirundo, Muyinga and Ruyigi, where prices of beans have declined by about half with the arrival of the new harvest into the markets. However, in other regions, the late planted bean and sorghum crops were damaged by excessive rains and hail in May and by insufficient rains earlier in the season. Provinces worst affected by localized crop losses are Kirundo, Muyinga, Karuzi, Cankuzo, Makamba, Mwaro, Kayanza and Muramvya. Food aid is being provided to populations affected by the escalation of the civil conflict in April and May. In Rwanda, harvesting of the 2003 second season food crops, mainly sorghum and beans, is underway. A satisfactory harvest is anticipated following abundant rains in late April and May, which improved conditions for crops previously affected by erratic precipitation. Production of Irish potatoes and bananas is also expected to be normal. However, reduced crops have been harvested in the Bugesera Region, where rains were insufficient and the food situation is likely to deteriorate in the coming months. Localized crop losses are also reported in parts of Rukara District in Umutara province. In central Africa, the food security is still precarious in Central African Republic, and food production is not expected to increase this year due to reduced planting and seed shortages, following population displacement. In northern Africa, harvesting of the 2003 winter cereal crops has been virtually completed. Normal to abundant rains over the main producing areas at planting and well distributed throughout the development period have significantly benefited the crops. Aggregate cereal output in 2003 is provisionally estimated at a record of about 35 million tonnes, an important increase from 2002 when an average 28 million tonnes were collected. Production of.
-4wheat, the main cereal, is estimated at 16.7 million tonnes, which compares to an average 12.1 million tonnes harvested in 2002. The increase in wheat production was particularly noticed in Algeria, where an increase of 100 per cent with respect to 2002 is observed, in Morocco, where the increase reached 60 per cent, and in Tunisia where production almost tripled from the 2002 level. A slightly above-average wheat output was harvested in Egypt. In west Africa, with erratic and generally below average rainfall so far in most coastal countries along the Gulf of Guinea, the outlook for the 2003 crops is generally unfavourable. Prospects for the main season crops have been damaged by extended dry weather over most of Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. In the Sahel, early crop prospects are generally uncertain in Senegal reflecting limited rains in parts and Guinea-Bissau due to large scale grasshopper attacks. By contrast, in the eastern and the central parts of the Sahel, weather conditions have been favourable so far with widespread and quite regular rains over most of Chad, Burkina Faso, Niger and Mali. In Mauritania, where the onset of rains has provided some relief to pastoralists, emergency food aid distributions and subsidized sales of wheat have improved the food situation in the worst-hit regions. In Côte d'Ivoire, the food situation remains critical, particularly in the west and the rebel-controlled north. In Liberia, an alarming humanitarian situation has emerged after fighting in Monrovia, where hundreds of thousands of people have sought refuge in almost 100 temporary shelters in the city including churches, schools, stadiums, etc, without running water or food. In this country, intensified fighting has disrupted the current agricultural season and displaced thousands of families, pointing to a further drop in rice production this year, and hence increased food aid needs. In Asia, several countries have been affected by tropical storms, typhoons, floods and drought. Hundreds of people were killed and hundreds of thousands have been displaced. Standing crops were also affected significantly. In China, central, eastern, and southern regions suffered from the worst floods since 1991, affecting tens of millions of residents and inundating several million hectares of farmland. More than 3.5 million people have been reported homeless. On the other hand, eight provinces in southern China are also suffering from drought, affecting millions of people and damaging large area of crops. In Indonesia, rice fields have suffered from severe drought this year and more than 10 000 hectares were affected. In the Philippines, typhoon Imbudo hit vast agricultural lands in northern Luzon and the estimated damage to maize is put at 446 000 tonnes. In India, monsoon, though late, brought heavy rainfall to the north-eastern states, mainly Assam and Bihar, affecting some 2.5 million people. In Bangladesh, some 45 000 people have been displaced and many summer rice seedbeds have been destroyed. Mongolia suffered from worst flooding since 1982 this year killing people and devastating crops and property. In the Near East, the outlook for the 2003 crop production is generally favourable. In Iraq, the harvesting season is complete. An FAO/WFP Crop, Food Supply and Nutrition Assessment Mission has completed its field work and the report is under preparation. In the Asian CIS, aggregate cereal harvest this year is 13 percent down on last year's harvest. Unusually cold winter and dry spring compromised cereal crops in Kazakhstan, Georgia and Armenia, while the weather proved favourable for crops in the rest of the region. Coarse grains have fared better than the wheat crop. Many of the governments in the region have made concerted efforts to increase food production at the expense of cotton, the main industrial crop in Central Asia.
In Afghanistan the prospects are for a record cereal harvest this year, owing to improved precipitation and larger than average areas under cereal cultivation. However, access to food will remain an issue for a large number of vulnerable households.
In Central America and the Caribbean harvesting of the 2003/04 first season cereal and bean crops is about to start. The outlook is good in Central American countries, as the total area planted to maize (the main cereal) is estimated as average; however, production will largely depend upon the intensity of the rains in the weeks ahead, which are forecast to be typical of the ongoing hurricane season. Average to above-average maize outputs are tentatively forecast for El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. Despite the favourable forecast, food assistance from the international community will continue to be provided until February 2006 in these particular countries (World Food Programme's Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation 10212.0) to families affected by the natural disasters of the past 5 years and recurrent economic shocks. The assistance will be focused on affected women and children and should also contribute improve household food supply. In Mexico, planting of the important spring/summer maize crop continues for harvesting from October. A slightly above-average output is early forecast. In the Caribbean, harvesting of the 2003/04 first season rainfed coarse grain crops is underway in Haiti, Dominican Republic and Cuba. Average to above-average ouputs, particularly in the second country, are expected provided normal weather conditions prevail. In Haiti, food assistance will be distributed to farmers affected by recurrent droughts, particularly in the north-western areas.
-5In South America, planting of the 2003 wheat crop is still underway in some countries, while harvesting of the 2003 maize crops has been completed in the southern areas. In Argentina, soil moisture deficits in the main producing areas have delayed planting of the 2003 wheat crop. Sowing should be completed in the days ahead and production is early forecast at 14.5 million tonnes, which compares to the low 12.3 million tonnes collected in 2002. The anticipated increase is due to a more intensive use of fertilizer. Maize output collected in 2003 has increased from the 14.7 million tonnes harvested the year before, and an average of some 15 million tonnes to 15.5 million tonnes of maize are provisionally estimated. In Brazil, wheat plantings have been only completed and production is forecast at a high 4.74 million tonnes, while maize output collected has been a record 45.8 million tonnes. The increase is largely the result of the government's production incentive programme to help reduce the country reliance on imports. In Chile, planting of the wheat crop has been also recently completed and a slightly above-average area planted is reported. In Uruguay, sowing of the 2003 wheat crop still continues. Intended wheat plantings should be below average. In Paraguay, planting of the 2003 wheat crop, which had been disrupted because of severe dry weather, has been recently completed and an average output is early forecast. In the Andean countries, in Bolivia, harvesting of the 2002/03 second season cereal crops has been completed and average outputs collected, while in Ecuador, the outlook is poor for the 2003 maize crop for the third consecutive year, mainly the result of adverse weather which particularly affected the first season crop. In Peru, prospects are good for the 2003 maize crops and an above-average output is expected. In Colombia, planting of the 2003/04 first season cereal crops continues under favourable weather and enlarged maize plantings, with respect to 2002 average level, are anticipated. In Venezuela, prospects are poor for the 2003 cereal crops, mainly as a consequence of the inadequate use of fertilizers and the lack of good quality seeds. This is principally due to the low purchasing power of farmers caused by the difficult economic situation presently faced by the country. In Europe, Prospects for the 2003 cereal harvest have deteriorated in Europe in the wake of exceptionally hot and dry conditions throughout many of the main producing areas, particularly in the central and southern countries. Wheat output in the EU is forecast at about 94 million tonnes, 10 percent down from last year and 7 percent below the average of the past 5 years, while for coarse grains, contrary to earlier expectations, output is now also expected to decline, by about 10 percent, to around 97 million tonnes. Among the CEECs even larger reductions are expected as the adverse spring/summer weather follows on from a less than ideal planting and winter period in many parts also. Well below normal wheat and small coarse grain crops expected in virtually all countries. There are still some hopes that the maize crop may remain closer to normal if significant rains arrive for the remainder of the growing season. In the European CIS, adverse weather conditions, thin snow cover and severely cold winter followed by unusually hot and dry spring, have significantly compromised cereal harvest this year. Aggregate cereal harvest in the region is seen almost 33 million tonnes down on 2002 harvest. Wheat harvest now estimated at 43.1 million tonnes, accounts for almost all of the decline. Aggregate coarse grains harvest now estimated at 52.3 million tonnes is slightly above last year's harvest, in view of the resistance of the crop to adverse weather conditions and replanting in spring. Wheat harvest in Ukraine is now estimated at 5.5 million tonnes compared with 19.7 million tonnes last year and in Russia 36.5 million tonnes compared with 50.6 million tonnes last year. Moldova has suffered severely and wheat harvest, the main staple, is now estimated at 221 000 tonnes compared with 1.2 million tonnes last year. The drop in cereal harvest will severely affect exports from the region, which was at a record high during the marketing year coming to an end. In the Baltics, the cereal harvest this year is seen to.
remain similar to last year's average harvest. The livestock sub-sector has been gaining more importance in the agricultural sector of the three Baltic countries. Unusually cold winter and relatively dry spring have compromised large areas of cereals in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia. Cereal harvest in the three countries is seen significantly lower than last year's improved harvest.
In North America, Cereal output in North America is set to recover sharply in 2003 from last year's drought-reduced crops. Latest indications for wheat output in the United States, now that the winter wheat harvest is almost complete, point to a larger crop than earlier expected, of almost 62 million tonnes, 42 percent up from the previous year's reduced level. In Canada, despite some seeding delays and persisting dry conditions in parts, wheat production this year is still expected to increase significantly from last year's poor crop and is forecast to reach about 22 million tonnes. Likewise, the coarse grain crops in both countries are also expected recover from poor performance last year. The United States maize crop is forecast to reach 256 million tonnes, 12 percent up from 2002. In Oceania, The winter cereal sowing conditions were generally improved over the previous year with satisfactory rainfall in most producing areas. The winter cereal area is estimated up 6.8 percent. Assuming normal weather for the remainder of the season, wheat output in 2003 is expected to rebound to about 22 million tonnes, and that of barley to about 7 million tonnes. The 2003 rice crop has already been harvested and output is officially estimated at a near-record low of just 408 000 tonnes, down about 70 percent from the 2002 level because of reduced irrigation supplies on account of last year's drought.
COUNTRY REPORTS AFRICA NORTHERN AFRICA.
ALGERIA (4 August) Harvesting of the 2003 cereal crops is well advanced and aggregate output is provisionally forecast at a high 4.2 million tonnes, a significant recovery from the previous year's 1.9 million tonnes, when the crops were affected at growth, in particular, by delayed seasonal rains. The recovery in 2003 is mainly due to beneficial rains at planting and adequate weather conditions throughout the development period. Some 3.0 million tonnes of wheat are anticipated, which compares to the past 5-year average of 1.6 million tonnes and the volume of 1.5 million tonnes collected in 2002. Production of barley, mainly used for feed, is expected to be average. Wheat imports in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June) should decrease from the previous year's volume of 4.8 million tonnes to about 4.3 million tonnes, reflecting the increase in 2003 production. Maize imports are also expected to decrease from 1.7 million tonnes to some 1.6 million tonnes in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June). EGYPT (4 August) Harvesting of the 2003 wheat crop has been virtually completed while that of maize is underway. Production of wheat should be about 6.8 million tonnes, compared to the past 5-year average of 6.4 million tonnes and 2002 production of 6.6 million tonnes. The increase is due to the combination of a modest increase in wheat plantings with respect to the previous year, in line with the Government's programme to help increase production, and the normal to abundant rains that have benefited the crops throughout the season. Maize output should be average, while an above-average barley output is anticipated. Production of paddy is also expected to be above average thus helping increase the country rice exports. Despite the increase in wheat production, wheat imports in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June) are expected to remain at the same level as the previous year's volume of 6.5 million tonnes, thus reflecting the strong domestic demand. Maize imports are also forecast to increase from 5.3 million tonnes to 5.4 million tonnes in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June). MOROCCO (4 August) Harvesting of the 2003 winter cereals has been completed and wheat production is provisionally estimated at a record 5.4 million tonnes, a tremendous increase from the above-average volume of 3.4 million tonnes collected in 2002. Production of barley is also provisionally estimated at a record 2.6 million tonnes. The increase is principally the result of the favourable rainfall pattern which has prevailed at planting and during growth throughout the main producing areas, together with the improved use of fertilizers and other agricultural inputs. Wheat imports in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June) are forecast to decline, as a consequence of the increase in production, from 2.7 million tonnes imported last year to about 1.3 million tonnes. Maize imports should remain at the same level of 2002/03 (July/June) imports of 850 000 tonnes. TUNISIA (4 August) Harvesting of the 2003 wheat and barley crops has been completed and satisfactory outputs collected. Production of wheat is estimated at 1.3 million tonnes, which compares to last year's Foodcrops and Shortages, August 2003.
-7drought affected crop of only 423 000 tonnes and to the past 5-year average of 1 million tonnes. Barley output is put at nearly 620 000 tonnes, well above last year's 90 000 tonnes and the past 5year average of 257 000 tonnes. The significant recovery is the result of the favourable rains and weather conditions that have benefited the crops throughout the season. Wheat imports in marketing year 2003/04 (July/June) are expected to drastically drop from the previous year's high 1.8 million tonnes. Imports of maize are also forecast to decline from 750 000 tonnes to some 700 000 tonnes.
WESTERN AFRICA.
BENIN (2 August) Following first rains in the southern part of the country in March, precipitation progressed northwards and covered the entire country in April, allowing land preparation and planting to start. However, in the south, rainfall decreased significantly from May on and remained generally below average, which may have affected crop development. Precipitation has been generally widespread and abundant in the north. Following well above average cereal harvest in 2002, the overall food supply situation in Benin is satisfactory. Markets are well supplied and prices of cereals are generally stable. Cereal imports for domestic use and re-exports during the 2003 marketing year are estimated at 140 000 tonnes and food aid requirements at 15 000 tonnes. BURKINA FASO (2 August) Following first significant rains in early April in the south and south-west, precipitation progressed northwards over the entire country in May and remained generally widespread and abundant in June. Although rains decreased somewhat in mid-June and late July, crops are growing satisfactorily. They are generally in the leafing stage in the Sudanian zone and tillering in the north and the Sahelian zone. Pastures are regenerating well, improving livestock condition. Following the 2002 record harvest, the overall food supply situation is satisfactory. However, the returnees and refugees from Côte d'Ivoire as well as people living in the food-deficit Northern and Sahelian zones will continue to need food assistance. Pastoralists are particularly affected in these zones, due to continuous drop in livestock prices. CAPE VERDE (14 August) The start of the rainy season is delayed. The weather remained mostly dry until late July on most islands. This situation may seriously affect crop production as planting of maize normally starts in July. A joint FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessment Mission in October 2002 estimated maize production at some 5 000 tonnes, only one fourth of the good 2001 harvest and similar to the poor crops in 1997 and 1998. The Mission estimated cereal import requirements for the marketing year 2002/03 (November/October) at 108 518 tonnes, of which 33 250 tonnes were expected to be imported commercially, leaving a food aid requirement of 75 268 tonnes. A follow-up joint FAO/CILSS mission in January 2003 found that the Government had launched food for work programmes to improve access to food for the poor. However, the programmes are under-funded. Cape Verde is a beneficiary of WFP's Regional EMOP launched in December 2002 for 5 drought-affected countries in the west of the Sahel, with an allocation of 2 400 tonnes of food.
-8CHAD (6 August) Following first rains in mid-April in the Sudanian zone, precipitation progressed northwards to the Sahelian zone in June and remained generally widespread and abundant. Crops are developing satisfactorily. Millet and sorghum crops are tillering in the Sahelian zone. They are growing satisfactorily in the Sudanian zone. Soil moisture reserves are abundant. Pastures have regenerated countrywide. The overall food supply position is satisfactory. However, the food situation is reportedly deteriorating in the food deficit areas of Kanem and Tandjilé. Assistance to affected people is hampered by difficult access due to poor road network. WFP has started providing food assistance to an estimated 41 000 people who have fled into the country to escape fighting in Central African Republic. COTE D'IVOIRE (2 August) Following the start of rains in late February, abundant precipitation covered the entire country during April. However, rains decreased and remained generally below average from May on, which may have affected maize development in the south and millet and sorghum crops in the north. Agricultural production is not expected to reach its pre-crisis level this year due to mass population displacement and likely seeds shortages, following the civil war. Although the overall security situation has started to improve, the food situation in the country remains critical, mainly in the west and rebel-controlled north. There are grave concerns about the humanitarian situation in the west, where hundreds of people have been emerging from the bush since French and West African peacekeeping troops were sent into the area in late May. Most of the children and women showed signs of malnutrition. WFP is facing a gap in donor funding for food supplies in the region and there is no functioning healthcare system. Humanitarian assistance falls short of current needs and an escalation in malnutrition, morb