Forestry Department.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Forest Health & Biosecurity Working Papers.
Biosecurity and Forests: An Introduction.
with particular emphasis on forest pests.
by Matthew J.W. Cock with inputs from Marc Kenis and Rüdiger Wittenberg.
December 2003 Forest Resources Development Service Forest Resources Division Forestry Department Working Paper FBS/2E FAO, Rome, Italy.
Disclaimer This paper is one of a series of FAO documents on forest-related health and biosecurity issues. The purpose of these papers is to provide early information on on-going activities and programmes, and to stimulate discussion. The study was carried out in March 2003, and was financially supported by the FAO-Netherlands Partnership Programme on Agro-Biodiversity. The author would like to thank the following persons for helping to prepare some of the case studies (taken from the Global Invasive Species Programme Toolkit) presented in this paper. Case Study 4 was prepared by S. Soetikno, CAB International South-East Asia Regional Centre, Malaysia Agricultural Research & Development Institute; Case Study 11 was prepared by Ross Morgan, National Manager, Forest Health Forest Health Advisory Services, New Zealand. The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Quantitative information has been compiled according to sources, methodologies and protocols identified and selected by the author. For standardized forest inventory methodologies and assessments on forest resources, please refer to FAO, 2003. State of the World's Forests 2003; and to FAO, 2001. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (FRA 2000). FAO Forestry Paper No 140. Official information can also be found at the FAO Internet site (http://www.fao.org/forestry/Forestry.asp).
Comments and feedback are welcome. For further information please contact:.
Pierre Sigaud, Forestry Officer (Forest Genetic Resources) Forest Resources Division Forestry Department FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Fax: + 39 06 570 55 137 Email: pierre.sigaud@fao.org For citation:.
Gillian Allard, Forestry Officer (Forest Health) Forest Resources Division Forestry Department FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy Fax: + 39 06 570 55 137 Email: gillian.allard@fao.org.
Cock, M.J.W. 2003. Biosecurity and Forests: An Introduction ­ with particular emphasis on forest pests. FAO Forest Health and Biosecurity Working Paper FBS/2E, 2003.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
`Biosecurity' in food and agriculture describes the concept and process of managing biological risks associated with food and agriculture (in its broadest sense, i.e. including forestry). Biosecurity is emerging as one of the most important issues facing the international community. There is a growing need for countries to establish biosecurity systems, either to meet obligations under international agreements (for example, in the environmental sector) or to take advantage of opportunities (for example, in the trade sector). In the forestry sector, biosecurity encompasses three main fields of activity: forest protection and phytosanitary issues; naturalization of introduced forestry trees and their impact on ecosystems or individual species; and the release of new genotypes, including genetically modified organisms. Phytosanitary issues `Pests' are defined by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products, i.e. insects, mites, molluscs, nematodes, diseases and weeds. Indigenous pests may be chronic or occur in outbreaks, whereas introduced pests usually occur in an initial outbreak followed by continuous chronic damage. Both types of pest can cause severe losses, making them important factors in forestry. Tropical and subtropical plantation forestry has often focused on a small number of fastgrowing, pioneer species, normally planted as pure stands. Monocultures, especially of genetically similar trees, are associated with an increased probability of pest outbreaks and can also transform sporadic pests into permanent problems. Mixed planting of native (and exotic) trees is therefore increasingly preferred as a strategy for avoiding pest problems. Pest risks associated with a particular tree/location combination should be evaluated prior to planting and the results confirmed with test plots. There is a growing trend towards adopting more sustainable management strategies for forest pests, particularly in developed countries. These changes are related to changes in the perception of the role of the forest, which is increasingly valued not just for economic reasons, but also for its ecological and social functions. Large monocultures are disappearing from many European and North American landscapes and are being replaced by smaller, mixed stands, which reduce pest risks as mentioned above. Analysing and evaluating pest risk requires reliable information. As might be expected, more information is available on pests of trees grown in developed rather than in developing countries, and also for pests of trees grown in plantations rather than for pests in natural forests. Virtually nothing is known of the pests associated with those trees harvested from natural forests and not grown in plantations, at least in the tropics. There is an urgent need for surveys and identification of the pests and diseases associated with many important tropical timber trees, in both natural and plantation situations.
Alien invasive species Alien species can be particularly damaging during plantation establishment, but can also have important impacts on forest biological diversity, especially in the tropics. An increasing number of accidental introductions can be expected as a result of the growing internationalization of trade, the increased movement of people and the resultant overstretching of quarantine services. Some forest and agroforestry trees have the potential to become invasive when grown as exotics, particularly in the tropics, but it is difficult to predict which alien species are likely to cause serious damage if introduced. Species that are innocuous or minor pests in their area of origin can be devastating when introduced elsewhere. At present, the best guide to potential invasiveness is those species that have already caused problems when introduced into another part of the world. Thus, access to reliable information is critically important for assessing this risk. Studies are needed to determine why introduced trees become naturalized or invasive, and protocols for assessing the risks of introductions must be developed and validated. Pilot planting schemes should include monitoring for any indications of invasiveness. Safer options for introductions (e.g. sterile trees) may also be useful. The longer an alien species remains undetected after its introduction, the less chance there is for successful intervention: there are fewer options for its eradication, containment or control, and the costs of intervention rise. Often the key to a successful and cost-effective solution is eradication, but this requires both early detection of an alien species and a rapid response. Once eradication is no longer feasible, the options for control of an alien species include biological control by the introduction of exotic natural enemies from the pest's area of origin. However, this approach should always be based on an appropriate risk assessment and risk­ benefit analysis, following international protocols. Invasive tree species tend to be multisectoral in their impact, and thus need to be addressed with a multisectoral approach. In some cases invasive trees provide useful products or services and, when eradication is not possible, management options should be identified in order to balance the positive and negative aspects. New genotypes The introduction of new tree genotypes could potentially have adverse impacts, e.g. through the displacement of indigenous taxa or genotypes, or the transfer of genes (leading to local evolution, hybridization and introgression), with the resultant development of new taxa with novel ecological characteristics. However, as yet, there are few records of such impacts in the forestry sector. Introductions of other species associated with forestry, including biological control organisms, pollinators, mycorrhizae, etc., should be considered with caution and on a case-by-case basis. The development of genetic modification has created new challenges in risk assessment. Although the first generation of GM products was not particularly relevant to forestry, there are numerous ways in which the technology could be used in forestry, and research in the field is extremely active. There seems to be considerable potential for improving forest trees by developing new genotypes with useful biological traits. However, assessing risks in longterm crops such as forest trees is difficult, and uptake of GM technology is likely to be slow unless protocols that reliably assess the risks are developed, tested, and agreed upon.
Managing biosecurity issues Forestry activities can contribute to the introduction of alien species in several ways, including the movement of forest reproductive materials and germplasm, solid wood packaging materials, trade in unprocessed timber, and contaminants of forest produce. The forestry sector needs to work with other relevant sectors to prioritize the risks associated with these various activities and to find ways of addressing them. In establishing the objectives of a biosecurity programme, it is critically important to consider the full range of stakeholders and their various interests in order to identify areas where cooperation is necessary and where synergies and efficiencies may be sought. In doing so, the whole regulatory cycle and the full range of players must be considered. Several groups may need to contribute to the definition of objectives and to the assessment of risks. Raising awareness, training and capacity building should therefore be important components of any biosecurity programme.
INTRODUCTION.
Definitions Biosecurity is a relatively new concept and its meaning is still evolving: usage varies among different countries and even among different specialist groups. It also presents difficulties when translated into other languages, for example, in Spanish `biosecurity' and `biosafety' cannot be distinguished, while in French biosafety (`biosécurité') is used as the definition for the transboundary movement of living modified organisms under the Cartegena Protocol1. To add to the confusion, biosecurity has also been used to describe the organized response to bioterrorism. Despite these ambiguities, some countries have established biosecurity policies. New Zealand passed a Biosecurity Act in 1993 and established a Biosecurity Minister and Council in 1999 to manage risks posed to the economy, environment and people's health by the movement of various organisms. Similarly, Biosecurity Australia, located within the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, deals with risks pertaining to the import of animals, plants and their products. Broadly speaking, `biosecurity' in food and agriculture describes the concept and process of managing ­ in a holistic manner ­ biological risks associated with food and agriculture (in the broadest sense, i.e. including agronomy, livestock husbandry, forestry, fisheries and related environmental aspects). This usage also implies that transboundary movements or the use of novel genotypes are involved in some way. A separate, though related, concept is `biosafety', which, as developed for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, is used specifically in relation to the release and transboundary movement of living modified organisms (LMOs). In one sense, therefore, biosafety is more limited in scope than biosecurity (since it refers only to LMOs), but in another sense it is broader, since it also encompasses the use of LMOs in medicine. Biosecurity in food and agriculture must be developed in harmony with the provisions of the Cartagena Protocol, while keeping these differences in mind. The FAO Expert Consultation on Biosecurity (September 2002) discussed terminology and concluded that the phrase `biosecurity in food and agriculture' best describes the concept as used by FAO and was unable to identify a satisfactory alternative (FAO 2003a).
The Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity adopted a supplementary agreement to the Convention known as the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety on 29 January 2000, which came into force on 11 September 2003. The Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology. It establishes an advance informed agreement (AIA) procedure for ensuring that countries are provided with the information necessary to make informed decisions before agreeing to the import of such organisms into their territory (see http://www.biodiv.org/biosafety/). 4.
Scope The FAO has outlined the scope of biosecurity as follows: "Biosecurity is composed of three sectors, namely, food safety, plant life and health, and animal life and health. These sectors include food production in relation to food safety, the introduction of plant pests, animal pests and diseases, and zoonoses, the introduction and release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and their products, and the introduction and safe management of invasive alien species and genotypes. Biosecurity thus has direct relevance to food safety, the conservation of the environment (including biodiversity) and sustainability of agriculture." (FAO 2001). The aspects considered relevant to the forestry sector are: · · · · Plant (i.e. tree) health as affected by biological factors ­ i.e. all groups of both introduced and indigenous pests (including insects, mites, molluscs, nematodes, diseases and weeds). The use of alien plant species in forestry (trees, but also associated species such as cover crops) that could become invasive. The introduction and release of exotic genotypes, including living modified organisms (LMOs) and their products. Forestry activities that may provide a pathway for the accidental introduction of alien species.
Biosecurity in forestry seeks to identify, prevent and remedy harm in specific sectors. In this context, it may be worthwhile highlighting the differences between harm and risk: `harm' is the damage done by something that might have been prevented through biosecurity, whereas `risk' is the chance of that harm occurring. Where risk is involved, there can never be absolute protection or certainty. The aim should be to optimize possible benefits while minimizing the risk posed by exposure to a potential hazard. This inevitably involves financial, ethical and technical factors. Public perception is also of great importance, and facilitating public understanding of risk is not easy. Often, the public demands a level of risk protection that is difficult to justify on technical or economic grounds, while a perceived failure of biosecurity can destroy public confidence in the whole concept. The decision to initiate and implement a biosecurity regime is often based on the concern that a known problem (such as the introduction of a forestry pest) may reoccur. However, there is also an increasing perception that the use and products of new technologies need to be regulated, particularly in view of the speed and power of technological advances, and their associated uncertainties (transgenic crops are a good example). The geographical scope of biosecurity measures should also be considered. While most national food and agriculture biosecurity structures have been established on an ad hoc basis, many countries are increasingly establishing regulatory frameworks that aim to protect global common goods and to respond to increasingly globalized risks, either to meet obligations under international agreements (for example, in relation to health, food safety, pest control, zoonoses and bioterrorism) or to take advantage of trade opportunities (for example, through the World Trade Organization Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Agreement (WTO SPS)).
No country can afford to ignore transboundary risks, which can have catastrophic implications for human well-being, the environment and the economy. A biosecurity failure in one country will often cause problems in neighbouring countries, particularly where shared terrestrial boundaries are not protected by natural ecological barriers. In this context, regional coordination and mutual support could have very substantial advantages. Some examples of the economic consequences of failures in biosecurity systems are given in the case studies. Subnational boundaries (based on geographical and ecological features) may also be highly significant, particularly in those countries that include islands or island groups. Biosecurity systems should also be developed to protect these boundaries. For example, the Hawaiian Islands have one of the highest invasion rates of alien organisms amongst oceanic islands; while there are legal barriers to slow down the rate of movement of organisms between mainland USA and these islands, they are comparatively ineffective: the postal system, for example, is not subject to inspection without a warrant. Similarly, the majority of invasive alien species arriving in the Galapagos Islands come from mainland Ecuador without crossing national boundaries. Even within a single conterminous country, movement of organisms can be very important, e.g. between the east and west coasts of Australia or the USA. At present, for example, one of the highest profile pest species in the USA is the glassy-winged sharpshooter (Homalodisca coagulata (Say); Cicadellidae), a pest of vines which has managed to spread from Florida (where it is indigenous) to California, where it is threatening the wine and table grape industry. These examples show that, in most cases, biosecurity should be considered to be both national and international in scope. It is clear, therefore, that implementing biosecurity can involve a number of integrated activities at regional and national levels, including: · · · · · · · identifying biosecurity issues for each sector at a national level; ensuring coordination and cooperation among the relevant authorities and ministries in relation to both national policy and action, and in the definition of common international actions; harmonizing and integrating national legislation to rationalize sanitary, phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures, while protecting human health and the environment; harmonizing methods for risk analysis and standard-setting across sectors; establishing, rationalizing and optimizing national capacity, with the aim of avoiding duplication, inconsistency and disputes among the relevant national agencies; making optimal use of regional resources and capacities; and cooperating in the international exchange of relevant information.
Importance of biosecurity Biosecurity is emerging as one of the most important issues facing the international community, for a number of reasons: · Producers' livelihoods can be destroyed by animal and plant pests, diseases, or damage to the environment.
Processors rely both on high-quality primary produce and on stable consumer demand, based on trust in their products. They are at severe economic risk if either is compromised, either through an external failure of biosecurity measures, or through internal risks, such as contamination in the course of processing. Ecosystem stability, and hence maintenance of ecosystem services to the environment and society, can be threatened by unwanted changes resulting from the introduction of invasive alien species or genotypes.
Two main factors have increased the perceived threat of these hazards, namely the increased global movement of biological materials and the rapid development of technologies associated with genetic modification. Over the past few decades, for example, the steady decline in the relative cost of transport, coupled with trade liberalization, have resulted in much wider movement of people, plants, animals and their products (including seed and reproductive material) than has previously been the case. This has severely strained the ability of quarantine and inspection services to prevent the unwanted introduction of alien species and genotypes of both plants and animals. Meeting this ever-expanding challenge will require cooperation across sectors, with optimal use of existing agencies and agreements. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), for example, recognized the need to "prevent the introduction of, control or eradicate those alien species which threaten ecosystems, habitats or species" (CBD 2000). In relation to plant health and movement, the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) is the most important international agreement. Ideally, to achieve their individual aims, the CBD and IPPC should be applied in parallel in a cooperative manner. This type of cross-sectoral collaboration exemplifies the way in which biosecurity should develop. As mentioned above, new technologies can also pose new potential risks to both human health and the environment, and as such require due consideration in any assessment of biosecurity. In this context, risk analysis is becoming increasingly important as a basis for regulatory decisions. Recognition of the risk implications of international trade in genetically modified organisms was the reason for the adoption of a new international agreement, namely the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, as part of the CBD.
THREATS TO FORESTS AND FOREST TREES.
Importance of arthropod pests and diseases The impact of invertebrate pests and plant pathogens is not always obvious or easy to calculate. Just because a pest is present does not mean it has either an immediate or a long-term impact. Furthermore, while the relationships between pests (in the broad sense) and their host plants are relatively well known in temperate regions, the impact of tropical pests is relatively poorly documented (Speight and Wylie 2001). In the case of the latter, the available economic assessments generally involve informed estimates rather than controlled scientific studies (see Case Study 1).
CASE STUDY 1: ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF INTRODUCED CONIFER APHID PESTS IN AFRICA.
In eastern and southern Africa, pine and cypress trees are grown extensively in industrial plantation monocultures for wood-based industries such as sawn timber, paper and other products. In most countries in this region, cypress trees are also grown in village woodlots and by small-scale farmers for fuelwood, local timber, soil stabilization and wind breaks. Three accidentally introduced aphid pests attack these trees: the pine woolly aphid, Pineus boerneri Annand (Adelgidae) (first found in 1968); the pine needle aphid, Eulachnus rileyi (Williams) (Aphididae) (first found in the 1970s); and the cypress aphid, Cinara cupressivora Watson and Voegtlin (Aphididae) (first found in 1986). The first two species attack Pinus spp. while the third attacks Cupressus spp. as well as indigenous cedars and junipers. Since their introduction, these three aphids have spread throughout southern and eastern Africa; they were the first pests specific to conifers to invade the region and have subsequently become the most damaging pests of these trees. In 1991, an attempt was made to estimate the losses caused by these pests, by collecting information on the area, growth and monetary value of softwood timber in the region, and on aphid distribution, feeding ecology and associated losses through tree mortality and reduced growth. It was estimated that, up to 1990, C. cupressivora had killed trees worth UK£27.5 million (approx US$44 million) and was causing an additional loss of a further UK£9.1 million (approx US$14.6 million) per year through reduction in annual growth increment (including that from dead trees). In addition, the two pine aphids caused a further loss of UK£1.5 million (approx US$2.4 million) per year due to reductions in the annual growth increment in the region's pine plantations. These figures are clearly conservative, since they do not include the impact of the aphids on indigenous junipers and cedars, or allow for any subsequent mortality due to C. cupressivora. A second study, conducted by the Kenya Forestry Institute, estimated that in Kenya the latter species might kill as many as 50 percent of all cypress trees during the 30-year harvest cycle. These economic data were instrumental in securing the resources needed to mount a biological control programme against the three aphids, which has resulted in substantial reductions in the incidence of the cypress aphid and possibly the others, although this has not been established with certainty.
Sources: Murphy (1996). See also Watson et al. (1999).
Some pests cause obvious damage that can be readily quantified, for example damage by the mahogany shoot borer (Hypsipyla grandella) can cause loss of the leader and hence trunk distortion in attacked trees. In other cases (e.g. damage by sap suckers, chronic diseases, defoliators and weeds), effects on yield may be far less obvious. Furthermore, although the short-term effect of `outbreak' pests is usually very obvious, data on the long-term economic impact of such damage (which occurs over a relatively limited period) tend to be sparse, particularly for tropical tree crops. The particular problems associated with outbreak pests are discussed in Section 2.1.1.
The impact of potential pests often differs in different regions. Thus indigenous pests may appear in sporadic outbreaks, or may cause more frequent problems, perhaps because of sylvicultural practices such as a tendency to grow a single species in monoculture (see Section 2.5). Newly introduced exotic pests, on the other hand, will often occur as an initial massive outbreak, but may become less damaging over time as the most susceptible trees die or, in some cases, the plants develop defensive responses against them. However, most alien pest species are likely to remain damaging at some level. In severe cases, pests may set ecological limits to the areas in which trees can be grown. For example, in Fennoscandia, severe outbreaks of the lepidopteran defoliator Epirrita autumnata are believed to be responsible for the altitudinal displacement of the boreal tree limit (Nuorteva 1963; Seppälä and Rastas 1980; Virtanen 1998). In rare cases, introduced pests may even threaten endemic tree species with extinction (see Case Study 13). In some cases, the impact of a particular pest or disease may be limited by using alternative, less susceptible, tree species. In contrast to agricultural systems, there are often several different tree species that can be used to produce very similar products. Hence, in the medium to long term, tree species or genotypes that are susceptible to the pests and diseases in a particular area can be phased out and replaced by other, less susceptible, alternatives. In such cases, the net effect of the pest over time is indirect (by restricting the choice of tree species), rather than direct. However, replacement tree crops may also be damaged by new pests. For example, in eastern Africa, damage due to canker (Rhyncosphaeria cupressi) led to the replacement of Cupressus macrocarpa by Cupressus lusitanica, which subsequently came under threat from the introduced cypress aphid, Cinara cupressivora. This type of situation is particularly common in agroforestry, where new trees (both exotic and native) are constantly being adopted and abandoned because of new pest problems. This is a good indirect indication of the importance of forest pests in the tropics, despite the absence of precise data on economic losses. In some cases, too, limitation of damage by substitution is not always practical. Some tree species will always be in demand and hence will be grown despite substantial losses due to pests or diseases. This is the case for mahogany, for example, which can suffer severe damage from the widely distributed mahogany shoot borer (H. grandella). The continuing demand for mahogany also explains why research on the shoot borer has continued for many years (Newton et al. 1993; Floyd and Hauxwell 2001), whereas little work has been done on equally intractable pests of trees that can be substituted. Similarly, the cultural and economic value of American chestnut (Castanea dentata) is such that efforts continue to be made to develop varieties resistant to chestnut blight (Cryphonectria parasitica), a disease that devastated this species during the first part of the twentieth century (see Case Study 2).
CASE STUDY 2: CHESTNUT BLIGHT CHANGES A FOREST ECOSYSTEM.
Chestnut blight entered the USA on nursery stock imported from China to New York around 1900. It is caused by a fungus that prior to 1978 was known as Endothia parasitica, but has subsequently been renamed Cryphonectria parasitica. The fungus is spread by wind, rain, birds and other animals; it enters through cracks or wounds in the bark and multiplies rapidly, causing sunken cankers which expand and girdle the stem, killing everything above the canker (usually in a single growing season). Since it had never previously been exposed to this fungus, the American chestnut (Castanea dentata) was highly susceptible and was devastated throughout its natural range, which extended over the Appalachian hills and highlands from Maine to Georgia. By 1940, it has been estimated that three and a half billion American chestnuts had perished. Prior to this, the American chestnut had been one of the most abundant hardwoods in the deciduous forests of the eastern USA, in some areas accounting for as much as 25 percent of all tree cover. In many eastern hardwood forests, it was not only the most numerous species, but also often the largest (30 m specimens were common). It was one of the most economically important trees in the eastern USA, with very durable wood that was highly valued for furniture and construction, and nuts that were both a cash crop and a staple food for wildlife. Now, American chestnuts survive mostly in the form of small understorey trees that sprout from the original root systems but which are continuously attacked by the blight. There have been attempts to produce hybrid chestnuts through cross-breeding, using Chinese species resistant to the disease as the parent line. The demise of the American chestnut illustrates how an entire ecosystem can be fundamentally altered. Although as a species it still survives, it is ecologically extinct ­ no longer a functional part of the ecosystem. Its loss has permanently changed the ecology of the eastern deciduous forests.
Source: Stein and Flack (1996).
Rubber (Hevea brasiliensis), a species of South American origin, grown extensively in SouthEast Asia, is another example of a tree for which substitution is not an option, since it is still the only species from which rubber can be produced (in spite of the extensive evaluation of thousands of other plant species as potential sources of rubber). For the moment, the extremely damaging leaf blight (Dothiudella ulei) that attacks this species is restricted to South America, where it prevents the establishment of commercial rubber plantations (Case Study 3). Africa and South-East Asia are currently free of the disease, which would be devastating if introduced. The disease-free status of countries in these areas is maintained almost entirely by preventing entry of the blight and, although early detection systems and emergency eradication plans may be in place, it would be optimistic to think that the disease could be contained if it was accidentally introduced (Case Study 4).
CASE STUDY 3: FORDLANDIA ­ A CLASSIC STORY OF INDIGENOUS PLANTATION FAILURE.
In 1927, Henry Ford was making half the automobiles in the world. Then, as now, the car industry depended upon the rubber supply from South-East Asia to make tyres, and by the 1920s rubber accounted for an eighth of the value of all US imports. Seeking an alternative source of rubber, Ford set out to establish a Brazilian plant