global information and early warning system on food and agriculture.
FOODCROPS AND SHORTAGES.
No. 3 October 2004.
AFRICA: In eastern Africa, the food situation remains precarious due to the impact of drought and armed conflicts. Currently more than 17 million people need emergency food assistance. In southern Africa, the 2004 cereal production in Zimbabwe was well below average levels, with anticipated serious food shortages in rural and urban areas. In drought-hit Lesotho, the 2004 cereal harvest was sharply down, necessitating emergency food assistance to large numbers of people. In western Africa, Desert Locusts continue to pose a serious threat to agricultural production across the Sahel, notably in Mauritania, Mali, Senegal and Niger. Joint FAO/CILSS/WFP missions are currently in the sub-region assessing the impact of the locusts on food production. ASIA/NEAR EAST: Millions of people in Asia have been affected by heavy and extensive monsoon rains and floods. The worst affected countries include Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and China. In Korea DPR, despite a recovery in food production, the country will still depend on international assistance to meet its minimum food needs. In Afghanistan, drought conditions and crop diseases have seriously compromised harvests, prompting increased food aid needs. Drought has also affected production in Sri Lanka, Mongolia and Pakistan. In Iraq, insecurity and the reduced numbers of international aid workers are hampering humanitarian assistance. LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN: Devastating floods in several Caribbean countries due to hurricanes have caused loss of life and serious damage to infrastructure and crops. In Haiti, tropical storm Jeanne caused loss of some 3 000 lives and extensive damage to infrastructure in Artibonite and North-West regions. By contrast, prolonged dry spells reduced the main season cereal production in Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala. Elsewhere, prospects are generally favourable, although dry weather conditions could lead to yield reductions in the main wheat producing South American countries. EUROPE: Cereal production rebounded sharply in 2004 after the poor droughtreduced crops last year. Weather conditions are generally satisfactory for planting and establishment of the 2005 winter cereals although more precipitation would be beneficial in some southern parts of the region. In the European CIS, cereal harvests, though significantly up on last year, are below expectations to match the good harvests in 2001 and 2002.
NORTH AMERICA: Planting of the 2005 winter wheat crop is progressing on schedule in the United States and plants are emerging well under generally favourable conditions. The maize harvest is well underway and a record output of 295 million tonnes is forecast. In Canada, predominantly cool and wet conditions during the 2004 growing season have resulted in slow crop development, a later than normal harvest and poorer quality crops. Nevertheless, output of wheat could still be up from the previous year when drought affected yields in parts. OCEANIA: The 2004 cereal output in Australia is set to fall from last year's bumper level but should be about the average of the past five years. Soil moisture conditions are favourable for the summer coarse grain planting and the area of sorghum and maize, for harvest in 2005, is forecast to increase sharply.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
COUNTRIES REQUIRING EXTERNAL FOOD ASSISTANCE (total: 35 countries) Region/Country Reason for emergency Region/Country Reason for emergency.
AFRICA (23 countries) Angola Returnees Burundi* Civil strife, IDPs and returnees Chad Refugees Central Afr. Rep. Civil strife Congo, Dem.Rep.* Civil strife, IDPs and refugees Congo Rep. of Civil strife, IDPs Côte d'Ivoire Civil strife, IDPs Eritrea* Drought, IDPs, returnees Ethiopia* Drought in parts, IDPs Guinea* IDPs and refugees Kenya* Drought in parts Lesotho* Drought Liberia* Civil strife, IDPs Madagascar Drought in southern parts, cyclones Mauritania Drought Malawi* Drought in parts Sierra Leone* Returnees Somalia* Civil strife, drought in parts Sudan* Civil strife, drought in parts Swaziland* Drought in parts Tanzania, U.R. Drought in parts, refugees Uganda* Civil strife, IDPs Zimbabwe* Adverse weather, economic crisis.
ASIA/NEAR EAST (6 countries) Afghanistan* Bangladesh Iraq* Korea, DPR* Mongolia* Sri Lanka Drought and civil strife Floods Recent war, shortage of inputs Economic constraints Drought and economic constraints Drought.
LATIN AMERICA (5 countries) El Salvador* Guatemala* Haiti Honduras* Nicaragua* Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Civil strife, drought, floods Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks Effects of adverse weather and economic shocks.
EUROPE (1 country) Russian Federation (Chechnya) Civil strife.
COUNTRIES WITH UNFAVOURABLE PROSPECTS FOR CURRENT CROPS Country Angola Bangladesh Cape Verde Chad Cuba Eritrea* Ethiopia* Kenya* Lesotho* Main contributing factor Adverse weather, returnees Floods Desert locusts, drought Refugees Flooding Erratic rainfall, input shortages Erratic rainfall Erratic rainfall Drought Country Malawi* Mali Mauritania Mongolia* Somalia* Sri Lanka Sudan* Swaziland* Zimbabwe* Main contributing factor Drought Desert locusts Desert Locusts Drought Drought, civil strife Drought Adverse weather, civil strife Drought Economic crisis.
PURCHASE AND DISTRIBUTION OF LOCALIZED OR EXPORTABLE SURPLUSES REQUIRING EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE: Afghanistan ___________________.
1/ Both here and in the text, countries with unfavourable prospects for current crop and/or uncovered shortfalls are marked in boldface, and those affected or threatened by successive poor crops or food shortages are marked with an asterisk [*]. Definitions can be found on the Contents page. Note: The maps on the front cover indicate countries with unfavourable crop prospects and/or those facing food emergencies.
Please note that the country reports ­ as updated between publications of the print version ­ are available from the GIEWS website: http://www.fao.org/giews/ in the GIEWS Workstation.
Foodcrops and Shortages, October 2004.
-3CROP AND FOOD SUPPLY SITUATION OVERVIEW.
As of October 2004, the number of countries facing serious food shortages throughout the world stands at 35 with 23 in Africa, 6 in Asia/Near East, 5 in Latin America and 1 in Europe. The causes are varied but civil strife and adverse weather, including drought predominate. In many of these countries, the HIV/AIDS pandemic is a major contributing factor. Recently published joint FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessment reports highlighting these factors in greater detail can be found at http://www.fao.org/giews/english/alertes/sptoc.htm. In eastern Africa, despite beneficial rains in parts, the food situation remains precarious due to lingering effects of drought and conflict. Currently more than 17 million people depend on emergency food assistance. The food shortages are expected to persist well into 2005 and large volumes of cereal imports, mostly in the form of food aid, are still needed to stave off starvation. In Sudan, the grave humanitarian crisis in Darfur has resulted in the death of tens of thousands and the displacement of more than a million people. Looting and burning of assets, including food and livestock have severely disrupted food availability and access for both rural and urban communities. In Somalia, early secondary "deyr" season rains have brought some relief in northern pastoral areas but it is too early to determine the impact on the emergency situation. Pre-famine conditions exist in several parts of the country with an estimated 700 000 people depending on food assistance and an additional half a million needing assistance until April 2005. In Kenya, the drought-induced food shortages persist with nearly 2.3 million people in need of food assistance. In Eritrea, poor seasonal rains and input availability have affected crop production and compounded the already precarious food situation. An estimated 1.4 million people depend on food assistance. In Ethiopia, the overall food supply situation remains highly precarious. An estimated 7.8 million people are in need of food assistance. In southern Africa, land preparation for planting of the 2005 cereal crops has begun under seasonal forecast of normal weather conditions. A FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessment Missions visited Malawi, 1 Mozambique, Zimbabwe , Lesotho, Swaziland and Angola in April-May this year. FAO's revised estimate of total 2004 cereal harvest for the sub-region is 21 million tonnes, similar to last year's about average output. Production of maize, the region's most important staple crop, at about 14.9 million tonnes, was the hardest hit by a drought in the eastern part of the sub-region, with a decline of about 5.5 percent from last year. Reduced harvest of cereals in Lesotho, Malawi, Swaziland and Zimbabwe is expected to cause food shortages in these countries at varying degree of severity. On the other hand, production increased in Angola, Botswana, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia and Zambia. The overall reduction of maize and other summer crops this year is expected to result in a net coarse grain import requirement for the sub-region as a whole of about 2 million tonnes for the 2004/05 marketing year. WFP has launched a three-year regional Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation (PRRO) requiring US$ 405 million and involving 656 573 tonnes of food commodities to assist food insecure and AIDS affected populations in the sub-region. In the Great Lakes region, planting of the 2005 first-season foodcrops, to be harvested from January, has begun under normal weather forecast for the season. Harvesting of the 2004 second season crops, mainly sorghum, maize and beans, is complete. Preliminary results indicate a normal to slight improvement in the overall food availability. However, resettlement of returning refugees and the food security situation continue to be hampered in parts of the region due to sporadic disturbances. In central Africa, growing conditions are favourable for the second maize crop in Cameroon, where a satisfactory first maize crop was harvested. In Central African Republic, in spite of good weather conditions and seed distributions, production is not expected to recover significantly due to persistent insecurity. In northern Africa, land preparation and early sowing of winter grain crops to be harvested from May next year are underway. An earlier potential threat of a Desert Locust infestation was avoided by a large-scale control operation. Thus, the full potential of this year's increased plantings, better input supply and favourable weather was realized and wheat output in the sub-region is provisionally estimated at a record 17.4 million tonnes, 38 percent higher than the average for the previous five years. In Egypt and Morocco, the largest wheat producers in the sub-region, wheat production is forecast at about 7 million tonnes and 5.5 million tonnes respectively. Aggregate coarse grain output is estimated at about 12.8 million tonnes, similar to the previous year's good crop.
The Mission was curtailed after 12 of the planned 19 days.
-4In western Africa, after limited and erratic rains at the beginning of the growing season in the Sahel, precipitation improved significantly from July and crops are maturing satisfactorily in most countries. As a result, an above-average harvest is anticipated, but the deteriorating Desert Locust situation continues to pose a serious threat to agricultural production across the Sahel. Following widespread breeding in the Sahelian zone in Mauritania, Mali, Senegal, Niger and Burkina Faso, numerous new swarms formed recently. Chad and Cape Verde are also being increasingly infested. Some three to four million hectares are estimated to be infested across the Sahel. The annual CILSS meeting held in early September on crop prospects in the Sahel estimated that 2004 cereal production could be close to last year's record level if current rainfall patterns continue and if Desert Locusts do not cause substantial damage to crops. However, the meeting estimated that up to 25 percent of the Sahel cereal production could be lost if large scale damage occurs. Although FAO anticipates a lower level of crop loss at regional level, the food security impact of Desert Locusts could be locally severe in some countries, notably in Mauritania, Mali, Senegal and Niger. A series of joint FAO/CILSS Crop Assessment Missions are currently visiting each country to estimate with national services the 2004 cereal production. In Mauritania, Mali, Niger and Senegal, the most affected countries, the Missions are jointly with CILSS and WFP for a full assessment of the impact of Desert Locust on agricultural production and food security. In the southern parts of the coastal countries along the Gulf of Guinea, an average maize crop has been harvested while the secondary maize crop is developing satisfactorily. In the northern parts, harvesting of coarse grains is underway. In Asia, millions of people have been affected by heavy and extensive monsoon rains and floods. The floods have caused considerable loss of crops and livestock and seriously damaged property and infrastructure in a number of countries, mainly in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and China. On the other hand, several countries have experienced severe drought that negatively impacted 2004 crop production. These countries include Sri Lanka, Mongolia, India, and Pakistan. In spite of an improved harvest in 2004, DPR Korea will still face a large import requirement of cereals. The country's double cropping programme seems to be severely constrained by declining soil fertility and lack of farm power. Despite a good harvest in 2004, China is expected to change its net trade position in cereals from a net exporter in 2003/04 (with net export of 9.6 million tonnes) to a net importer in 2004/05 (with net import 3 million tonnes). India's rice and wheat exports are expected at to decline due to reduced production and tight stocks. In Afghanistan, drought conditions and crop pests and diseases as well as unusually high temperatures in Spring significantly compromised cereal harvests this year. In the Asian CIS, cereal harvesting is nearly complete from an aggregate area of about 19 million hectares. Aggregate cereal harvest is estimated at more than 26 million tonnes, which is some 2.2 million tonnes down on last year's above average harvest. This total includes some 22 million tonnes of wheat and nearly 4 million tonnes of coarse grains. In several countries of the Near East, drought and conflict have affected last season's crops. A severe drought in Jordan has decimated crops and left thousands of herders in need of assistance. In Iraq, insecurity and the reduced numbers of international humanitarian workers is affecting delivery of food and other types of assistance. In Central America and the Caribbean, harvesting of the 2004 main season cereal crop is complete or well advanced. Outturns have been mixed with satisfactory maize and sorghum crops in Mexico and reduced harvests in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua following prolonged dry weather during the season. In Costa Rica, paddy production was reduced by a mite infestation. In the Caribbean, torrential rains due to the passage of hurricanes in September and excessive precipitation early in the season, resulted in severe crop damage and reduced cereal production in the Dominican Republic, Cuba and Jamaica. However, the abundant rains of September improved soil conditions for planting of the second season cereal crops. In South America, the 2004 wheat crop is about to be harvested in southern countries. Prospects are uncertain. Despite an increase in plantings, dry weather during the season in several countries, including Argentina and Brazil, is likely to have resulted in yield reductions. The 2004 coarse grain crops, harvested earlier in the year, were below the record levels of 2003 but still above average. In Andean countries, a bumper maize crop has been gathered in Colombia but production was reduced in Venezuela. In Peru, Ecuador, and parts of Bolivia, dry weather reduced outputs of the recently harvested cereal crops. In Europe, cereal output has rebounded sharply in 2004 throughout the region after the poor drought-struck crops last year. The increase has been most pronounced for winter wheat, output of which is estimated to have increased to well above the average of the past five years. Winter cereals for harvest in 2005 have Foodcrops and Shortages, October 2004.
-5already been planted in many northern parts and planting is ongoing in central parts under generally satisfactory conditions. However, more precipitation would be beneficial for the planting in southern parts of the region such as Spain, southern France and Italy, where topsoil's moisture is lacking after several weeks of dry weather. In the European CIS, late Summer precipitation as well as March and April frost damaged nearly three million hectares of cereals, mainly in the Russian Federation and the Ukraine. In addition, insufficient access to farm inputs prevented many farmers in the two large producing countries to match the high areas planted in 2001 and 2002. An aggregate of about 59 million hectares of cereals were planted in the region. Cereal harvests are nearly complete and aggregate production in the region is tentatively estimated at about 120 million tonnes. This total includes more than 65 million tonnes of wheat and about 54 million tonnes of coarse grains. In North America, planting of the 2005 winter wheat crop is progressing on schedule in the United States and plants are emerging well under generally favourable conditions. The aggregate output of wheat in 2004 was officially estimated in October at 58.9 million tonnes, 7.7 percent down from 2003 after a reduction in winter wheat area and yields. By contrast, coarse grains output should rise sharply, largely due to the record maize crop now being harvested. Maize output is forecast to reach 295 million tonnes, 38 million tonnes up from 2003. In Canada, predominantly cool and wet conditions during the 2004 growing season have resulted in slow crop development, a later than normal harvest and poorer quality crops. Nevertheless, the wheat output is forecast to increase by almost 4 percent to 24.5 million tonnes, reflecting a higher average yield compared to 2003 when drought affected some parts. In Oceania, the 2004 cereal output in Australia is set to fall from last year's bumper level but should be about the average of the past five years. Some widespread rainfall in late August improved conditions for developing crops after a prolonged dry spell. Wheat production is forecast at just over 22 million tonnes. Soil moisture conditions are favourable for the summer coarse grain planting in the key-producing parts of northern New South Wales and southern Queensland, and the area of sorghum and maize, for harvest in 2005, is forecast to increase sharply.
COUNTRY REPORTS AFRICA NORTHERN AFRICA.
ALGERIA (22 October) Sowing of wheat and barley crops for harvesting from June next year will start soon. Intensive and large scale control operations during the 2003/04 agricultural season made it possible to bring the widespread Desert Locust infestation under control and limit damage to agriculture. Thus, a good cereal production has been gathered in 2004, for the second consecutive year. This is the result of overall favourable weather conditions, larger area sown and adequate availability of agricultural inputs, as well as the implementation of the Agricultural Development Plan set up by the Government in 2000. Aggregate cereal output is provisionally estimated at 3.95 million tonnes, which is similar to the bumper crop harvested last year and 75 percent above average. As a consequence, imports of cereals, mostly wheat, are forecast at about 5.12 million tonnes, virtually unchanged from last year. EGYPT (22 October) Harvesting of the 2004 maize and sorghum crops has been completed while that of paddy is well advanced. The output of the mainly irrigated wheat crop, harvested earlier in the year, is estimated at 7.18 million tonnes, up 5 percent from the above average production of 2003. Barley output is estimated to have almost doubled to a record 264 000 tonnes compared to the good crop harvested last year, driven mainly by a significant expansion in the area sown. Wheat imports in marketing year 2004/05 (July/June) are expected to increase by some 3 percent to 6.6 million tonnes. Imports of maize, mostly used as animal feed, are forecast at about 4.7 million tonnes, about 200 000 tonnes more than the previous year. MOROCCO (22 October) Land preparation is underway for the planting of the 2004/05 winter grain crops. Intensive and large scale control operations made it possible to bring this year widespread Desert Locust infestation under control, and limit damage to agriculture. This, in addition to favourable weather conditions, larger area sown and adequate availability of agricultural inputs, resulted in increased cereal production for the second consecutive year. The aggregate 2004 cereal production, mostly wheat and barley, is estimated at a record 8.47 million tonnes, about 7 percent more than the bumper crop harvested in the previous year. Output of wheat, by far the most important crop, increased by 393 000 tonnes to 5.54 million tonnes. Production of barley, the main coarse grain grown in the country, was somewhat higher than last year's record level of 2.62 million tonnes. Reflecting two consecutive years of bumper harvests, import of cereals in the marketing year 2004/05 (July/June) are forecast to decline to about 2.97 million tonnes. TUNISIA (22 October) Sowings of wheat and barley crops to be harvested from May 2005 are underway. Favourable weather conditions, larger area sown and adequate availability of agricultural inputs resulted in good 2004 cereal production for the second successive year. Aggregate cereal output, estimated at 2.5 million tonnes, although 14 percent below the bumper crop harvested in previous year was almost 63 more than the average for the previous five years. Production of wheat is estimated at 1.65 million tonnes, compared to the past five year's average of 1.15 million tonnes. Barley output,.
-7estimated at 846 000 tonnes, is 7 percent below last year's bumper harvest but over twice as high as the average for the previous five years. Import of cereals in 2004/05 (July/July), mostly wheat and maize are forecast at 1.62 million tonnes, about 232 000 tonnes more than in the previous year.
WESTERN AFRICA.
BENIN (13 October) The prospects for the 2004 cereal crop are favourable reflecting overall good weather during the growing season. In the south the first maize crop has been harvested while the second maize crop is heading/flowering. In the North, harvesting of millet and sorghum is underway. Following last year's good cereal output and the arrival of the first season crops on the markets, the food supply situation remains satisfactory. The cereal import requirement for 2004 is estimated at 138 000 tonnes, including 8 000 tonnes of food aid. The country is being affected by Nigeria's increasingly protectionist policy and the tightening of controls against re-export trade. Economic growth is forecast to slow down in 2004 and households' income and access to food is negatively affected. BURKINA FASO (17 October) After reduced and erratic rains at the beginning of the growing season, precipitation increased significantly from July over the entire country and remained widespread and above average in August. Limited rains affected crops in September in some locations in the North and the Sahel zone, but overall soil moisture reserves remained adequate for cereal crops to develop. As a result, millet and sorghum crops, which are generally in the heading and early maturation stages, are developing satisfactorily in most regions. An above average harvest is anticipated at national level. In August, some mature locust swarms reached northern Burkina Faso, where hatching and band formation occurred. Some 29 villages were reportedly affected and nearly 20 000 hectares were estimated to be infested. About 5 600 hectares have been treated so far. Although Desert Locusts may cause severe damage to crop and pasture locally in the north near the Mali border, they are not expected to significantly affect national food supply. A joint FAO/CILSS Crop Assessment Mission is currently in the country to estimate the 2004 cereal production and assess the impact of Desert Locusts on food security in the country. CAPE VERDE (15 October) Following irregular and limited rains in August, precipitation increased significantly in September and early October on Santiago and Fogo islands improving crop prospects, but remained limited on Santo Antao and Sao Nicolau islands, where crops suffered water stress. Moreover, several islands have been invaded by Desert Locust swarms in July and August, and hatching and band formation occurred, notably on Santiago, Maio and Boa Vista Islands. Swarms from current infestations in Senegal and Mauritania continue to invade the country. Therefore, overall crop harvest prospects are unfavourable. However, even in a normal year, domestic production covers only one-fifth of the country's cereal utilization requirement and the balance has to be imported. A joint FAO/CILSS Crop Assessment Mission will visit the country towards the end of the month to estimate the 2004 cereal production and assess the impact of Desert Locusts on food security.
-8CHAD (21 October) Widespread and above normal rainfall since July benefited crop development in most producing areas. Millet and sorghum are maturing in the Sudanian zone while they are developing in the Sahelian zone. Crop prospects are favourable. Small-scale breeding of Desert Locusts was in progress in the central province of Batha, in the north-eastern region of Ennedi and in the eastern region of Ouaddai where crop losses were reported. However, cereal production at national level is not expected to be significantly affected. As of early October, the estimated number of Sudanese refugees in eastern Chad was 196 000. A recent survey by the Centre for Disease Control (CDC) revealed alarming malnutrition rates and a worrisome health situation among refugees. A joint FAO/CILSS Crop Assessment Mission is currently in the country to estimate the 2004 cereal production and assess the impact of Desert Locusts on food security. COTE D' OIRE (13 October) IV The harvesting of the first maize crop and the sowing of the second crop has been completed. In spite of overall adequate weather conditions, a strong agricultural recovery is not expected this year due to persistent insecurity, conflict-induced population displacement and the prolonged partition of the country that continue to hamper inputs distribution and marketing activities. In spite of reduced agricultural production in 2003, the overall food supply position remains adequate and inflation moderate, due mainly to sustained food imports in the governmentheld south and cross-border trade with Burkina Faso and Mali in the rebels-controlled North. However, lack of cash is a major constraint to imports from Burkina Faso and Mali ­ conversely, Ivorian cereals are being sold in neighbouring countries. WFP has extended the May­December 2003 emergency operation to December 2004. This operation is targeting returnees and displaced individuals as well as other vulnerable populations in the north and west. In the regions under rebels control the health situation is almost totally dependent on humanitarian intervention and seems to run at only 30 percent of its normal capacity, according to OCHA. Food security for many households continues to be hampered by disruption of livelihoods especially in the west. In addition, due to continuous unfavourable market situation, smallholder cash-crop producers are experiencing a significant loss of income. Cotton production in 2003/04 has been estimated at 230 000 tonnes, about half of the previous year's level, and marketing of the produce has been seriously disturbed. The sugar industry is about to collapse, since three of the four sugar growing areas and processing plants are in the north and have been hard hit by the crisis. Total cereal import requirements in 2004 were estimated by a joint FAO/WFP mission at about 1.4 million tonnes, virtually unchanged from last year, of which about 1.2 million tonnes would be obtained on commercial terms, leaving about 184 000 tonnes to be met through external assistance. GAMBIA, REPUBLIC OF (25 October) After inadequate rains in June that delayed plantings and stressed crops, notably in the Western Division, precipitation improved significantly in July and remained regular and widespread for the remainder of the growing season. Reflecting the overall favourable weather most crops have completed or are about to complete their cycles satisfactorily. Groundnut crop are pegging/maturing countrywide while harvesting of early millet is completed in most parts of the country. Sorghum is generally heading/flowering in Upper River Division and in some parts of Central River Division where it is predominant. Harvesting of maize is almost completed except the late sowed fields in Western Division and in other isolated areas in the country. Most upland rice fields have reached maturity and harvesting is well in progress in many Divisions while transplanting continues in the Foodcrops and Shortages, October 2004.
-9lowland fields. Area under cereal is estimated to have increased by some 6 percent over last year's 173 000 hectares. Although grasshopper, blister beetles and striga infestations have been reported in several areas, overall damage to crops has been limited. The Desert Locust situation remains calm. However, a small share of the swarms that form in the Sahel may invade the country through Senegal late this month. The Government has undertaken several actions to enhance the country's preparedness for any eventual attack. A joint FAO/CILSS Crop Assessment Mission, which visited the country recently, is preparing its report which will be issued shortly. GHANA (12 October) Satellite imagery indicates that overall growing conditions have been satisfactory. The first maize crop has been harvested in the south. Millet and sorghum are developing satisfactorily in the north. Following an above average cereal harvest in 2003 and the arrival of the first season crops on the markets, the food supply situation remains satisfactory. The record 2003 cocoa production along with higher producer prices have improved access to food for the estimated 1.6 million peasant farmers who produce most of the country's cocoa. The crises in Côte d'Ivoire and Liberia have resulted in an influx of third-country nationals in transit through Ghana to their home countries, Ivorians and Liberians seeking asylum and the return of Ghanaian nationals. However, some of the 42 000 Liberian refugees in the country have reportedly started to return home. GUINEA* (12 October) Precipitation has been generally adequate, and the main cereal crops are maturing. Following a strong depreciation of the Guinea Franc, the price of rice - the staple food for Guineans ­ more than doubled over the past six months seriously affecting access to food by urban and rural populations. In an attempt to bring down increasing food prices, the Government decided to provide a subsidy to rice importers. The official price of a 50 kg bag of rice has been fixed at 40 000 GF but on the markets the price is between 80 000 GF and 100 000 GF. The repatriation of Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea was completed in late July. About 12 170 people have been repatriated this year, bringing the number of refugees repatriated since the beginning of the operation in October 2001 to about 56 000. Although the restoration of peace in Sierra Leone has resulted in a decrease of the number of refugees in Guinea, the country still hosts a large number of refugees. According to the results of a refugee verification exercise carried out by WFP in June, 80 806 refugees are still living in the country, in addition to some 80 000 IDPs and over 100 000 returnees from Côte D'Ivoire in 2002 in Guinea Forestière. GUINEA-BISSAU (21 October) Regular and widespread rains have been received since the beginning of the rainy season, b