<title>ADCP/REP/79/9 - Aquaculture Information</title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The FAO/UNDP Ad hoc Consultation on Aid for Aquaculture Development held in La Toja (Pontevedra, Spain), 20-23 June 1978.^1^/ considered inter alia information requirements for rapid development of aquaculture, especially in developing countries. The Consultation concluded that a free exchange of information is of primary importance in the development of aquaculture, particularly since the major increases in production in the near future are expected to be achieved through transfer of technology. A unified comprehensive information gathering, processing and dissemination system would be necessary to meet the needs of aqua-culture development. The existing information systems of some relevance to aquaculture attempt only bibliographic coverage of aquaculture publications. But of greater significance to development would be unconventional types of information and data contained in unpublished documents and restricted reports which are not at present covered to any appreciable
extent. It is necessary to organize the collection of such information on a decentralized basis and arrange for the processing of inputs from various sources for feedback of the total processed information to input stations for dissemination in appropriate forms. The meeting was not able to discuss the details of the information to be collected, but suggested that the assistance of a small group may be sought for this purpose.
1^/ UNDP/FAO Aid for Aquaculture Development - Report of the FAO/UNDP Ad hoc Consultation on Aid for Aquaculture Development, La Toja (Pontevedra, Spain), 20-23 June 1978. ADCP/REP/78/4:30 p.
This meeting of a Group of aquaculturists and information specialists was convened as a follow-up of the La Toja Consultation, for the purpose of reviewing in detail the existing information systems and the types of conventional and unconventional information required for aquaculture development, with a view to formulating a coordinated programme of collection, processing and dissemination of aquaculture information.
The list of participants and the agenda adopted for the meeting are given in Annexures I and II, respectively. Mr. R.R. Freeman (U.S.A.) acted as the Chairman of the Group and Mr. R.A. Neal (U.S.A.) and Mr. R. Needham (FAO) as its rapporteurs.
<section>2</section>
2. EXISTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
The existing information systems concerned with aquaculture are FAO's Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS), the U.S. National Aquaculture Information System (NAIS), FAO's International Information System for the Agricultural Sciences (AGRIS) and the Current Agricultural Research Information System (CARIS). They all do attempt some coverage of bibliographic information, but none of them is able to do it adequately at present. ASFIS with its output of the Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts, has greater coverage of the subject and although incomplete is more widely used by fishery scientists and aquaculturists. However, none of them provide the specialized developmental information that is needed for the worldwide expansion and intensification of aquaculture that the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) attempts to promote.
<section>3</section>
3. AQUACULTURE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
The Group considered in some detail the types of activities involved in aquaculture development and the nature of information required for each of them. Generally speaking, three types of information are needed, viz.;
(i) statistical data on production, area under culture, species cultured, value of products, exports and imports, manpower employed, etc.
(ii) bibliographic and other non-numerical information such as directories of experts, institutions, research programmes, etc.
(iii) numerical and other data relating to aquaculture production, including cost and income.
Only very few countries in the world have an organized system for the collection and analysis of aquaculture statistics. The normal channels through which FAO fisheries statistics are collected have, in the majority of cases, been unable to provide the information needed, as national statistical surveys do not cover aquaculture and when they do, cannot always distinguish aquaculture production from capture fisheries landings. The presently available aquaculture production statistics are largely based on estimates made by agencies directly involved. In many cases these are estimated on the basis of seed production, survival rates, area under cultivation, average production per unit area, etc.
The Group recognized the importance of reliable statistics in development planning and evaluation and stressed the need for FAO and national agencies to pay greater attention to this. National sampling surveys would appear to be the most appropriate means of obtaining the necessary statistics. The possibility of including aquaculture in the decennial agricultural censuses was considered. It was noted that the United States of America had already included it in the last agricultural census.
The main source of bibliographic information is published scientific literature. The existing systems, principally ASFIS and NAIS make every effort to cover conventional sources, such as journals that they have access to. It was however apparent that a significant proportion of relevant information is unavailable to them at present as much of it is not suited for publication in scientific journals and consequently remains unidentified in unpublished reports, theses and similar formats to which access can be gained only by the direct participation of their producers in information exchange programmes at either national or regional level. There are many relatively less known periodical and occasional publications, especially published in developing countries that contain considerable information of value. Also, the coverage of non-English publications tends to be very incomplete. Major advances in aquaculture are being made in many developing countries and reports of work in
those countries are often in local languages not regularly covered by existing bibliographic systems. According to a rough estimate, probably no more than 50 percent of the relevant literature is captured by the existing systems.
The type of information which is crucial to the development of aquaculture and is sadly lacking, is the data type of information. The results of pilot and production projects which could form the basis for large-scale investment programmes are at present extremely difficult to obtain. At least some of it may be contained in informal publications, annual reports or similar documents. Other undocumented information may have to be collected directly from the projects. There are many users for such information, ranging from investors and private aquaculturists to administrators and research workers. As increased aquaculture production in the near future is expected to be based largely on the transfer of known technologies, the availability of relevant numerical data is of primary and immediate importance.
A preliminary list of data required is contained in Annexure III. The collection of such data is admittedly the most difficult, both from the point of view of personnel and effort needed and also in gaining access to appropriate sources. The Group recognized the problems involved in collecting data from private farms, but felt that the many pilot and production projects being undertaken with the support of governments or financial institutions could provide valuable information. With the strengthening of extension services in the countries, contacts with farmers would become closer and the possibilities for data collection would improve. The regional aquaculture centres being established in Latin America, Africa and Asia and eventually the network of national centres that will be linked to it, could become the main focal points for data collection and dissemination.
<section>4</section>
4. PROPOSALS FOR AN INTER-REGIONAL AQUACULTURE INFORMATION SYSTEM
4.1 Aquaculture Statistics
4.2 Bibliographic Information
4.3 Production Methods and Data
4.1 Aquaculture Statistics
The Group was of the view that the collection of aquaculture statistics should receive high priority attention of the Fishery Information Data and Statistics Service of FAO Fisheries Department. The decennial agricultural censuses could be used to collect at least certain types of statistical information. The inclusion of aquaculture in the census is not expected to add significantly to the financial or other burdens of national institutions responsible for holding the agricultural censuses. The Group was informed that the Statistical Advisory Committee of FAO has discussed this possibility during the session that was underway in FAO at the time of this meeting.
The Group recommended that the next Agricultural census should attempt to obtain the following aquaculture data:
(i) annual production through aquaculture in all types of waters - quantities and values by species
(ii) types of production systems adopted
(iii) labour force employed in aquaculture - full-time, part-time
(iv) the size of water areas exploited and the number of production units such as ponds, cages, pens and enclosures, etc.
While the census data will undoubtedly be valuable, it would not fill the need for more frequent evaluations of the industry. National sampling surveys may have to be resorted to for this purpose in countries where total enumeration is not practicable.
4.2 Bibliographic Information
The Group noted that ASFIS provides a satisfactory base to develop a comprehensive literature information service and the expansion of the system will be the most efficient and economic means of meeting the requirements. AGRIS/CARIS programmes of FAO have approximately 100 national and regional centres, many of which provide some coverage of literature information of relevance to aquaculture development and so ASFIS should establish a close working relationship with this programme. ASFIS should expand its coverage of aquaculture information to cover:
(i) periodicals and non-conventional documents, especially those produced in developing countries which are presently not covered by ASFIS centres
(ii) theses and dissertations from all geographic areas, and
(iii) literature in languages not covered at all, or not adequately covered at present.
The ASFIS "tools", especially the thesaurus, require augmentation if the needs of aqua-culture have to be met adequately and it is recommended that this should be done as soon as possible. The NAIS thesaurus could be used as an additional source of aquaculture terms.
The regional aquaculture centres being established through ADCP should have ready access to and be able to respond to requests for original documents or other information. It is therefore necessary to establish a document delivery service, e.g. through microfiche or coupon schemes. Such service should be available both within and between regions. As the use of modern data processing and communication technology can greatly facilitate flow of information, the regional centres should be provided with appropriate equipment for the purpose and the staff should be given necessary training in its use.
4.3 Production Methods and Data
The-Group recalled that the regional aquaculture planning workshops organized by ADCP in Accra ^1^/, Bangkok ^2^/ and Caracas ^3^/ had proposed that the regional networks of aquaculture centres to be established as support services to development programmes, should undertake, besides research and training, the collection, processing and dissemination of information. The Group noted that the regional centres for Africa and Latin America are expected to become operational by the end of 1979 and the Lead Centres for Asia in early 1980. After these Centres become fully established, a number of selected national centres in each region will be strengthened and linked to the regional centres to form regional networks which are expected to be operational by 1981-82. As mentioned earlier, it was recognized that the regional networks would be the logical focal points for collection and dissemination of aquaculture information.
^1^/ UNDP/FAO, 1975, Aquaculture Planning in Africa - Report of the First Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 2-17 July 1975. ADCP/REP/75/I: 114 p.
^2^/ UNDP/FAO, 1976 ,Aquaculture Planning in Asia - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Asia, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-17 October 1975. ADCP/REP/76/2:154 p.
^3/ UNDP/FAO, 1976a, Aquaculture Planning in Latin America - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Latin America, Caracas, Venezuela, 24 November-10 December 1975. ADCP/REP/76/3:173 p.
The Group took note of the information requirements of also developed countries in respect of aquaculture. For a developing science like aquaculture, free worldwide exchange of information is of special importance. Special efforts have therefore to be made to obtain the cooperation of institutions and agencies concerned in developed countries, to enable the establishment of appropriate data-gathering and processing arrangements.
The Group recommended that the aquaculture information system should be developed as a cooperative effort of the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and its regional networks and the Fishery Information Data and Statistics Service of FAO Fisheries Department. The system should develop an adequate number of input stations, which could also serve as dissemination points.
The first step would be the development of an appropriate format for data input forms and refinement and finalization of data requirements based on the preliminary list in Annexure III. This has to be done in Rome headquarters, with due consideration of the types of outputs required, both routine in tabular form and occasional in response to special requests.
The regional aquaculture centres should function as input stations in the system and the staff assigned for information work should be given special training in data collection, recording, coding and data submission procedures to ensure that uniform procedures are used by all the centres. The Fishery Information Data and Statistics Service (FIDI) would arrange for centralized storage of computerized information according to an appropriate format. The input stations would carry out the coding and processing of data into a form suitable for direct entry into the central computer. The Centre staff has to be trained in processing methods, and the hardware required, such as data recorders and word processors, has to be purchased or rented. The various Centres should use compatible hardware. The Group considered the need to verify the accuracy of processed data and felt that this should be the responsibility of the regional centres, although occasional checking of data by the
headquarters staff at Rome will be desirable.
The data should be stored in a standardized form in FAO's central computer facilities. At regular intervals, as for example every six months, the printout of data collected could be made available to the regional centres. If a Centre finds information of interest to the region in the printouts, it may disseminate it through occasional bulletins or news-sheets for the benefit of interested users. It was suggested that all external requests for information from the developing countries covered by the regional centres should be through those centres only and the dissemination of information should also follow the same channels. Standardized outputs in tabular form should also be made available to the regional centres at regular intervals.
The Group made the following rough estimates of the cost involved in developing and maintaining an aquaculture information system of the type proposed:
Input Centres - For each Centre:
U.S. $
Staff
Professional 1) Already provided
Clerical 2) by host governments
Equipment
(i)
Data recorders, word processors
(ii)
Telex or computer terminal
(iii)
Forms, punch cards, tapes, and floppy discs, etc.
(iv)
Microfiche duplicator, reader-printer
Total:
Headquarters
Staff
Professional - 1
45 000 per yr
(For initial training of input station staff, data storage and retrieval, checking of data, coordination with other information systems and institutions/agencies concerned in developed countries, etc.)
Miscellaneous
Key punch costs
5 000 per yr
Computer expenses/printout
15 000 per yr
Total:
65 000 per yr
<section>5</section>
ANNEXURE I - LIST OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE AQUACULTURE INFORMATION GROUP MEETING, ROME, 25-28 APRIL 1979
Mr. E.F. Akyüz
Chief
Fishery Information, Data and
Statistics Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. K.-W. Chow
Fish Feed Technologist
Aquaculture Development and
Coordination Programme Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. A.G. Coche (part-time)
Senior Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and
Aquaculture Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Mr. R.R. Freeman
Acting Director
Environmental Science Information Center
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Rockville Maryland 20852
U.S.A.
Mr. L.P.D. Gertenbach (part-time)
Senior Fishery Statistician Fishery Information, Data and
Statistics Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. H.F. Henderson (part-time)
Chief
Inland Water Resources and
Aquaculture Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. C. Idyll
Chief
Division of International Fisheries
Development and Services
National Marine Fisheries Service National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce
3300 Whitehaven Street
Washington, D.C. 20235
U.S.A.
Mr. M.N. Mistakidis
Deputy Programme Leader
Aquaculture Development and
Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO
Mr. R.A. Neal
Aquaculture Advisor
Department of State
Agency for International Development
Washington, D.C. 20523
U.S.A.
Mr. R. Needham
Fishery Information Officer
Fishery Information, Data and
Statistics Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. F.A. Pagán
Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and
Aquaculture Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Mr. M. Pedini
Fishery Resources Officer
Inland Water Resources and
Aquaculture Service Fisheries Department
FAO
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
Programme Leader Aquaculture Development and
Coordination Programme Fisheries Department
FAO
Mr. Wm. E. Ripley
Fisheries Adviser
Division for Global and Interregional
Projects
United Nations Development Programme
One, United Nations Plaza
New York, N.Y. 10017
U.S.A.
Mr. P.M. Roedel
Fisheries Adviser
Office of Agriculture
Bureau for Technical Assistance
Department of State
Agency for International Development
Washington, D.C. 20523
U.S.A.
Dr. E. Samaha
Programme Officer
International Development Research
Centre
P.O. Box 8500
Ottawa
Canada K1G 3H9
Dr. Y.C. Shang
Aquaculture Economist Aquaculture Development and
Coordination Programme
Fisheries Department
FAO
Mr. C. Stamatopoulos
Analyst/Programmer
Fishery Information, Data and
Statistics Service Fisheries Department
FAO
<section>6</section>
ANNEXURE II - AQUACULTURE INFORMATION GROUP MEETING ROME, ITALY 25-28 APRIL, 1979
AGENDA
Adoption of Agenda
Timetable and plan of work
Review of existing information systems, specifically ASFIS and NAIS
Types of information (conventional and unconventional)
Users of aquaculture information and the adequacy of existing systems
UNDP/FAO regional networks of aquaculture centres and their proposed information functions.
Formulation of a coordinated programme of collection, processing and dissemination of aquaculture information system, including costing and staffing
Recommendations for the implementation of the programme
Any other business.
<section>7</section>
ANNEXURE III - A PRELIMINARY LIST* OF MAJOR DATA ELEMENTS TO BE INCLUDED IN AN AQUACULTURE INFORMATION SYSTEM
^* is list is meant to serve as a guide for planning purposes only and does not claim to be exhaustive
1. Operational
(a) Experimental
(b) Pilot-scale
(c) Commercial
Small-scale
Large-scale (industrial scale)
2. Cultivated Species
Monoculture - Species - Hybrids and strains
Polyculture - Combination of species, hybrids, strains
3. Distributional
Geographic
Climatic
Temperature range
Salinity range
4. Methodological
Production system
(Pond culture, open water culture, cage culture, raceway culture, etc.)
Ponds
(Size, depth, water exchange, salinity, water source including heated water effluents, water control structures)
Raceways
(Size, lining, waterflow)
Cages and enclosures
(Size, material, mesh size)
Open waters
(Type of open water, nature of installations, substrate for molluscs, rafts, trays)
Impoundments
(Size, water supply, depth, salinity, water control structures)
Seed production
(Wild fry or spat, controlled breeding, hormones)
Type of seed used
(Hatchlings, fry, fingerlings, spat)
Hatching method
(Fertilization rate, hatching rate, larval survival)
Seed rearing methods
(Tank or pond rearing, density, survival)
Methods of collection from the wild
(Eggs, fry, fingerlings)
Production of marketable animals
Stocking rates
Survival rates
Feeds used (unprocessed feeds, processed feeds including feed mixture)
Feed formulae (ingredients, nutrient ratios)
Feeding rates
Feeding technique
Feed conversion
Fertilizers (organic - including sewage, composition, nutrient value; inorganic - composition)
Rates of fertilizer application
Diseases
Commonly occurring diseases
Causative agents
Prophylactic measures for control
Curatic measures for control
Integration with crop and livestock
Species of crop
Species of livestock
Stage at which combined farming practised
Ratios of combination
Yields of fish, crop, livestock
Percentage increase in yield and income
Labour inputs
Full time No.
Part time No.
Management personnel No.
Produce
Size at which harvested
Form in which marketed (live, fresh, frozen, processed)
5. Economic
Capital costs
Cost of land or land rental
Cost of construction including water control structure
Cost of equipment
Depreciation of equipment and installations
Operating costs
Water supply
Seed
Feed
Fertilizer
Labour
Disease control
Management
Interest on loan
Taxes
Insurance
Average rate of return on investment
Pay-back period for initial investment
Cost of production per ton
Farm price per ton
6. Enterprise data
Major companies/corporations
Major cooperatives
Consulting firms
Aquaculture engineering firms
Equipment suppliers
Seed suppliers
Feed suppliers
7. Institutional
Higher educational institutions
Degrees/diplomas
Duration of course
Minimum qualifications for admission
Specialized training institutions
Nature of training
Duration of training
Diploma/certificate
Minimum qualifications for admission
8. Legal
Legislation
Patents
Special incentives
9. Social
Full-time or part-time employment of aquaculturists
Family-size of fanners and number of working members
Total individual or family income
Income from aquaculture
Other occupations of farmers, if any
M/N/1223/E/7.79/1/500
