<title>ADCP/REP/80/13 - Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
This Curriculum for multidisciplinary training in Aquaculture is based on a basic text prepared by a Task Force headed by Mr. H.P.C. Shetty, Director, College of Fisheries, Mangalore (India). The other members who contributed were Mr. Alan Bowers, Department of Marine Biology, Port Erin, University of Liverpool (U.K.), Dr. Y.C. Shang, University of Hawaii (U.S.A.), Dr. F.A. Pagan, Puerto Rico (U.S.A.), Dr. T.V.R. Pillay (FAO), Dr. H. Rabanal (FAO), and Mr. U.W. Schmidt (FAO).
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
One of the major constraints to the development of aquaculture in most countries has been recognized to be the scarcity of trained personnel, particularly those with broad-based training and experience in practical aspects of aquaculture production. The core personnel required for aquaculture have been identified as senior aquaculturists and technicians or extension workers. ^1/. While the large number of technicians or extension workers needed for the implementation of development programmes have to be trained in their own countries with special focus on production systems of relevance to those countries and the socio-economic conditions under which they have to be applied, the small number of senior aquaculturists who need multidisciplinary broad-based training in all significant aspects of aquaculture will have to be trained on a regional or sub-regional basis. The Asian Network of Aquaculture Centres has been established under the regional project (RAS/76/003) sponsored
by several governments of the region and supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The project is executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) within the framework of the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and has as its main objectives the implementation of systems-oriented applied research, training of senior aquaculture personnel and establishment of an information system. The project has at present three Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres, viz., The Freshwater Aquaculture Research and Training Centre in Dhauli (Bhubaneswar), Orissa, India; National Inland Fisheries Institute, Bangkok, Thailand and Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC) in Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. A fourth Lead Centre is now under construction in Wuxi, China.
1^/ UNDP/FAO (1976) Aquaculture Planning in Asia - Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning in Asia, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-17 October 1975: 15 pp.
Nature and duration of training
The training offered at the Regional Lead Centre of the Asian Network is intended to equip candidates for senior positions in fishery or allied departments of government, semi-government agencies or private industries to plan and execute aquaculture programmes. It is multidisciplinary in nature and will cover all essential aspects of aquaculture, including selection of sites, design and construction of aquaculture facilities, breeding and rearing of cultivable organisms, relevant physico-chemical, biological and environmental aspects, post-harvest technology, socio-economics and planning.
Although theoretical instruction will be given on all aspects, the training will be heavily oriented to practical work and about 80 percent of the time will be devoted to laboratory and field work. Special attention will be devoted to aquaculture production systems that have immediate application in the region.
The training will initially be for a period of one year, with three 14-15 week academic sessions and two 4-5 week breaks which are expected to be utilized largely for project work and field visits.
Venue
The training headquarters will be in the Regional Lead Centre at SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, where classroom, laboratory and dormitory facilities will be available. The farm facilities of the Department will be used for practical work as appropriate. Part of the instruction, especially on freshwater aquaculture, will be organized at the Regional Lead Centres in India and Thailand.
Candidates for training
The maximum number of candidates to be admitted for a training course will be 25. The candidates have to be sponsored by their governments and should have some assurance of being employed in aquaculture activities on the completion of training. FAO will invite governments to nominate candidates well in advance of each training session. The minimum academic qualification required is a university degree in biology, fisheries science, or related disciplines. Preference will be given to candidates with previous experience in aquaculture or fisheries work. Final selection of candidates will be made by FAO based on the recommendation of a selection committee.
Medium of instruction
English.
Training Schedule
The training schedule (see annexure) shall consist of 5-day weeks (Monday-Friday) and 8-hour days (from 8 to 12 and from 14 to 18 hours). Detailed programmes of practical and field work will be developed in accordance with the progress of experimental and demonstration work at the regional lead Centre of the network. However, strong emphasis on practical work will be maintained. The ratio of theoretical instruction to practical work in individual courses will range from 1:1 to 1:5. In addition to the scheduled theory and practical classes, the trainees are required to participate in actual production programmes with a view to becoming proficient in aquaculture practices. Each trainee will be required to participate in one or more practical field assignments and to raise an aquaculture crop using one of the systems of culture. This shall be carried out either alone or with one or more of the other trainees, depending on the nature of the project. The inter-sessional breaks
will be largely used for work on the allotted projects and for visits to aquaculture sites. The trainees are required to maintain complete records of their laboratory and field work and to prepare a report on their project work. The project report shall be submitted at least a fortnight before the completion of the course.
Evaluation procedure
The performance of the trainees shall be judged by a system of continuous evaluation. There shall be three written or oral tests in each academic session (term), spaced out over the duration of the session. There will thus be nine tests in all. Each test shall consist of objective and subjective types of questions. Marks shall also be awarded on the performance and diligence of the trainees in laboratory and field work, practical records and project work. A minimum of 60 percent marks in the aggregate will be required for eligibility for the award of diploma. A report on the performance and progress of each trainee shall be sent to his/her government at the end of every term.
The allotment of marks shall be as follows:
(i) written tests 40%
(ii) performance in practicals 25%
(iii) practical records 15%
(iv) project work 20%
Diploma
A diploma shall be awarded to each successful trainee.
<section>3</section>
I. Introduction to aquaculture
1. Definition of aquaculture; its multidisciplinary nature.
2. Objectives of aquaculture: production of protein-rich human food; improvement of natural stocks through artificial recruitment and transplantation; production of sport fish; production of bait for commercial and sport fishing; production of ornamental fishes; recycling of organic wastes; production of industrial fish and fishery products.
3. Comparative efficiency of aquaculture as a means of protein production.
4. History of aquaculture; its present organization and status.
5. The need for aquaculture and the role of aquaculture in fishery development and management.
6. Different kinds of aquaculture systems in fresh, brackish and marine waters: pond culture; running water culture; culture in recirculating systems; culture in ricefields; cage culture; pen culture; bottom, raft, rack and tray culture of shellfish; culture of economic seaweeds, etc. Monoculture and polyculture; culture of fish in combination with rearing of other animals and/or plants.
7. Levels and patterns of aquaculture industry: extensive, semi-intensive and intensive cultures; small-scale rural aquaculture and large-scale industrial aquaculture.
8. Economic considerations in aquaculture operation.
Practicals
Field trips to selected rural fish farming sites, large-scale fish farming enterprises, integrated aquaculture projects and multi-purpose reservoir development projects.
<section>4</section>
II. Selection of sites for aquaculture
1. Sites suited for different types of aquaculture
Land including swamplands; river and stream beds; coastal areas including bays, estuaries, backwaters, lagoons, salt marshes and mangrove swamps; lakes, reservoirs and irrigation tanks; other existing water bodies.
2. Technical and non-technical considerations in site selection
2.1 Socio-economic, political and legal factors
Quantity and quality of available manpower; social and religious customs; consumer habits; availability and cost of construction materials and equipment; transportation and communication facilities; security of tenure; maritime laws relating to the control of foreshore and sea bed in coastal waters; legal size limits; closed seasons, etc.; industrial and agricultural planning in the area; accessibility; nearness to markets.
2.2 Climatic factors
Temperature, sunshine, rainfall, evapo-transpiration, floods, hurricanes, winds and relative humidity.
2.3 Main environmental factors
(a) Topography and ground elevation: topography of land suitable for aquaculture; low-lying deltaic, coastal and hilly areas with suitable slope to facilitate water supply, drainage and low cost of construction; importance of ground elevation in relation to tidal ranges for locating coastal pond farms; ground elevations suitable for marine farms at different tidal ranges; topography of sea bed sites suitable for sub-littoral enclosures and sea bed cages; stability of shore and banks.
(b) Soil: importance of soil quality in construction of fish farm installations and productivity of overlying waters; the formation and classification of soils; soils suitable or capable of being made suitable for aquaculture; unsuitable soils; soil profiles; methods of studying soil profiles; physical properties of soil (texture, structure, colour, specific gravity, volume, consistency, pore space, etc.,); colloidal properties of soil; soil water; soil-water interface; movement of water in soil; percolation and drainage; inorganic constituents of soil (N, P, K); humus; soil reaction - saline, alkaline and acid soils and methods of correcting their characteristics; soil fertility and factors affecting it; fertilizer requirements for soil improvement; soil conservation.
(c) Water supply, quality and dynamics: main sources of water for aquaculture - ground water, water table and aquafers, rain water, extent and nature of watershed area, irrigation water, water from natural and artificial water bodies; multiple uses of water and aquaculture; assessment of available water supply for inland farms, quantification of water requirements for different types of aquaculture based on sources of supply, inflow, loss due to evaporation and seepage and renewal needs.
(d) Physical features of water: temperature, turbidity, colour, water movements, water conditions and depth; stratification of water; tidal amplitude and its seasonal changes in coastal sites and their bearing on farm elevation and water supply; storm surges, wave action and water currents and their effect on marine aquaculture installations; chemical features of water: pH, dissolved oxygen, acidity, alkalinity, total hardness, nitrogen, phosphates, silicates, salinity, chlorides, chlorine, hydrogen sulphide, free carbon dioxide, sodium, magnesium, potassium, calcium, iron, arsenic, biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand; physico-chemical factors of special importance in aquaculture and their optimum ranges; possible ways of controlling principal factors, such as turbidity, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, alkalinity and salinity. Pollution of fishery waters by sewage, pesticides, industrial effluents and possible pollutants from intensive aquaculture; effects
of pollution on fishes, shellfish and fish food organisms; physical, chemical and bioassay of polluted waters, waste waters, sludges and bottom sediments; pollution prevention and abatement measures.
(e) Productivity: concepts of aquatic productivity; primary productivity and its relation to fish/shellfish production in aquaculture; methods of measurement of productivity (oxygen method and C[l4] method). Phyto-biota (bacteria, planktonic and periphytic microscopic algae, macroscopic algae, and submerged, floating and emergent macrovegetation) and zoo-biota (periphytic, benthic, planktonic and other free-swimming animals); important groups of phyto-biota and zoo-biota and their value as fish/shellfish food; inter-relationships of phyto- and zoo-biota; methods of plankton, periphyton and benthos collection and analysis; importance of biota in the biological productivity of water bodies; effect of water quality on productivity; food cycle in water bodies.
(f) Fouling: intensity of fouling and its seasonal fluctuations; effects of fouling on marine aquaculture installations; preventive measures.
(g) Availability of spat: spat availability and its role in deciding on mollusc culture.
(h) Type and density of vegetation: quantitative and qualitative appraisal of vegetation; size and root system; cost of clearance.
Practicals
Collection and study of soil profiles; collection and identification of different types of soil; analysis of soil samples for determining their physico-chemical characteristics (texture, pH, conductivity, organic carbon, available nitrogen, available phosphorus and available potassium); survey of different types of sites; contour mapping.
Collection of water samples, waste waters, sludges and bottom sediments and their analysis for essential physico-chemical parameters, calculation of water supply requirements for selected aquaculture systems; pollution control in aquaculture waters.
Determination of primary productivity of selected aquaculture areas; collection and analysis of plankton, benthos, periphyton and nekton.
<section>5</section>
III. Selection of species for aquaculture
1. Desirable characteristics of aquaculture organisms
Fast growth, short food chain, efficient conversion of food, ready acceptance of compounded feeds, good table quality, disease resistance, ease of breeding in captivity, early maturation, high fecundity, tolerance to a wide range of environmental parameters, no adverse environmental impact, etc.
2. Commonly cultured organisms
Fishes, crustaceans and molluscs; other cultured organisms - seaweeds, frogs, crocodiles and turtles.
3. Biological features of commonly cultured fishes, crustaceans and molluscs
Tolerance limits of salinity, temperature and oxygen tension; growth rates and yields in different types of culture; breeding habits; feeding habits and geographic distribution.
4. Criteria for selection of species for culture
Objectives of culture; geographic and climatic considerations; culture qualities of the organisms; consumer acceptance and marketability; cost of production; domestic consumption versus export.
5. Indigenous versus exotic species
Conditions for introduction of exotic species or strains; procedures for deciding on introductions and transplantations; precautions to prevent adverse effects on local fauna and flora and the spread of infections.
6. Selection of strains of cultivated species for favourable characters
Growth, food conversion, shape and body conformation, resistance to diseases, tolerance of wide fluctuations in environmental factors, meat quality, etc.; use of hybridization techniques for obtaining superior strains and monosex progeny.
Practicals
Identification of cultivated organisms of Asia and their various stages; study of food habits, maturity stages and fecundity of important cultivated organisms.
<section>6</section>
IV. Seed production
1. Seed in aquaculture
Seed as a major determinant for successful culture; growth and survival; role in production costs.
2. Different methods of seed production
2.1 Collection from natural sources
(a) Collection of fish, shrimp and prawn seed: life stages collected from the wild for culture; area suitable for seed collection - feeding and/or breeding grounds, favourable hydrographical conditions (current velocity, depth, salinity, turbidity, topography, etc); different types of gear employed, their mode of operation and relative efficiencies; seasons of occurrence of seed; sorting, holding or storage, conditioning and acclimatization.
(b) Collection of mollusc seed: areas and seasons for spat collection; different types of spat collectors - brushwood and mangrove branches, ropes, tarred sticks, tiles, threaded shells with spacers, plastic plates, etc.; handling and transport of mollusc seed.
2.2 Hatchery production of seed
(a) Brood stock:
(i) Wild-caught fish/prawn/shrimp - precautions in catching and transporting; state of maturity; selection of brood fish from catch; acclimatization; collection of berried shrimps and prawns.
(ii) Farm-reared fish/prawn/shrimp - selection fo brood stock; age and size for spawning.
(iii) Care of brood stock, including feeding and segregation; sex-ratio required for breeding; effect of feeding and environment on gonadal maturity and spawning success; control of spawning by environmental manipulation and hormonal treatment.
(b) Spawning of fish:
(i) Methods of spawning - natural spawning, induced spawning - stripping; hormone injection (hypophysation); hormone injection with stripping.
(ii) Hypophysation of fish - principles underlying hypophysation technique; reproductive physiology of fish in relation to hypophysation; homoplastic and heteroplastic pituitary administration; use of fish, mammalian and synthetic hormones and their combinations; dosages; methods of preservation of pituitary glands in liquid preservatives, drying and by ampouling; pituitary banks.
(iii) Spawning techniques employed, with particular reference to tilapias, carps, trout, catfishes, milkfish, mullets, groupers, gouramis and seabass.
(iv) Hybridization and selective breeding for production of better strains; hybridization for production of all-male progeny of tilapia; sex reversal techniques; principles of fish genetics and their application in hybridization and selective breeding of cultivable fishes.
(c) Spawning of crustaceans: maturation and induced spawning of shrimps and prawns; eye ablation (cauterization) of shrimps and prawns and attainment of maturity; spawning tanks and their operation.
(d) Methods of induced spawning of oysters, mussels and other molluscs: manipulation of temperature in oyster spawning.
3. Incubation and hatching
Different types of hatching installations (hatching ponds, tanks, hapas, jars, troughs, trays, etc.) and their relative efficiencies; suitable sources of water supply for hatcheries; importance of clean water, temperature and flow rate; aeration; open and closed systems; filters and biological conditioning; adhesive and non-adhesive eggs; bacterial and fungal infestations in hatcheries; ultraviolet and antibiotic treatments; effect of temperature/salinity regime on hatching time; size at hatching and viability of larvae; grading of larvae; transport of eggs.
4. Larval rearing
Different types of installations for early rearing of larvae; shape, size and colour of tanks; self-cleaning tanks; hygiene, water supply and lighting; density of stocking; feeding requirements of small-mouthed and large-mouthed larvae, vegetarian and carnivorous larvae; culture of food organisms, such as unicellular algae, protozoans, molluscan larvae, Artemia, rotifers, cladocerans, etc.; use of artificial feeds; feeding frequency and feeding rates; auto-feeders; physiological changes during metamorphosis of flat fish and the special care required; special requirements of mollusc larvae for settling; different types of spat collectors; production of cultchless spat; special requirements of prawn and shrimp larvae - salinity requirements and change of feed at various larval stages.
5. Transfer to nursery ponds
Acclimatization; time of transfer; grading; transportation; release; stocking rates.
6. Transportation
6.1 Live fish (spawn, fry, fingerlings and adults)
(a) Considerations in transport of live fish:
(i) Physiology of respiration in relation to physico-chemical dynamics of the transport medium.
(ii) Toxicology of biological waste products.
(iii) Action of chemical additives.
(b) Causes of mortality in transportation:
(i) Oxygen starvation.
(ii) Accumulation of toxins in the transport medium.
(iii) Hyperactivity, strain and exhaustion.
(iv) Diseases.
(v) Physical injuries.
(c) Conditioning of fish before transportation; special conditioning requirements of brackishwater fish for stocking in fresh water.
(d) Methods of packing and transport:
(i) Transport of hardy fish in baskets and buckets.
(ii) Transport in open and closed systems - in open carriers with or without artificial aeration/oxygenation/water circulation; closed system - in sealed airtight carriers with oxygen; containers used - earthen pots, cans, wooden tubs, barrels, vats, polythene bags, live-fish carrier boats, specially equipped vehicles, etc.
(iii) Packing rates in relation to species, age, size, temperature, duration of transport, means of transport, nature of containers, climate, etc.; formula for packing rates.
(e) Use of chemicals: anaesthetics, antiseptics and antibiotics; dosages.
(f) Chemical control of osmotic pressure, pH and carbon dioxide.
(g) Use of coagulants for removing suspended/colloidal organic matter.
(h) Economics of live fish transport.
6.2 Live shrimps and prawns
Conditioning in cooling tanks; wet transport in open and closed systems; transport in cardboard boxes with sawdust and ice.
7. Economics of different methods of seed production
Practicals
Collection of fish seed, gears used and situations where used, shrimp and prawn larvae and juveniles and seed oysters/mussels from open bodies of water; induced breeding of selected species; hatching and larval rearing, producing at least one crop of fry; packing and transport of live fish (seed and brood fish) and prawns/shrimps.
<section>7</section>
V. Design and construction of pond farms
1. Type of ponds based on source of water supply
Springwater ponds, seepage water ponds, ponds fed by rainwater or run-off, ponds fed by water courses and tide-fed ponds; barrage ponds and diversion ponds - rosary or linked ponds and parallel ponds.
2. General layout of pond farms
Ponds (nursery, rearing, holding, brood, catching, transition or stunting ponds); water control structures (dikes, canals, sluices, monks and pipes); and supporting facilities (road bridges, culverts, workshop, stores, farmhouses, etc.).
3. Planning of farm layout
Preparation of farm layout plan, including water control system, based on physical features of the area, climatic conditions and requirements of farm management (production of fingerlings, table fish from either fry stage or fingerling stage); calculation of area required for nursery space; proportion of nursery ponds to production ponds, proportion of rearing pond area for different stages of rearing and area of holding ponds; determination of shape, size and depth of ponds; advantages of small and large ponds; optimum size of ponds for small-, medium- and large-scale culture operations; arrangement for adjustment of water level and salinity range of individual ponds in coastal farms.
4. Preparation of work plan
Quantification of input requirements; cash estimates; organizing supply of materials, labour and machinery; preparation of work schedule.
5. Site survey
Preparation of contour map; marking out the farm area; survey instruments required - levelling instrument with levelling staff, direct reading tachymeter with staff, theodalite, optical square, bevel protractor, tape and marking staff.
6. Site clearance
Clearance of vegetation from farm site by underbrushing, withering, felling and burning; removal of stumps; collection and later utilization of surface organic deposits as fertilizer or for facing embankments.
7. Design and construction of water control structures
7.1 Water control structures
Water gates and canals, levees or perimeter dikes and subsidiary dikes.
7.2 Basic principles for design
Calculation of water requirements; filling and drainage of pond farms; use of pumps, gravitation and/or tidal force for water supply and drainage.
7.3 Basic data required
For all farms - topography, soil properties, water supply, evapo-transpiration, seepage, magnitude of floods, rainfall, storms and cyclones; for coastal farms only - tidal characteristics and range, river discharge, ground elevation and designed datum level.
7.4 Design and construction of dikes
Determination of height, top width and base width of dikes; slope of dike in relation to soil type and function; construction of dike foundation and wall; measures for maintenance of foundation stability; excavation of core trench and core puddling in case of unsuitable soils; protection and stabilization of dikes - planting of vegetation, use of plastic sheets, bituminous emulsions, concrete, asbestos and timber reinforcements or wire mesh reinforcements; provision of roadways on dikes.
7.5 Levelling and sealing of pond bottom
Levelling of pond bottom, providing slope toward the outlet in case of flatland; sealing of the pond bottom to prevent seepage; materials used for sealing - clay lining, polyethylene or rubber lining, gley or biological plastic, bentonite clay and chemical sealants; construction of drainage ditches on pond bottom to facilitate drainage.
Excavation of elevated sites or portions of pond sites; filling depressions or deep portions; methods of closing natural waterways at some sites or enclosing project area(s).
7.6 Design and construction of water gate structures
Main gate, secondary gates (division boxes) and tertiary gates; their dimensions in relation to volume of water intake and drainage; structure of main gate - tide-stream wing walls (in coastal farms), side walls, bed protection, sill and abutments; construction procedure; materials used.
Different types of inflow and outflow installations employed in individual ponds - Rivaldi valve, elbow joints, bottom water outflow, double sluice overflow, inlet pipes, sluices and monks; types of pipes used - earthenware, concrete, iron, polythene, PVC, asbestos, etc.; installation of overflow pipe or construction of spillway; location and size of spillway.
Construction of diversion canal for diversion of excess or flood waters.
Different types of filters used with water control structures - wire screen, nylon mesh or cloth bag, sand or gravel, saran fibre, etc.
8. Pumps used in fish farms
Type of pump - piston, impeller, water-ram, Archimedean screw; lift, delivery, sludge and submersible pumps; freshwater and saltwater pumps; driving units - electric, diesel and petrol; their horsepower and delivery rates; suction and delivery pipes; foot valves; maintenance of pumps and simple repairs; possible use of wind power or other inexpensive sources of power for pumping.
9. Machinery used in farm construction
Earth-moving machinery - rooters, bulldozers, scrapers, excavators, draglines, clam digger, suction dredgers, crawler (caterpillar), hydraulic ditchers, backhoe, cranes, loaders, and rubber tractors, dumpers, tip trucks and sand pumps.
Earth-packing machinery - rubber rollers, vibrator rollers, road rollers, diesel rams and sheepsfoot rollers.
Construction machinery - electric, diesel and petrol concrete mixers, vibrators, driving rigs and conveyor belts.
Power, working capacity, fuel consumption and running costs of different types of machinery; high capital cost; possibility of contract hire, period hire or cooperative ownership.
10. Economic aspects of pond farm construction
Practicals
Survey of potential sites using land survey instruments; preparation of contour map; calculation of earth work; design of sluices; equipment used in construction; construction of typical pond farms; cost estimates for the construction of selected farms.
<section>8</section>
VI. Pond culture
1. Organisms cultivable in ponds
Species suited for culture in stagnant and semi-stagnant ponds - fishes, crustaceans and molluscs; principal cultivated (freshwater and coastal) warm- and cold-water species in Asia - fishes (Salmo spp., Tilapia spp., Sarotherodon spp., Cyprinus carpio, Clarias spp., Hypophthalmicthys molitrix, Ctenopharyngodon idella, Aristichthys nobilis, Catla catla, Labeo spp., Cirrhina spp., Puntius spp., Chanos chanos, Mugil spp., Lates calcarifer, Epinephelus spp., Lutjanus spp.); - crustaceans (Penaeus spp., Metapenaens spp., Macrobrachium spp., Scylla serrata); - molluscs (Crassostrea spp., Mytilus spp.).
2.1 Control of predatory and weed fishes
Predators in fish ponds - zooplanktons, insects, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals; methods of their control; weed fishes and their control.
2.2 Control of aquatic vegetation
(a) Role of vegetation in ponds: different kinds of aquatic vegetation in water bodies with special reference to tropical ponds - microphytes and macrophytes; submerged, floating or emergent; adverse effects of excessive growth of aquatic vegetation, including depletion of nutrients and decreased production of plankton; effect of fertilizer application on the growth of vegetation.
(b) Control of algae:
(i) Mechanical method - repeated seining.
(ii) Chemical methods - application of copper sulphate, copper oxychloride, malachite green, powdered superphosphate, monuron, diuron, dichlone, powdered quicklime, etc.
(iii) Biological method - use of herbivorous fish.
(c) Control of undesirable macrovegetation:
(i) By increasing depth of water.
(ii) Manual removal.
(iii) Mechanical methods: different devices for cutting and raking weeds; time and periodicity of cutting; clearance of cut weeds.
(iv) Chemical methods: different kinds of herbicides used - contact herbicides and systematic herbicides; toxicity of herbicides; treatment techniques - methods and dosages of application; effects of herbicide application on water quality, fishes and fish food organisms.
(v) Biological control: use of herbivorous fish and other animals; encouraging the growth of an algal bloom through fertilization; covering the water surface with floating vegetation, such as water hyacinth, Pistia or Salvinia.
3. Improvement and restoration of pond bottom
Draining, drying the bottom; soil cultivation and dredging; benefits accruing thereof; use of right type of sand in shrimp ponds; dispersion of iron oxide in coastal shrimp ponds for eliminating hydrogen sulphide.
4. Control of principal physico-chemical factors of fish production
Temperature, dissolved oxygen, salinity and alkalinity; use of thermal effluents from power plants for faster growth in temperate and cold climates.
5. Liming
Effect of liming; time and methods of liming.
6. Fertilization
Objectives and effects of fertilization; different kinds of inorganic fertilizers (phosphate, potassium and nitrogenous fertilizers) and organic manures (cattle dung, poultry manure, pig manure, sewage sludge, compost, etc.,); micronutrients; use of organic and inorganic fertilizers singly and in combinations: determination of dosages in relation to initial soil and water quality; methods and frequency of application; precautions necessary in the application of fertilizers and manures.
7. Nursery techniques
Stocking rate of fish spawn in relation to food resources and condition of water body; stocking rates of shrimp and prawn larvae in relation to food resources, condition of the pond bed, water runover, aeration facilities and weather; artificial feeding, - feeds commonly used, periodicity and rates of feeding, time and place of feeding, feeding methods, etc. (see page 23); maintenance of water quality and health of larvae/juveniles; prevention of water stratification in shrimp/prawn ponds; methods of selective eradication of fish in shrimp/prawn ponds.
8. Rearing (culture techniques)
8.1 Stocking rates and maximum standing crop
Rates of stocking fry, fingerlings and yearlings in relation to food resources and condition of water body; stocking density and stocking