<title>11</title>
<section>11. Waste management</section>
Environmental impact assessment (EIA) of development aid projects
Initial environmental assessment.
Oslo, October 1992
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation NORAD
P.O. Box 8034 Oslo Dep., 0030 Oslo. Telephone: 47 2 3144 00
Design: Anne Kvalheim and Petter Wang
Typesetting by: Akersposten/Ullern Avis, Oslo
Printed by: Reclamo, 1992
<section>Foreword</section>
The natural resource base in our world today is exposed to constantly increasing pressures. Environmental problems are on the increase in developing countries as well as in developed countries. In developing countries, ecological stress strikes large and vulnerable population groups, and hinders social and economic development in many areas.
In 1987 the World Commission on Environment and Development, in their report "Our Common Future", described the problems we are facing and the measures which must be taken to solve them.
Environmental problems in developing countries make demands on Norwegian development aid. Three Norwegian White Papers (Nos. 36 (1984-85) and 34 (1986-87) on major questions concerning Norwegian aid to developing countries, and No. 46 (1988-89) on Norway's follow-up of the recommendations of the World Commission, have stressed the importance of taking environmental issues into account in Norwegian-assisted development aid projects. In 1990 this was further articulated in the NORAD strategy paper "NORAD in the nineties". In the NORAD strategy document Part 11 "Strategies for bilateral aid" (1992) it is determined that all ongoing and planned development aid projects must be assessed with regard to environmental impacts.
This booklet has been compiled to help NORAD desk officers and planners to integrate environmental considerations into waste management projects at an early stage in the planning process. It is one of a series of booklets presenting guidelines for environmental impact assessment (EIA) of various types of development projects. Experience and ideas from corresponding material compiled by other countries (OECD, the World Bank) have been integrated in this EIA-system.
<section>Introduction</section>
An initial assessment has the objective of helping desk officers and planners to assess a project in relation to environmental effects. The assessment shall provide a survey of environmental effects likely to ensue if a project is implemented. Usually an initial assessment will be based on easily accessible information, former research, the local population's views, etc.
The initial assessment only identifies potential direct and indirect environmental impacts; estimates are not assumed to be substantiated by special accounts or registrations. That comes under a full assessment. An initial assessment ought to be mastered by personnel without specialist knowledge of that particular project type, or of environmental consequences in general. In the course of an initial assessment, the project desk officer may nevertheless find it necessary to consult environmental expertise.
The initial assessment should attempt to clarify both positive and negative environmental impacts. However, since the major positive effects are usually included in the main project account, the initial assessment will tend to lean towards potential negative impacts.
The EIA-system affords no easy solution to weighing positive and negative aspects against one another in a decision-making process. This is because there are seldom clear objective criteria or threshold values for which environmental effects are acceptable or not.
This booklet provides a survey of required information as well as questions that need to be answered in an initial assessment of projects and activities connected to waste management.
To offer a brief overview of the subject, Part I describes what these type of projects normally comprises, and what enviromnental impacts in particular can be expected. It stresses an account of the special problems often faced by waste management in developing countries and tropical areas.
Part II offers a more specific account of the kind of information that ought to be available as well as questions that should be answered in an initial assessment of waste management.
<section>Part I: General account</section>
<section>1 Characteristics of projects and activities connected with waste management</section>
<section>1.1 Introduction</section>
Waste, in this connection, is defined as all residual products of human activity, except waste water and gaseous emissions. The waste may consist of solid materials and substances, or liquids and gases stored in barrels or other containers. Which is regarded as worthless waste and which as reuseable, will vary according to the assessments made by individual persons or communities.
The waste problem is on the increase in developing countries. In many places it is critical, despite the fact that the amounts of waste are generally less in developing than in industrialized countries. Many towns are expanding rapidly, and ineffective waste management systems are frequent. In addition, increasing industrialization in many developing countries leads to large amounts of waste, e.g. various types of hazardous waste. Even in rural areas, where the amounts of waste are smaller, management is often practiced in ways that can potentially threaten health and environment. Proper waste management is crucial in order to avoid a series of negative environmental impacts and to prevent the spreading of diseases among humans. However, projects and measures aiming at improving waste management can also cause environmental harm if health and environmental aspects have not been well considered during the planning and operations.
Increasing awareness of the waste problem, both in industrialized and developing countries, has made the problem an issue in several declarations and international conventions and provisions. The "Baser convention" of 1989 and the "Bamako convention" of 1991 are two of the most central ones. Both have been signed by a series of developing countries. In addition to drawing up general principles of waste management, they forbid export of hazardous waste to countries which do not have sufficient administrative, legislative and technical competence to manage the waste safely. It also does not give permission to export of hazardous waste from developed countries to developing countries. Several regional declarations have also been signed by developing countries in recent years.
<section>1.2 Project categories</section>
Projects and activities connected to waste management can generally be categorized as follows:
o Development of a sensible and efficient system for storage, collection, possible transfer and transport of refuse.
o Creation of environmentally safe, energy-and resource-saving and practical methods of disposal, e.g. recycling, land-filling and other means of processing, including closing down and safeguarding dumps that pose a risk to health and environment.
o Technical, professional and financial improvement of institutions and authorities to ensure that waste management systems work over time.
Waste management measures can also be important sub-components of other project categories, e.g. industry, agriculture, fisheries, aquaculture and mining. Measures towards proper waste management should be part of the planning of such projects from the start.
Waste management measures may also include training, research and legislation.
Choice of technology and scale of projects and activities related to waste management may vary depending on type and amount of waste, as well as on local environmental, economic, technological, institutional and socio-cultural conditions. Experience shows that conditions in most developing countries require other kinds of solutions than those being practiced in industrialized countries.
<section>1.3 Waste categories and characteristics</section>
Generally speaking, waste is categorized partly according to source, partly according to means of disposal, and partly according to characteristics. Municipal refuse, for example, contains several categories which are collected and treated in the same way, whereas hazardous waste characteristically has especially dangerous properties irrespective of source. Municipal waste is commonly categorized as follows:
o Domestic garbage: food scraps, packaging etc. from daily housekeeping.
o Bulky domestic waste: refrigerators, furnitures etc.
o Street rubbish: from street sweeping.
o Garden and park waste.
o Building and demolition rubbish.
o Metal scrap: from cars, other vehicles etc.
o Latrine and septic waste.
o Waste from institutions: hospitals and health stations etc. which often contains infectious refuse.
o Waste from commercial activity: offices, hotels, restaurants, shops, markets etc.
o Industrial waste, which can be subdivided into:
- organic waste from fisheries, aquaculture farms, agriculture, foodstuff industries,
- mining waste,
- various branch-specific residuals,
- general garbage resulting from most industrial undertakings: from cantines,
workshops, warehouses etc.
o Sludge from wastewater treatment plants.
Waste may contain different amounts of several components. The composition will vary between countries and cultures, as well as seasonally. Typical components in municipal waste are:
o easily decomposable organic matter: food scraps, waste from fruit and vegetable markets, dead animals, septic excrements etc.
o combustible organic matter: cardboard, paper, textiles, bone etc.
o plastics,
o metals,
o glass,
o ashes,
o sand and gravel.
o Hazardous waste, which can be subdivided into:
- organic waste: waste oil, solvents, paint, lacquer, glue, distillation residue, pesticides, pathogenes etc.
- inorganic waste: various toxic metals and heavy metals, cyanides, acids, bases, asbestos etc.
Hazardous waste is characterized by a high potential for direct damage to health and welfare, or by causing serious pollution and environmental harm. It can be:
a) highly inflammable (e.g. solvents, oil products),
b) etching (e.g. acids, bases),
c) reactive, i.e. react spontaneously in contact with other materials and lead to generation of toxic gases, explosion, fire or heat generation (e.g. cyanides, acids, bases, alkaline matter),
d) toxic (e.g. pesticides, heavy metals),
e) infectious (matter containing pathogenes),
f) carcinogenic, or
g) ecotoxic, i.e. substances that accumulate in the ecosystems and/or poison these directly.
A complete survey of dangerous components and types og hazardous waste is provided in tables 1, 2 and 3 at the end of this booklet.
Hazardous waste can occur as residuals of a series of activities, e.g.: Agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and industries related to these primary activities, e.g. dairies, breweries, textile and leather industries, wood, chemical-pulp and paper industries; Energy production based on oil or coal and related activities, e.g. mining and oil drilling; Metallurgical industries and production of electronic equipment, glass, ceramics/porcelain, asbestos and cement; Chemical industry and processing. Households and service industries are also sources of hazardous waste, e.g. Iead-containing batteries, paint and solvents, chemicals from photo laboratories, research laboratories, cleaning plants, hospitals etc. (cf. booklets for initial environmental assessment of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Forestry, Industry and Mining). Some types of hazardous waste can be potentially dangerous over time, whereas some become dangerous only in combination with other residual products,
naturally occurring substances, or when exposed to special conditions, e.g. heat. Occasionally, waste which is not originally hazardous can nevertheless become very dangerous if sufficient amounts of it are generated.
o Nuclear waste: Handling requires extraordinary solutions, being generally regulated by special directives. Accordingly, they will not be described in any detail in this initial assessment booklet.
The amounts of municipal waste are usually smaller in developing countries because of lower production and consumption, and extensive sorting and recycling of a series of waste components among poor population groups (cf. chapter 2). These conditions lead to a higher waste density because of the absence of paper, plastics, glass, packaging etc. In return, the share of easily decayable organic matter is greater.
Prior to the planning of waste management measures, the composition of the municipal waste should be thoroughly examined. This is of great importance with regard to choice of technology and system of waste management.
<section>1.4 Activities connected to waste management</section>
Waste management can include a series of activities. One should distinguish between traditional and/or existing practice (cf. chapter 2) and activities connected to projects that aim to improve and make waste management more efficient. Good waste management focus on a "cradle to grave" approach. This involves active surveying and monitoring of refuse all the way from generation to disposal. Such systems presuppose adequate legislation and strong organizational and institutional conditions. A brief description of the various activities which waste management generally includes is given below. The scope and practice concerning the various activities will vary between countries, cultures and project categories.
A) From generation to transport of waste
a) Storage
Storage of waste takes place at the spot where the waste is produced. Domestic refuse is normally stored continually in a container or sack until collected. The daily production is usually stored inside until it is carried outside for collection. There can be one unit per household or per several households, or local communal collection points where garbage is emptied in a bin or container. In some developing countries, old oil barrels, concrete tubes and other improvised enclosures may be used for storage, often without any systematized garbage collection taking place.
Industry and business often have their own systems with relatively large storage units. Some factories run large refuse heaps on the factory premises, without any form of regular collection. Containers used as storage units are common for a great many industries and outside large market places.
b) Collection
Collection generally takes place by loading waste from the storage containers on to a vehicle, e.g. hand cart, donkey cart, tractor with trailer, lorry or special garbage truck. The garbage is usually collected and emptied by the crew of the vehicle (the garbage collectors), but in some cases collectors make a sound signal on which household members come and empty their garbage into the vehicle.
Collection requires passable routes, and the choice of technology must be adapted to the existing quality of roads, streets and settlements. A simple cart can often be more useful than a modern garbage truck, and labour-intensive methods more efficient than modern, mechanized ones. The choice of technology should also be considered on the basis of available facilities for maintenance. In some places, tractors ordinarily used for agricultural purposes have proved useful for collection and transport of waste. Moreover, in agricultural areas where tractors are used, there is often a good infrastructure with garages and available spare parts.
Wherever there is a systematic collection, small-scale industries and businesses are usually included. Major manufacturing industries producing large amounts of waste usually run their own systems for collection and transport. Collection of sludge from waste water treatment plants also requires separate collection routines.
c) Waste transfer and transport
If the place of disposal is far away or if very small vehicles are used for collection, it can be appropriate to load the garbage on to a larger transport vehicle. Transport is thereby rationalized in that it takes fewer vehicles and crews. Waste transfer can take place by the collection car emptying the garbage into a container for collection by a larger container car, or by the garbage being loaded directly from the collection vehicle on to the transport vehicle. Light vehicles should be used for shorter distances, e.g. tractor with trailer. Transport takes place between collection, any transfer, and the place of disposal. Also in this case, choice of technology should be based on the passability and quality of roads and other infrastructure (cf. booklet 8: "Transport").
B) Waste disposal
This is a common term for how the waste is handled, whether some of it is recycled, treated in some way or another, or placed in a landfill.
a) Source sorting
The purpose of source sorting is to keep waste components separate from each other at the source, or where the waste arises, so that one or more of them can be reutilized or recycled. Usually, cardboard and paper are sorted, but food scraps, glass, metal, plastics, combustible and compostable matter can also be sorted. Such sorting requires that the waste producers are enabled to store waste components separately, and that special collection and transport systems for the various components exist. In developing countries, source sorting is still uncommon.
b) Central sorting
Central sorting takes place by sorting out valuable components from mixed waste. In some industrialized countries, mechanized sorting plants exist, but these have only been tried out to a small degree in developing countries, at least as far as mixed domestic waste is concerned. Manual sorting, however, is quite common, and large amounts of valuable materials are sorted out for reuse (cf. chapter 2). The ratio between the economic value of materials such as plastics, paper, glass, metals, textiles etc. and hourly payment for labour is generally much higher in developing countries than in industrialized countries, so that manual sorting can be cost efficient.
Attempts have also been made to establish recycling centres that pay for recyclable waste. For these to work, relatively high prices must be paid for pure and sorted materials.
c) Recycling
Source sorting and central sorting of domestic refuse are important links in the recycling of waste components. Industry and various businesses often produce large amounts of relatively homogeneous waste. Such waste can often be used as raw material for other industries and/or be utilized in other ways. For example, waste from fisheries, aquaculture, slaughter-houses etc. can be used as animal feed after e.g. heat treatment, sterilizing and/or grinding; sewage, sludge and agricultural waste can be used for fertilization of aquaculture plants and agriculture; wood waste from forestry and wood industries are useable as fuel; dust and slag from smelting works can be used for road construction; iron and other metals can be recycled from rehabilitation of buildings and plants; and chemical residuals and by-products from one factory can be used as raw material in another. In some industrialized countries, waste exchanges have been established, at which waste for sale and demands
for particular waste products can be announced.
d) Production of refuse derived fuel (RDF)
The purpose of producing RDF is to sort out a fraction containing the main part of the highly combustible components that can be found in waste, i.e. cardboard, paper, textiles and wood. These are dried, ground and briquetted. The advantage is that a product is made which is dry and storable, in addition to being compact and thus easily transportable. Such RDF can, if the separation is good, be burnt in various types of incinerators without special gas cleaning measures. In developing countries, this method has only been tried out to a slight degree so far.
e) Composting
Composting is a treatment method geared to a quick microbial decomposition of organic matter in the waste. This takes place by grinding, separation of some of the more heavily decomposable components, controlling of humidity and nutrients (usually by means of sewage sludge) and supply of air (aerobic decomposition). The entire process generally takes 1 year, and the compost product can be utilized in agriculture. In addition, carbon dioxide and water are produced, which escape to the atmosphere. Some machine equipment is commonly used for composting, but there are examples of successful comporting processes which are mainly carried out manually. Waste produced in many developing countries is often ideal for composting, and the method could preferably by practiced on a larger scale in areas where agriculture is important. Sewage sludge can also be applicated directly to fields for agricultural purpose, assumed that the content of heavy metals or other poisoning material is
not dangerously high.
f) Anaerobic decomposition
Anaerobic decomposition is basically different from aerobic decomposition (ref. e), even if the the decomposition is done by microorganisms. Air is shut off, and the process usually takes place in a reactor. Since the decomposition is anaerobic (without air), inflammable methane gas is generated in addition to carbon dioxide, which can be utilized for energy purposes. Anaerobic decomposition of waste has not been tried out to any great extent yet, while such treatment of farces on a small scale is a well-known technology in many developing countries. The generated gas is utilizable as energy for cooking in the households.
g) Incineration
Burning of rubbish takes place in special incinerators adapted to this heterogeneous fuel which often has a low calorific value as compared to conventional fuels. Proper incineration requires ample supplies of air, a certain resident time and a sufficient temperature. Some harmful waste gas components are nevertheless generated, and a great deal of dust follows the flue gas. Purification of the waste gas is therefore required. It keeps a temperature of 800°-1000 °C, and it is possible to recycle up to 80 per cent of the energy by heat-exchanging the gas with water. Hot water for distant heating, processing heat for industry or steam for electric generators can then be produced.
h) Deposit in landfill
There will always be a need for a landfill, regardless of the means of disposal chosen. None of the methods commented on above can take care of absolutely all of the waste, and all leave residuals which must be handled in an alternative way. A landfill may be anything from an uncontrolled rubbish heap (a dump) in a hollow to a well prepared area with a sealed bottom, a system for accumulation and handling of water leachate, compaction of the waste with a compactor, daily covering of the refuse, enclosures etc. Many landfills and dumps in developing countries have come into being by chance, without necessary preliminary investigations or land-use planning.
C) Management of hazardous waste
Processing procedures for hazardous waste will vary according to type of refuse, degree of toxicity etc. There should be strict requirements regarding storage, collection, transport, transfer and disposal. Hazardous waste should normally not be treated together with other types of waste, but certain types may be burnt together with other waste. In some countries, hazardous waste is deposited in a landfill together with domestic waste, in reference to a theory that the biological processes taking place in domestic waste also decompose hazardous waste. This has not been documented, and concerns, at best, only some very special matter. Organic hazardous waste can be burnt in specially constructed incinerators, whereas inorganic waste can be detoxified chemically, stabilized and/or encapsulated prior to a controlled depositing. The processing procedure will only be effective and proper if the strictest international requirements and directions are complied with. Special training
and protection of those engaged in handling of refuse are necessary. All hazardous waste must be stored in clearly marked barrels, containers etc. The marking must pay attention to any limitations concerning language and reading skills, and clearly caution anyone coming into contact with the waste (cf. chapter 3.6).
a) Storage
Hazardous waste commonly goes through different periods of storage before final disposal or destruction. The waste is often stored as it is being generated, and up to a certain amount before it is transported onwards to an intermediate storage station, or direct to the disposal plants. However short the period of storage, one should take great care to reduce the risk of leakage into the environment. For some types of hazardous waste there is still no safe method of processing or disposal. Such waste must be stored until new technology has been developed, or until decomposition over time has removed the risk of serious pollution. Storage facilities for such waste should be constructed in accordance with strict international directions and in stable localities.
Measures concerning waste processing should pay attention to the special conditions existing in the various developing countries. Transfer of technology is often an important element in development aid, and a well adapted choice of technology should be based on a consideration of various conditions, both locally and nationally. In order to achieve sustainable measures, it is often necessary to carry out investigations and research to form a basis for the planning of measures, and choice of technology and localization, accomplishable within the economic, technological, institutional, cultural and environmental framework conditions and opportunities in an individual country and in a particular locality. With regard to choice of technology, except for the handling of hazardous waste (cf. chapter 3.6), these conditions can lead to decisions which will not always meet standards that are common in technologically highly developed countries. However, experience from developing
countries has shown that relatively simple measures can bring considerable, and environmentally sound, improvements.
<section>2 The environment affected by the project</section>
The waste problem in developing countries is different, and often greater, than in highly developed countries. The flow of waste per capita is usually less, but so are the economic resources for dealing with the problem. Waste disposal often takes place by uncontrolled dumping on unsuitable spots, e.g. river banks, streets, canals, or small and large rubbish heaps. Generally speaking, the amount of waste increases in proportion to an improved purchasing power, industrial development, rationalization within trades and specializations. Such a development is taking place in several developing countries. The waste problem is great, and increasing, especially in cities. In addition, extensive migration to cities, and relatively great differences between poor and rich urban areas, create special conditions concerning the generation and handling of waste (cf. booklet 12: "Development of densely populated or urban areas"). Waste management systems controlled by municipal authorities
usually exist, but they tend to be insufficiently organized, ineffective, and seldom cover all parts of urban and densely populated areas. In addition, there is often an informal sector of private contractors who have established collection systems for rubbish.
<section>2.1 Informal collection systems</section>
In several big cities in developing countries, more than half of the population live in slum areas. Many settlers live in sheds built of old packaging and metal scraps, and many gain their livelihood by collecting waste from streets and landfills, for sorting and sale of objects and materials such as glass, metals, plastics, paper/cardboard and textiles. In some towns, a well-organized system for collection, sorting and reutilization has developed, whereby large amounts of materials are prepared for sale to e.g. manufacturing and small-scale industries. Such systems can be operated through a number of contractors and activities. On the ground level, poor people collect waste in barrels, boxes and baskets. In some towns, both women and men walk about the streets early in the morning before the municipal collection vehicles arrive in streets and at storage points; in other cases, collection from door to door is offered. The collected materials are sold to dealers who perform a
rough sorting before selling them on to other dealers, who perform a further sorting and cleaning before the materials are sold on to industry etc. The entire range of activities, some of them unhygienic, can provide work and income for hundreds of people. In addition, manufacturing and small-scale industries are offered raw materials at a low price, which can save the national economy relatively large sums of foreign exchange in connection with purchase of imported goods. There are also examples of private contractors, e.g. special ethnical and/or religious groups among the urban population, specializing in waste collection and dominating this activity over municipal or public measures. This informal, private collection tends to cover only the upper middle class and the more affluent urban areas, since this is where most of the recyclable waste materials can be found. It is not difficult to argue against such manual collection for health and environmental reasons, but it
may be hard to find good alternatives.
In extreme cases, people settle down by or on large landfills in order to live on what they find there. The health consequences are evident. Skin diseases, intestinal diseases, typhus, cholera, hepatitis etc. easily spread among people in such areas. In addition it is often children who look for waste at the landfill. Conflicts often arise between municipal waste collectors who take the most valuable materials themselves and people living on the yields of the landfill.
<section>2.2 Slum vs. affluent settlements</section>
Great differences in prosperity between various urban areas can lead to great differences concerning waste management. Affluent areas generally have paved roads and streets, which makes them more passable for the waste collecting vehicles, whereas slum areas with muddy and narrow streets can be virtually inaccessible. Moreover, households in the more affluent urban areas are able to pay for the collection of waste. Efficient and modern methods of storage and collection of waste can work well in the prosperous parts of the towns, whereas slum areas often require more labour-intensive approaches (cf. chapter 1.4). The composition of the waste also varies greatly between various urban areas. Slum waste consists almost entirely of organic matter, e.g. vegetable scraps and excrements from animals and humans. This kind of refuse is often just thrown into the street to rot or becomes feed for dogs, goats, pigs or cows. Such areas are characterized by bad smell and large amounts of
flies and rodents. In many towns, lack of collection causes blockages in the draining and sewage systems. Malaria has been spread in towns with blocked gutters, so that small water puddles are created in which malaria mosquitoes can breed. In some developing countries, the hygiene in private households can be very good, while being neglected in public squares, streets and places. Pollution also has a negative aesthetic and visual effect on the urban environment. In the countryside and in villages, waste largely consists of organic matter. In larger villages and around market places, problems that are equivalent to those in slum areas in the big cities tend to arise.
<section>2.3 Socio-cultural conditions</section>
Introduction of an efficient and modern collection system presupposes changes in household habits. This may be difficult to achieve. A poor family living in a limited space has no room for a dustbin. Besides, it is likely to be used for another purpose if it is given by someone. Among some population groups, religious taboos can also prevent storage of garbage in the house or backyard. Among other groups, e.g. Muslims, the backyard is a prohibited area to others, e.g. waste collectors. Female secularization and the holiness of the home can completely prohibit the intrusion of strangers. Religion and socio-cultural conditions may, in various connections, play an important part in the way waste is handled. Castes and taboos involve that some population groups will not touch garbage, so that work connected with it must be carried out by others. Sale of recycled material can also be problematic if the receiver knows it has been in contact with waste. Use of do