<title>Commercialization of non-timber forest products in Amazonia</title>
NRI Socio-economic Series 2
E M Richards
<section>Foreword</section>
This series is based upon work carried out under the socio-economics research programme at NRI. Its purpose is to provide an easily accessible medium for current research findings. Whilst it is hoped that the series will be of interest to those concerned with development issues worldwide, it may be of particular relevance to people working in developing countries.
The topics covered by the series are quite diverse, but principally relate to applied and adaptive research activity and findings. Some papers are largely descriptive, others concentrate on analytical issues, or relate to research methodologies
The aim is to present material in as straight-forward a fashion as possible so that it can reach a wide audience.
We are interested in the views and opinions of readers and welcome any feedback to this series.
Alan Marter Socio-economics Research Programme
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This research was funded by the Natural Resources and Environment Department of the Overseas Development Administration. However, the views and analysis do not necessarily represent those of either NRI or ODA. The author would like to thank Angus Hone and Clinton Green of NRI, and Nigel Sizer of Cambridge University, for their comments on an earlier version of this paper, and their general encouragement and advice, as well as David Cleary, also of Cambridge University, for his interest and information.
NATURAL RESOURCES INSTITUTE Overseas Developmcnt Administration
C) Crown copyright 1993
The Natural Resources Institute (NRI) is an internationally recognized centre of expertise on the natural resources of developing countries. It forms an integral part of the British Government's overseas aid programme. Its principal aim is to alleviate poverty and hardship in developing countries by increasing the productivity of their renewable natural resources. NRI's main fields of expertise are resource assessment and farming systems, integrated pest management, food science and crop utilization.
NRI carries out research and surveys; develops pilot-scale plant, machinery and processes; identifies, prepares, manages and executes projects; provides advice and training; and publishes scientific and development material.
Short extracts of material from this publication may be reproduced in any non-advertising, non-profit-making context provided that the source is acknowledged as follows:
Richards, E. M. (1993) Commercialization of Non-timber Forest Products in Amazonia, NRI Socio-economics Series 2. Chatham, UK: Natural Resources Institute.
Permission for commercial reproduction should be sought from:
The Head, Publishing and Publicity Services, Natural Resources Institute, Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent, ME4 4TB, United Kingdom.
This publication is printed on chlorine-free paper.
Price £5.00
No charge is made for single copies of this publication sent to governmental and educational establishments, research institutions and non-profit-making organizations working in countries eligible for British Government Aid. Free copies cannot normally be addressed to individuals by name but only under their official titles. Please quote order no. SES2 when ordering.
Natural Resources Institute
ISBN: 0 85954 3382
ISSN: 0967-0548
<section>Abbreviations</section>
CNS
National Council of Rubber Tappers
CPATU
Eastern Amazonia Centre of Agroforestry Research
CPR
Common Property Resource
EAP
Economically Active Population
EMBRAPA
Brazilian Organization of Agricultural and Livestock Research
FUNAI
National Foundation for Indigenous Affairs
IBAMA
Brazilian Environmental Institute
IBGE
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
INCRA
National Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform
INPA
National Amazonian Research Institute
NRI
Natural Resources Institute
NTFP
Non-Timber Forest Product
ODA
Overseas Development Administration
UIN
Union of Indigenous Nations
<section>Glossary</section>
Aviamento
Credit and marketing system where goods are supplied on credit and paid for in extractive products, mainly rubber and Brazil nuts
Caboclos
Indigenous river people
Campesinos
Small farmers
Castanhais
Brazil nut groves
Castanhales
Estates
Castanheiros
Brazil nut gatherers
Colonos
Colonizers
Ejidos
Land reform co-operatives (Mexico)
Fob
Free on board
Fundo
Farm
Garimpeiros
Gold prospectors
Hylea
Amazon Basin
Nordestinos
Northerners
Patrao
Merchant
Patrones
Merchants
Ribereños
River-dwellers (Bolivia)
Ribeirinhos
Indigenous river people
Seringal
Rubber estate
Seringueros
Rubber tappers
Swidden
Traditional forest farming practice including 'slash and burn'.
Terra firme forest
Forest not subject to flooding
Varzea
Seasonally flooded forest
<section>Summary</section>
This study examines the impacts of the development of the principal extractive products of the Amazon and identifies the main factors affecting sustainable welfare benefits for extractive groups. These include tenure instability, policies favouring alternative land uses, aviamento, commercialization systems, commercial pressures resulting in resource depletion where the extraction method is destructive, and the boom-bust nature of export markets that inevitably lead to substitution by a synthetic or planted product. The future of extractivism depends on better remuneration for extractors, whether through the market or not, tenure and institutional reforms (i.e. extractive reserves), and successful diversification through integrated natural forest management. The cultivation of formerly wild plants in agroforestry systems should also be given high priority. Extractivism on its own, and under present market conditions, has major limitations as a response to deforestation
pressures, but there are important strategic and humanitarian reasons for its support while longer term solutions are being developed.
<section>Introduction</section>
Background
Human and ecological background
Historical overview
Background
Both Amazonian Governments and aid donors have regarded the market development of extractive non-timber forest products (NTFPs) as a means of forest conservation. By increasing the value of the standing forest as a productive asset superior to alternative uses, it has been hoped to encourage forest-based communities to manage the forest resource in a sustainable fashion.
Many of these products lend themselves to nondestructive management practices. Some, like Peters et al. (1989) contend that the sustainable exploitation of non-timber forest resources represents the most immediate and profitable method for integrating the use and conservation of the Amazon forests, while Gradwohl and Greenberg (1988) maintain that extractive reserves offer a mode of forest use that is both immediately economically competitive and sustainable in the long run. There has therefore been considerable research and development emphasis on identifying and developing market possibilities, but with insufficient understanding of the consequences of this for welfare of the extractive groups and resource sustainability.
This study analyses the impact of market integration of a number of case study NTFPs, on welfare, resource sustainability, and biodiversity conservation. This provides the basis for a discussion of the problems and potential of extractivism for sustainable forest management in Amazonia. The study focuses on tree products, and therefore excludes fauna, firewood and other NTFPs.
Human and ecological background
There are many terms for the various groups of extractors in the Amazon, such as seringueros (rubber tappers), castanheiros (Brazil nut gatherers), and ribeirinhos, or caboclos, (riverside dwellers) as well as the Indian groups. The caboclos, sometimes referred to as rural indigenous people, are mixed-blood descendants of Indians and Europeans or Africans. They are distinct from more recent colonos (colonizers) who have moved into the area since the 1960s. These are not mutually exclusive categories. For example, most rubber tappers also collect Brazil nuts and other extractive products, and engage in a wide range of livelihood activities.
In general the Amazon is sparsely populated. The overall average population density in the Amazonian lowlands of nine countries was 2.1/km2 (Eden, 1990). Over half of the estimated 15 million in Brazil's Amazonia Legal are now urban, many of them former rubber tappers and failed colonos. Other groups include about three million colonos, two and a half million caboclos, half a million garimpeiros (gold prospectors), and 200 000 Amerindians (Sizer, 1991).
The rubber tappers (mainly caboclos) are largely descendants of the half a million nordestinos who moved into the Amazon from the drought-prone northeast during the rubber boom (1870-1910). Estimates of their current number vary. Schwartzmann et al. (1987) calculated that half a million people depended on rubber and other latex products as their main source of income, in comparison with 340 000 rubber tappers according to the 1985 Census. Browder (1990) estimates that up to one and a half million derived a significant proportion of their income from extractive activities.
According to data presented in Torres and Martine (1991), the numbers in extractivism are in decline: in the northern region of Brazil the proportion of the economically active population (EAP) in extractivism declined from 9.6 to 4.6% between 1970 and 1980, and also fell in absolute numbers, while total EAP increased by 76% and urban employment more than doubled. The 1980s saw a further absolute and relative fall in extractivism to less than 3% of EAP (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) ).
Some 90% of the hylea, or Amazon Basin, is covered by forest not subject to flooding (terra firme forest) (Eden, 1990). The seasonally flooded or varzea forest areas are the most fertile due to the constant process of soil fertility renewal through sedimentation. They were the first to be settled due to the obvious transport, soil fertility and fishing benefits. They are also the most often cited when economic calculations are presented to show the sustainable viability of extractivism (e.g. Peters et al. 1989). However, the varzea forests, where a few marketable
species predominate (oligarchic forests), constitute only about 2% of the Amazon Basin (Browder, 1992).
Historical overview
The history of extractivism is overshadowed by one product - rubber. Padoch and de Jong (1990) comment that the rubber boom caused the complete transformation of society, and resulted in the break-up of many of the Peruvian Amerindian groups who were literally enslaved.
Case study: The Santa Rosa community, peru (Padoch and de Jong, 1990)
The population of Santa Rosa are ribereños, or river dwellers descended from various indigenous and mestizo (mixed blood) groups. They are thus the equivalent of the Brazilian caboclos. This was a prime rubber tapping area, and in 1907 several estates in the locality were flourishing, at a time when rubber composed 20% of Peru's exports, but by 1912 many of the rubber tappers had left the area for Iquitos or beyond.
During the 1930s and 1940s most of the land on the large Monte Carmelo fundo (farm) was planted with barbasco (Lonchocarpus sp.), the roots of which were exported by the American owned Astoria company in Iquitos, since they contained rotenene, a natural insecticide. The surrounding forest was cleared to supply the market which peaked in about 1946. However the price began to fall with the development of DDT and other synthetic insecticides. This, together with family quarrels, caused the collapse of the fundo.
The owners left the fundo and took 60 male labourers (members of the Ashaninka tribe) to the Putumayo River to promising extraction sites for leche caspi (Couma macrocarpa), a milky-white resin used in the manufacture of chewing gum, paints and varnish, and regarded as capable of saving the region from the marasmus resulting from the fall of rubber. The women and children were left behind for three years to carry on with subsistence farm production. This disruption of family and community life was evidently similar to the rubber boom.
By the mid- 1950s the market for leche caspi had waned again, and so the owners of Monte Carmelo moved to Santa Rita near the Colombian border to start a rice production and processing centre, this time with the labourers' families. This was shortlived due to a dispute with a more powerful neighbour, but several of the men married into a Yagua Indian group employed on a nearby fundo, and stayed on to raise cattle. In 1955 some of the families moved to the Napo River (northwest of Iquitos) in order to exploit rosewood oil, which experienced a meteoric price rise in the 1950s. Accessible forests were quickly stripped of rosewood trees.
After this, most of the group returned to Santa Rita, but some stayed on in the Napo area to be absorbed in the local Quichua culture. Eventually the remaining group returned to Monte Carmelo and founded Santa Rosa, which soon swelled with migrants from other areas.
This brief history illustrates the processes of migration, deculturation and fragmentation of family and society over a fairly short period. It was the speed of cultural change which has been most dramatic, according to Padoch and de Jong (1990). For example the Ashaninkas apparently abandoned their language and customs in the process of the migrations described above.
In the case of the Witoto of the Putumayo River, the atrocities and killings aroused international attention and protest.
However, both before and after the rubber boom, many other products have followed the boom-bust cycle of extractivism. During the 18th and 19th centuries the Portuguese and Jesuits organized Amerindians in extractive expeditions to gather forest products, especially cocoa, andiroba seed, copaiba balsam, sarsaparilla, and oil from giant river turtles. As early as 1851, investigators found Amazonian collectors receiving only 0.5% of the eventual New York consumer price of Sarsaparilla (Padoch, 1988).
During the present century there have been several important mini-booms. From 1910 to 1925, the seeds of tagua or vegetable ivory (Phytelephus macrocarpa) were harvested for buttons and game pieces until artificial materials took over. From 1925 to 1935 balata (Manilkara bidentata) and leche caspi (Couma macrocarpa) became important until substituted. Then barbasco (Lonchocarpus spp.) became important until it was overshadowed by DDT and other synthetic insecticides in the 1960s (Padoch, 1988). In the 1950s alligator skins were in demand, and were followed in the 1960s by jaguar and ocelot skins.
The case study of the Santa Rosa community (see page 2), illustrates the social and cultural impacts of the constant migration of communities in response to these market forces. Padoch (1988), Colchester (1989), Gray (1990) and others have documented the social and cultural impacts on indigenous communities, including the consequences of dependency in its various forms, resulting from market integration.
Up to the 1950s extractive activities were dominant in the rural economies of the Amazon, but in most parts, especially Brazil, livestock, agriculture and mining took over. The extractive economy stagnated and declined due to worsening terms of trade, while national emphasis shifted to the coffee boom in the southern highlands, and to industrialization. Since the advent of over two million people after the opening of the Belém-Brasilia highway (1965) and the Transmazon highway in the early 1970s, the area has been the scene of major social and economic upheavals.
Table 1 presents the production figures for extractive and other NTFPs from Brazil and Table 2 presents recent export data from Brazil. Such statistics are often incomplete or found to be in conflict with one another.
There is no good set of figures on Brazilian domestic consumption of these products. Further data are provided by Lescure and de Castro. An explanation of the products is presented in Appendix 1.
<section>Rubber and extractive reserves</section>
Aviamento
Autonomous systems
Changes in tenure and resource use in Acre
Development of extractive reserves
The future of natural rubber extraction
Following the discovery of vulcanization in 1839, rubber became an important commodity and its extraction and export from Amazonia expanded rapidly, especially after 1870. This caused a high demand for labour and so poor labourers from the drought-prone northeast of Brazil were recruited to fill the gap. Most of these settled along the tributaries of the Amazon and collected latex in the adjacent varzea forests (although Hevea brasilierisis also grows in terra firme forest), causing the displacement of Amerindian groups to the terra firme (Schmink and Wood, 1986).
The impact of the rubber boom on indigenous societies has already been mentioned. Murphy and Steward (1956) documented the effect of the rubber trade on the Mundurucu Indians of the Brazilian Upper Amazon. One of the main factors which weakened their society was that tapping was best done individually, and not collectively as had been the case with the cultivation and processing of cassava, which previously formed the basis of their economy. Colchester (1989) refers to this as the 'atomizing effects of individualist training'.
The rubber boom was broken by the establishment of Hevea plantations in South East Asia by the British, where domestication was not hampered, as it was in Brazil, by leaf rust fungus (Microcyclus ulei). The development of synthetic substitutes further hastened this decline. Extraction in Brazil has only continued as a result of the Government policy of subsidizing national production to the extent that rubber prices in Brazil have been up to three times the international price (Fearnside, 1989). Allegretti (1990) attributes this to the lobbying power of vested interests in the marketing and industrialization of rubber, as well as to the acute shortage of foreign exchange.
A viamento
From the beginning these migrants were inserted into a highly regressive credit and marketing system called aviamento in which market goods were supplied on credit at inflated prices, to be paid for in extractive products, mainly rubber and Brazil nuts. As a result of the low extractive product prices offered by the petty rubber merchants or patraos (owners of the rubber trails), and the inflated food, clothing and medicine prices, rubber tappers were always in debt.
The system was thus one of debt bondage in which rubber tappers were obliged to sell all their produce through the patrao, as well as often paying rent to him in exchange for rights to use his land (usufruct rights). The presence of independent small-scale merchants who offer an alternative when prices become too extreme, provided some limit to the system's inequity.
Several studies document the inequity and welfare impacts of aviamento on rubber tappers. For example a survey of 170 rubber-tapper households in Caruari, Amazonas State, by Whitesell (reported in Browder, 1992) between 1986 and 1991 revealed that 76% had a patrao to whom they felt obliged to sell all they produced, 28% also paid rent to him and 79% were in debt.
Sizer (1991) presents data from 51 families in the Jau National Park, Amazonas State, that show that patraos were supplying basic foodstuffs at over twice their market value in Manaus (the nearest urban centre), paying 30% below Manaus prices for extracted products, and charging real monthly interest rates of 40% on parts of the outstanding debts. According to Sizer's data, average monthly expenditure was greater than mean income recorded from extraction.
A survey of 24 households by Romanoff (in press) in Riberalta, Bolivia, in 1981 found that all but one were in debt to patrones (merchants) to an average equivalent of a quarter of their annual household income. Food staple prices were 50% above those paid by urban residents. Periodic food shortages were reported by 71% of the households, 22% of the children were malnourished, and a further 32% were in danger of becoming so. As with the data of Oliveira and Whitesell (both in Browder, 1992) this survey reports high residential instability amongst extractors.
The low return to producers is partly explained by the high cost and risk of transport, often in treacherous weather conditions, and the high risks of marketing extractive products in a hyper-inflationary economy (Padoch, 1989). The merchants and patraos themselves are usually also in debt to downstream merchants, as this indebtedness is transferred back up the marketing chain to the wholesalers and exporters who provide the seed money for aviamento.
The aviamento system is still widespread and exists in many forms throughout the Amazon Basin. Although it maintains extractors in conditions of severe deprivation, there are two factors which may make it difficult to replace. Its primary function is its capacity to call forth
supply from remote areas - a means of bridging the gap between the non-market subsistence economy and the market economy (Torres and Martine, 1991). For this reason aviamento tends to decline in importance as the road network expands, as happened in Acre from the 1960s.
Secondly, the system is designed so that rubber tappers maximize time devoted to extractive activities: by manipulating the terms of trade, the merchants or patraos oblige the tappers to engage in extractivism (in order to pay off their debts) and provide the products which form the basis of the merchant's trading business. This leaves little time for subsistence agriculture. Thus aviamento may be environmentally more benign than the alternative autonomous system.
Aviamento helps to explain Government policy towards rubber extraction, as it forms part of a commercial system in which many powerful interests are involved. Post-war policy has therefore always sought to protect the regional commercial system and avoid putting Amazonian rubber in a competitive position with Asian plantation rubber (Schwartzmann and Allegreti, 1987).
Autonomous systems
There has been a shift from aviamento to an autonomous system in more accessible areas. It is termed autonomous because it does not involve dependence on a trader or resource owner. In the autonomous areas there is a greater diversification of activities and products, and a more reasonable quality of life is achieved, according to Schwartzmann (1989) who undertook a survey in one such area in Acre where the National Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA) had granted land rights to rubber-tapper families.
The survey found that the average holding was 372 ha and an average family exploited 1100 rubber trees. From an annual family production of 750 kg of rubber and 4500 kg of Brazil nuts, annual incomes of almost $1000 were earned, with some earning over $1500 plus subsistence benefits. This gave them an income that put them above half the EAP of the region (Schwartzmann, 1989). However, there was a big variation in the economic condition of the households: even without aviamento 55% of the households were in debt to middlemen, while the remainder had an average cash surplus of $680.
Schwartzmann (1989) reported that rubber tappers were keen to remain in the seringal (rubber estate), valued the forest, and had a more balanced diet than urban dwellers. However more recent evidence from Oliveira (in Browder, 1992), also in Acre, reports a 'progressive deterioration' in their diets.
Changes in tenure and resource use in acre
Between 1960 and 1980, major changes in land use and distribution occurred in western Brazil, especially in Acre where extraction declined both in area (by 65%) and number of holdings, and ranching and agriculture increased enormously. This was a result of the Government policy of frontier development through expansion of the road network, resource privatization, and subsidies.
In the first half of the 1970s, up to 80% of State lands were sold and land prices rose by 1000-2000%, depending on access to roads (Schwartzmann, 1991). This was encouraged by subsidized credit available at negative real interest rates throughout the 1970s. This together with very low prices made land an extremely attractive investment for businessmen from southern Brazil. Operations of 'cleaning the land' or removing the rubber tappers and small farmers became common from 1973 as ranchers intimidated and bought out rubber tappers for low prices. The consequent outmigration more than doubled the urban population of Acre from 21% in 1960 to 44% in 1980 (Schwartzmann, in press). There are reports of whole towns of ex-rubber tappers, like Eirunepe in Amazonas, which grew from 8 000 to 30 000 in five years (Parfit, 1989). In addition between 10 000 and 50 000 moved over the border to Bolivia.
Rapid deforestation soon followed these changes. By 1987 the area deforested in Acre had increased to 633 000 ha from 77 000 ha in 1975, according to official statistics. It is not coincidental that the level of assassinations also reached a peak of almost 200 a year in Brazilian Amazonia in the mid-1980s (Schwartzmann, in press). Fearnside (1989) comments that rubber-tapper leaders were continually threatened by gunslingers hired by ranchers. The assassination of Chico Mendes in 1988 brought this situation to world attention.
Development of extractive reserves
Out of these problems, the National Council of Rubber Tappers (CNS) was established in 1985 in a meeting that also called for the formation of extractive reserves. Extractive reserves provide a framework for the sustained use and protection of extractive products through the definition of property rights in favour of local communities, according to May (1990b). This may sound conventional, but the extractive reserves approach has a number of significant differences to top-down schemes.
Its adherents claim that it represents a genuinely bottom-up approach in which grassroots organizations have developed with little or no Government support (Allegretti, 1990). The legal recognition of property rights proposed for extractive reserves follows traditional patterns of land use. Each landholding allows for a mix of activities, as in the autonomous rubber tapper system, with generally three rubber trails of 120 trees per trail in some 100-150 ha. Some of these trails may lie within another holding, but the rights to the rubber trees are recognized.
The land is retained by the State and is leased to the rubber tappers for an initial minimum period of 30 years: this avoids the normal process of land concentration and deforestation which has followed privatization in the Amazon region. The extractive reserves are under the joint control of CNS and the Brazilian Environmental Institute (IBAMA), but at the local level are administered by locally elected groups.
Due to continued conflicts over land rights progress has been slow. Schwartzmann (in press) reports that at the time of writing 14 reserves have been decreed and four are operational.
The Government has showed support for the extractive reserves concept through increased social infrastructure, and support to co-operative processing initiatives (Sizer, 1991). Several important processing and marketing co-operatives have been started, most notably the Brazil nut plant at Xapuri in Acre State.
The future of natural rubber extraction
Natural rubber extraction faces a bleak future as a result of successful domestication in non-Amazonian Brazil. Large areas have been planted in Sao Paulo and Matto Grosso States, and Browder (1992) estimates that cultivated rubber now supplies 60% of Brazil's market. These plantations, which have the major economic advantage of being nearer the centres of demand, will soon be able to supply all Brazil's domestic rubber needs at a reduced cost, thereby removing the rationale for subsidizing wild rubber extraction. Liberalization policies in the Brazilian economy are also likely to increase pressures for reduction or removal of this subsidy.
<section>Other extractive products</section>
Brazil nuts
The current crisis and future prospects
Babaçu
Changes in tenure and land use
Impact of commercialization and processing changes
Products from the varzea
Açai juice
Palm hearts
Impact of market expansion for açai products
Aguaje
Camu camu
Essential oils and flavouring products
Rosewood oil
Copaiba balsam
Cumaru nuts
Fatty oils
Ucuuba
Andiroba
Exudates
Brazil nuts
Bertholletia excelsa is found in terra firme forests throughout the Amazon Basin, in 50 to 100 tree groves. Balee (1989) and others believe that indigenous groups are responsible for this distribution. Its importance in extractive economies in Brazil, Peru and Bolivia is partly due to the seasonal complementarily with rubber - it is harvested in the rainy season while rubber is extracted in the dry season. Women have an important role in the extraction activity, as they crack the fruits collected by the men, separate out the nuts, and prepare them for home consumption.
Brazil nut extraction became important after the rubber price crash from 1910, when rubber tappers looked for alternative income sources. It developed at a slower pace than rubber, partly because it is a high-volume low-value product with a more elastic demand. O'Donnell Sills (1990) notes that the Brazil nut market share has
declined to less than five per cent of the edible nut market, due mainly to the growth in consumption of almonds and hazel nuts.
The quality and quantity of Brazil nut production varies widely between trees, regions and years, the latter partly the result of the unusual flowering to fruiting cycle (12-15 months) and fluctuations in world prices. There has been a shift from the states of Pará and Amazonas to Acre, causing significant increases in production and transport costs, due to lower tree densities and the greater distance to Belém (Torres and Martine, 1991). These changes have benefited Colombian and Peruvian producers.
Case study: Brazil nut extraction in maraba (o'donnell sills, 1990)
In the Maraba area of Para State, traditionally the main extraction area of Brazil, extraction quickly came under the control of the local political elite. These Brazil nut barons used land tenure legislation to ensure control of the castanhais (Brazil nut groves) to add to their control of the commercial process. Extractors who worked the castanhais were tied to the aviamento system; their only alternative was the publicly owned castanhais of the people, but these were privatized during the late 1970s.
Roads, particularly the Belém-Brasilia highway and the Transamazonica, which reached Maraba in 1971, brought major changes to the area. The population of Maraba grew by 258% in the decade to 1980, by which time there were 800 sawmills (compared with I 00 in the mid- 1960s), and there was a large increase in forest clearance for agriculture and ranching. Between 1978 and 1984, cattle numbers increased by 350% while Brazil nut production fell by 68%.
This was the result of both the reduced tree population and labour shortages, as most people sought alternative forms of employment to escape debt bondage. There were also pollination problems due to smoke from land clearance. Deforestation of castanhais also resulted from the land tenure laws, in which land rights were, until recently, secured by conversion to pasture or agriculture, and due to demand for charcoal from the massive Carajas iron ore project, as well as for the timber itself.
During the 1980s the Brazil nut barons saw their economic and political power wane but made various attempts to prevent land reform. After a series of violent conflicts, in 1988 some 64 castanhales (estates) covering 240 000 ha were expropriated by the Government on payment of exaggerated compensation levels negotiated by the barons.
There followed a period of increased invasion, violence and deforestation as a result of lack of definition of the tenure situation. The setting up of communally managed forest areas was discussed, but found little support from residents more interested in rice, cassava and maize. This was due partly to the low producer returns from the aviamento system, and the fear that sales would be boycotted. O'Donnell Sills ( 1990) makes the important observation that the local Unions and their members have a history of fighting for the right to cultivate the land in the castanhais, as opposed to preserving it, and have always sought individual tenure.
These condition