<title>Locust handbook</title>
Natural Resources Institute (NRI)
Overseas Development Administration
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
© Crown Copyright
First published by The Anti-Locust Research Centre 1966
Second edition published by the Overseas Development Natural Resources Institute 1988
Third edition published by the Natural Resources Institute 1990
The Natural Resources Institute (NRI) is the scientific arm of Britain's Overseas Development Administration. NRl's principal aim is to increase the productivity of renewable natural resources in developing countries through the application of science and technology. Its areas of expertise are resource assessment and farming systems, integrated pest management and food science and crop utilisation.
Short extracts of this publication may be reproduced, providing the source is acknowledged:
STEEDMAN, A. (Ed.) (1990). Locust handbook. (3rd edn) Chatham: Natural Resources Institute, vi + 204pp.
Permission for commercial reproduction should, however, be sought from the Head, Publications and Publicity Section, Natural Resources Institute, Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4 4TB, United Kingdom.
ISBN 0-85954-281-5
Price £30.00 including postage and handling
No charge is made for single copies of this publication sent to governmental and educational establishments, research institutions and non-profit making organisations working in countries eligible for British Government Aid. Free copies cannot normally be addressed to individuals by name but only under their official titles.
The Natural Resources Institute is indebted to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the use of the locust frequency maps used in Figs 65-88. In addition, NRI is especially grateful to Dr P. M. Symmons of the FAO for much of the information used in Chapter 7, Controlling Locusts.
NRI would also like to thank Micronair Ltd. Micron and CDA and Lockinge Farm Enterprises for providing material on their sprayers which are described in the Appendix.
The contributions and suggestions of the following NRI staff offered during the production of this edition of the handbook are acknowledged:
R. Allsopp, E. M. Ambridge, R. A. Cheke, 1. F. Grant, V. P. Howe, N. D. Jago, D. R. Johnstone, J. 1. Magor, G. R. Manners and D. R. Reynolds.
The Overseas Development Administration provided funds to cover the costs of production for this handbook.
<section>Introduction</section>
The first edition of the Locust Handbook was published in 1966, shortly after the end of the last major plague of the Desert Locust. The second edition was produced in response to another upsurge in the numbers of Desert Locusts and, for the first time for 50 years, the simultaneous appearance of swarms of African Migratory Locust, the Red Locust and the Brown Locust. In addition, significant populations of grasshoppers have been damaging crops in West Africa. Demand for the second edition was such as to warrant this third edition. It is timely as recently there have been grasshopper outbreaks on an unprecedented scale in the Sahel and Oman.
Locusts and grasshoppers remain a potent factor in the agricultural environment of many countries and plant protection departments need to be vigilant because of the locusts' potential to reduce crop yields. This edition of the handbook is designed to help those involved with locusts and grasshoppers to understand them and to assist in their control. The opportunity has been taken to update many of the maps and to include more information on grasshoppers. The emphasis is on those species which do most damage. Readers who require information on the complete range of locust and grasshopper pests should consult the Locust and Grasshopper Agricultural Manual (COPR 1982) and those who are responsible for detailed forecasting of the Desert Locust should consult the Desert Locust Forecasting Manual (COPR 1981). Relevant information from both manuals has been included here.
This handbook deals more with the Desert Locust than other species but much of what is said about this locust is applicable to all species. Information on biology, distribution and movement is included with particular reference to those matters which directly affect control or survey practice.
Locusts have the capacity to live in a wide range of habitats, and consequently exhibit great variation in the details of their life cycle and behaviour; this plasticity of behaviour adds to their interest but in this book it is neither possible nor desirable to describe all this variation in detail. Here we are concerned with what usually happens, telling the story of the majority of cases and giving an account which is sufficiently accurate for most practical purposes.
A handbook cannot be a substitute for practical training and experience in the field, but it can provide a source of basic data for those who are just beginning to work on locusts and those whose duties concern anti-locust work only occasionally. It is hoped that the handbook will also serve to indicate to the more experienced officer the detailed observations on particular aspects of the problem that are needed to supplement existing knowledge. It is expected that many of the readers of the handbook will be people who not only actually do anti-locust work, but also have the opportunity to observe locusts in areas seldom if ever visited by research teams. Such people are in a position to make careful observations on locusts which will help anti-locust organisations to learn more about the pests, and so help to develop new and better methods of killing them and ultimately preventing new locust plagues arising.
<section>1. What are locusts?</section>
Locusts belong to a large group of insects commonly called grasshoppers, which are recognisable by the big hind legs used for jumping. All grasshoppers (except the so-called long-horned grasshoppers) belong to the super family Acridoidea, and the most important locusts are all in the family Acrididae. Locusts are special grasshoppers, usually large ones, which have a capacity for changing their habits and behaviour when they occur in large numbers. When their numbers rise they become gregarious in habit and stay together in dense groups. These groups are called swarms when they are composed of adults and bands when they consist of the wingless young stages, commonly called 'hoppers'. The swarms of several species of locust can migrate over great distances, and this and gregarious behaviour are the outstanding characteristics that distinguish typical locusts from other grasshoppers. When locusts are in small numbers they live their individual lives like ordinary grasshoppers.
There are several different kinds of typical locusts capable of forming large migrating swarms, but there are also several other species of grasshoppers which do not normally live in vast crowds but which have the capacity to multiply rapidly and produce groups or swarms in special circumstances. These sudden population rises may be started by unusual weather conditions or changes in land-use; they may not actually result in large migrating swarms but the groups formed will stay together in a typical locust way. Such species may be regarded as being intermediate between grasshoppers that live alone and typical locusts that often do not.
<section>Locust and grasshopper distribution</section>
The green areas in Fig. 1 indicate the parts of the world where crops may suffer damage caused by locusts and grasshoppers. The area covered by this handbook is enclosed by a black line. Some areas may be liable to attack by only one species while in other areas several kinds may be serious pests. The species covered in this handbook are listed below; an individual distribution map accompanies the description of each species.
Desert Locust
Schistocerca gregaria
African Migratory Locust
Locusta migratoria migratorioides
Oriental Migratory Locust
Locusta migratoria manilensis
Red Locust
Nomadacris septemfasciata
Brown Locust
Locustana pardalina
Tree Locusts
Anacridium spp.
Bombay Locust
Nomadacris succincta (formerly Patanga succincta)
Sudan Plague Locust
Aiolopus simulatrix
Senegalese Grasshopper
Oedaleus senegalensis
Rice Grasshopper
Hieroglyphus daganensis
Variegated Grasshopper
Zonocerus variegatus
Javanese Grasshopper
Valanga nigricornis
Other Sahelian grasshoppers
Diabolocatantops axillaris (formerly axillaris) Catantops
Kraussaria angulifera
Cataloipus cymbiferus
Cataloipus fuscocoeruleipes
<section>Damage and losses caused by locusts</section>
Locusts have probably been an enemy of man ever since he began to grow crops. The Desert Locust is mentioned in ancient writings such as the Old Testament of the Bible and the Koran. Carved images of locusts have been found on Sixth Dynasty (2420-2270 BC) tombs at Saqqara in Egypt. Locusts are still a great enemy of the farmer and in some countries they are the determining factor between sufficient food for the people and starvation. Damage is sometimes diffuse and not very obvious, but it can be very severe in many more restricted areas. This depends on whether the swarms are moving about quickly or whether they stay for several days in one area.
The number of people in the world is increasing by about 220,000 every day, so that more and more crops must be grown to feed them. No one wants to grow more crops to feed locusts. Table 1 gives examples of crop losses caused by locusts.
TABLE 1
Year
Country locusts (in £ sterling)
Value of crops destroyed by(in £ sterling)
1986 value
India
400,000 per year
6 million
1928 and 1929
Kenya
300,000 per year
4.5 million
Somalia (Southern Region)
Morocco
4,500,000 in a single season
40 million
FAO estimate for only 12 out of 40 affected countries
1,500,000 per year; in 1955 over 5,000,000
45 million
It is even more significant to reckon the losses in terms of quantities of actual food or other crops and the examples in Table 2 show how serious these can be.
TABLE 2
Year
Country
Amount of crops eaten by the Desert Locust
Libya
7,000,000 grapevines; 19% of total vine cultivation
Sudan
55,000 tonnes of grain
Senegal
16,000 tonnes of millet, 2000 tonnes of other crops
Guinea
6000 tonnes of oranges
Ethiopia
167,000 tonnes of grain, which is enough to feed 1,000,000 people for a year
India
4000 hectares of cotton (value £300,000)
These are not all the figures available for damage by locusts; they are only a few examples and much more information is required about exact crop losses. There are several reasons why locusts are able to do so much damage.
1. They eat a wide range of food.
2. Each one eats its own weight of food every day. This increases gradually from the small hoppers to the adults and reaches a maximum of about 2 9, two or three weeks after fledging. Young swarms of this age cause the most severe damage.
3. There are often so many of them together. We know that there can be at least 40 million and sometimes as many as 80 million in each square kilometre of swarm. Figure 2 shows a small part of a swarm which measured over 1000 km², and therefore contained about 40,000 million locusts weighing about 80,000 tonnes. (Half a million locusts weigh approximately 1 tonne.)
One tonne of locusts (a very small part of an average swarm) eats as much food in one day as about 10 elephants or 25 camels, or 2500 people.
Locusts do damage by eating the leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, bark and growing-points, and also by breaking down trees because of their weight when they settle in masses, and sometimes even by spoiling plants with their excrete. They do not, as far as we know, carry any disease but some laboratory workers have developed an allergy to them.
An analysis of 2000 records of Desert Locust damage shows that: 8% of the damage is done by hoppers, 69% by immature and maturing swarms and 23% by mature swarms. The figure for hoppers is low because the breeding areas are mostly outside the main crop areas.
Damage by the Desert Locust
The following illustrates the nature and degree of damage to both food and cash crops that can occur in the Desert Locust invasion area.
Bulrush millet
Bulrush millet (Pennisetum americanum) is a staple grain crop along the southern edge of the Sahara and in the Indo-Pakistan desert. It is much liked by the Desert Locust as a food plant and since it is grown extensively in areas which are highly frequented by this locust for breeding, considerable damage is caused; both leaves and ripe grain are destroyed (Fig. 3).
Sorghum
The staple food crop in areas receiving a slightly higher rainfall than the Pennisetum zones. Many varieties of this crop are not greatly liked by the Desert Locust during their main period of growth but the ripening grain of most varieties is readily attacked. Heavy damage is caused, mainly by newly fledged swarms of the summer generation.
Maize
Usually grown as a staple food crop in areas which are either too cool or too wet for the Desert Locust, but in parts of eastern Africa where it is grown under hotter and drier conditions than is customary for this crop, heavy damage does occur, the plants often being entirely defoliated and the cobs eaten away (Fig. 4).
Wheat and barley
Staple food crops in the spring breeding areas of the Desert Locust where they can be severely damaged, especially when they are approaching harvest. At this stage locusts bite through the last remaining moist part of the plant, the section of stem just below the ear, causing complete loss of grain, often without attacking the ear itself.
Rice
Comparatively little damage is done to irrigated rice even in areas highly frequented by the Desert Locust, probably because the artificially wet conditions in which it is grown are not liked by this locust.
Sugarcane
The effect of damage varies according to the stage of cane growth and the variety; for example, in Pakistan damage is greatest during the first four months of cane growth.
Cotton
This crop can be severely attacked. The effect of damage on yield is great if it occurs just before flowering but less if it occurs afterwards. In the Desert Locust summer-breeding zone the start of cotton flowering generally coincides with the fledging of adult locusts and as the young adult is the stage at which most feeding takes place, this increases the danger to cotton in these areas.
Coffee
Coffee is rarely attacked. Occasionally defoliation of bushes occurs, but locusts do most damage at the flowering stage or when they settle on bushes in such large numbers that their weight breaks the branches.
Fruit trees
These are particularly vulnerable to attack by immature swarms which have a preference for roosting in trees. Serious damage has occurred on oranges, lemons, pawpaw, dates and grapevines. Once damaged by locusts, the trees are liable to have their fruit yield affected for more than one year. Orange trees were very severely attacked in 1954-1955 in Morocco (Fig. 5).
Grasslands and rangelands
It is not always fully realised how much damage can be done by locusts to natural grassland because it is generally less noticeable than damage to crops. We know that in the
United States grasshoppers, at a density of only 2/m² can eat approximately 2 kg of grass/ ha/day. Locust densities can be as much as 15 times higher than this, so that 30 kg/ha of grassland may be lost each day. This is particularly important in areas where rangeland is not very good anyway and there can be widespread losses of cattle.
Damage by other species
African Migratory Locust
During plagues, the last of which ended in 1941, swarms of the African Migratory Locust invaded most of Africa south of the Sahara. Throughout this invasion area there are extensive areas of cereal crops which are liable to severe damage. For example, in West Africa in the late 1920s and early 1930s, when there were also plagues of Desert Locusts and Tree Locusts, the Migratory Locust was the most voracious crop pest and in East Africa, where there were plagues of the Desert Locust and the Red Locust, it had a similar reputation.
The Migratory Locust feeds mainly on grasses. During recessions it feeds on wild grasses and cereal crops in and around the flood plains of the Middle Niger that form its main outbreak area.
Millet crops are particularly liable to damage, especially the bulrush or fox-tail millet and sorghum. Rice can also be severely attacked and it was reported that in 1930 40% of the rice crop in Guinea was destroyed. Non-cereal crops are damaged much less frequently, usually when wild grasses are dry or where cereal crops are not available. They include: sugarcane, palms, pineapple and less frequently pigeon pea, cabbage, carrot, cassava, coffee, cotton, groundnut, kidney bean, hyacinth bean, lettuce, Lima bean, pawpaw, pea, potato, turnip and yam. In Guinea 30-40% of the banana crop was lost annually from 1931 to 1934 because locusts ate the foliage, thus removing shade from the fruit. In general there is little damage to trees, either from feeding or breakage by the weight of settled locusts, because, unlike the
Desert Locust, swarms of the African Migratory Locust normally settle on low vegetation or bare ground.
Red Locust
The last major Red Locust plague lasted from 1930 to 1944 and during two of those years South Africa reported spending some £933,000 on crop and grassland protection measures.
The Red Locust feeds principally on grasses and damages cereals and sugarcane. Other crops attacked include: citrus, fruit trees, cotton, legumes, palms, root crops, tobacco and vegetables. Damage has been reported throughout the invasion area and the branches of trees can be broken by the weight of roosting locusts.
Brown Locust
The Brown Locust is a pest in southern Africa. It feeds on grasses and is an important pest of pasture. When these are not available it feeds on cotton, lucerne, potato, legumes and citrus, particularly lemon which can have both leaves and bark attacked. In 1964 the mean annual expenditure on control in South Africa was reported to be between £100,000 and £200,000.
Tree Locusts
Tree Locusts are not major pests. Anacridium melanorhodon has been recorded as being a significant but occasional pest of millet from Senegal to Sudan. In the Sudan it damages Acacia Senegal (the tree from which gum arabic is obtained), cotton, fruit trees, dates and shade and ornamental trees. Anacridium aegyptium is a minor pest throughout the Middle East and North Africa where it has been recorded damaging tobacco, grapevines, dates, vegetables, fruit and other trees.
Grasshoppers
The group of West African grasshoppers (see Chapter 4) are nearly all grass feeders and are pests of cereal crops, especially millet and sorghum. The exception is the Variegated Grasshopper, which can be a major pest of cassava.
Oriental Migratory Locust
This locust causes damage throughout its distribution area in the low-lying grasslands of Southeast Asia. Unfortunately there are few estimates of the value of crops destroyed. In the Philippines damage estimated at 10 million pesos was reported for 1911-1912 with damage of varying intensity every year from 1925 to 1934.
While grasses are the preferred food it will feed on a wide range of crops including bamboo, banana, barley, beans, citrus, coconut, groundnut, lettuce, maize, millet, pea, pineapple, rice, sago, palms, sisal, sorghum, soyabean, sugarcane, sweet potato, tobacco and wheat.
Bombay Locust
The Bombay Locust was reported doing most damage at the turn of the century in India. At that time crop damage was almost as great as that caused by the Desert Locust. In 1903 locusts were reported to be dispersed over an area of 350,000 km². There have, however, been no reports of swarms of Bombay Locust since 1908. Elsewhere it damages coconut leaves in the Laccadive Islands and in Thailand is a pest of maize. Significantly, although the maize lost due to locust action is only a small proportion of the crop, estimated to be 1%, this amount has a substantial cash value as the maize is exported. It is therefore worthwhile for the Ministry of Agriculture to carry out control.
Both hoppers and adults feed on a wide variety of plants including bamboo, banana, betel nut, millet, cashew, cassava, castor, chinese cabbage, citrus, coconut, cowpea, cucumber, durian, fig, ginger, groundnut, guava, lime, maize, mango, mulberry, mung bean, mustard, oil palm, orange, rambutan, rice, rubber, sorghum, soyabean, sugarcane, sweet potato, talipot palm, tea and tobacco.
Javanese Grasshopper
This grasshopper is not a major pest but does considerable local damage to a wide range of cash and tree crops mainly in Java and West Malaysia. Most records of damage concern leaves, growing shoots and young plants. Teak is attacked and the largest infestation recorded was some 5000 km² in the teak forests of central Java in 1915. Almost all the plants damaged by the Bombay Locust are attacked by the Javanese Grasshopper which also damages cover crops.
Conclusion
While locusts have been reported doing damage to a wide variety of crops it is difficult to obtain detailed information. It would appear that this is an area for future study so that only populations which really need to be controlled are sprayed. It is now widely recognised that the careless and liberal use of pesticides can lead to the poisoning of the environment both locally and in areas far from the original site of application. Therefore it is vital that all those responsible for locust control are fully informed of the ecology of the pest in their area so that spraying is only done when necessary and at the time when the minimum amount will have the maximum effect.
<section>2. Desert Locust-Schistocerca gregaria</section>
The Desert locust is probably the most important locust species because it has a vast invasion area of some 29 million km², affecting 57 countries (Fig. 6). This is more than 20% of the total land surface of the world. During plagues the Desert Locust has the potential to damage the livelihood of a tenth of the world's population. Fortunately there are not plagues every year; they occur intermittently (Fig. 7). Recent plague years are 1926-1934,1940-1948, 1949-1963,1967-1969 and 1986-1989. Between plagues the Desert Locust occupies a smaller area known as the recession area, where it lives in small scattered populations. However, with suitable weather conditions, which include sufficient rainfall, these scattered populations are concentrated where they can breed successfully, leading to a vast increase in numbers of insects so highly mobile they may travel up to 1000 km in a week.
<section>Anatomy of a locust</section>
The basic anatomy of an adult locust is described here and illustrated by photographs of the Desert Locust (see also Plate 2).
External anatomy
The body can be divided into three main parts: head, thorax and abdomen (Fig. 8).
Head
On the head can be seen:
1 A pair of jointed antennae or feelers which the locust uses to recognise things by touch or smell.
2 A pair of large compound eyes which give the locust a wide field of vision and enable it to detect movement easily. It is not known how many colours locusts can recognise but it has been shown that they react to green.
3 The mouth which has several parts that can easily be separated and identified. These are the upper lip, a pair of hard, black, serrated jaws which move sideways to cut through plant food, a pair of secondary jaws which help in holding the food, and a lower lip.
4 Jointed appendages which are called palps. These are used for tasting food.
Thorax
This is the part of the body which contains the muscles for walking, jumping and flying, and to which the wings and legs are attached.
On the thorax can be seen:
5 A sheath covering the top and sides of the front part of the thorax. It is called the pronotum.
6,7, 8 Three pairs of legs, the hind legs being large and used for jumping. Each leg has three main parts, the femur (9), the tibia (10) and the tarsus or foot (11).
12 Two pairs of wings. At rest the harder front wings cover and protect the softer hind wings which are folded fan-wise.
Abdomen
On the abdomen can be seen:
13 The ear, on the first section of the abdomen just behind the first joint of the large back legs. This is where the locust receives sounds. Locusts can hear one another up to about 2 m apart.
14 The ovipositor valves in the female. These are two pairs of short, curved, black hooks which form the tool with which the female locust digs a hole in the soil when the eggs are laid. This is how the female can be distinguished from the male, as the male does not have these hooks (Figs 9 and 10).
Along the sides of the thorax and abdomen are small openings called spiracles (15). These are holes through which the locust breathes. The largest spiracle on each side is just above where the middle pair of legs joins the body and can be seen opening and closing if a live locust is examined. The spiracles lead to very fine tubes which carry air directly to all parts of the locust's body; these tubes, which appear as slender silvery threads when you examine the internal organs, constitute the tracheal system.
Cuticle
The locust is covered with a special kind of skin which is referred to as the cuticle. It has three different layers. The layer nearest the inside of the body is soft and flexible; then comes a harder layer and on the outside is a thin layer of wax. This wax makes the skin waterproof and its presence also means that insecticides required to kill locusts by contact action should be dissolved in oils which will penetrate the wax. The hard part of the skin serves as the skeleton of the locust and is thinner at the joints so that movement can take place.
On many parts of the skin very fine short hairs can be seen. These are connected to nerves inside the body and serve in many ways to make the locust aware of the conditions in which it has to live. Those on the face detect air movement so that the locust can take off and land into the wind.
Inside the locust's body can be seen a dark-coloured tube running from the mouth at the front to the anus at the hind end (Fig. 11). This is the food tube or gut. There is always some material in the gut and it is not possible by merely looking at the gut to decide whether the locust has been feeding or not. The more feeding a locust does the quicker the food passes through the gut. The usual length of time is from 0.5 h to 2 h, but it can take 3-4 days if there is little food available. This allows the locust to withstand long periods of starvation.
The front part of the gut is wider than the remainder; it is concerned with grinding and storing food. The middle part is where digestion takes place and the hind part is where the water is absorbed. The waste is passed out at the anus as small dark-coloured faecal pellets, 4-5 mm long and 2 mm thick. These can often be seen in vast numbers beneath bushes and trees where locusts have been feeding and can provide evidence of the recent presence of locusts even though the locusts themselves have departed. After digestion some of the food material is stored in the body as fat, which can be seen inside the abdomen when a locust is cut open. It is a soft, yellow, shapeless mass, and it provides fuel for activities such as marching and flying. Flying locusts use up this fat at the rate of about 14 mg (0.8% of the body weight) per hour. A complete lack of fat inside the body of a fully grown (not a fledgling) locust means that it has probably been flying a long time without
feeding. A large amount of fat means that it has probably been feeding considerably without much flying.
Many very fine silver-coloured tubes can also be seen inside the body. These are the air tubes or tracheae already mentioned.
In a mature female locust the yellow eggs are conspicuous and arranged in rows in the ovary. When fully grown the eggs of the Desert Locust are each about 7 mm long.
If red spots can be seen in the ovary this usually means that the female locust has already laid at least one egg pod. It can, however, mean that some eggs started to develop and then stopped because of unfavourable conditions.
<section>Life cycle</section>
The life cycle comprises three stages: egg, hopper, adult (Fig. 12). The time spent in each stage varies considerably depending on the weather. This is discussed in more detail in the the section on seasonal movements and breeding areas (page 36).
Immature adults
Immature adults are usually pink, lighter or darker according to whether the locusts have been bred under high or low temperatures. The bright pink may change to a brownish red if the locusts have spent more than two months in this immature stage.
Maturation
Desert Locusts may become sexually mature in a few weeks or a few months, according to environmental circumstances. In unfavourable weather and food conditions, as for instance when they are subjected to low temperatures and drought, maturation may take as long as six months. If they have the right kind of food and weather, maturation can take place rapidly in 2-4 weeks. The exact conditions that cause locusts to mature are not known but the process is usually associated with the start of the rainy season. Male locusts start to mature first and then give off from their skin a chemical substance the odour of which causes maturation to start in females, and also in any males in which it has not already begun. The beginning of maturation can be recognised by the disappearance of the pink colour from the hind tibia. At this stage yolk is deposited in the eggs. It is at this stage that the eggs present in the female locusts begin to accumulate yolk and as they grow to full size
over the next week the abdomens of the females become distended.
Mature adults
The mature adult is yellow, the males being a brighter yellow than the females. The ovaries of the female locusts contain eggs which can easily be seen if the abdomen is pulled away from the thorax. At this stage large swarms break up into smaller ones, as those locusts that mature first settle on the ground for breeding, while those not yet quite mature fly on.
Copulation
This is the mating act. The male jumps on the back of the female and holds on to her with the front pair of legs (Fig. 13). The tips of their abdomens come into contact and the male sex cells (spermatozoa) are passed into the body of the female where they fertilise the eggs. The time spent in copulation varies from 3 to 14 h. Several females can be fertilised by one male and the spermatozoa can be stored inside the female's body and used to fertilise more than one set of eggs. Sometimes there are many more males than females in a mature swarm and then fighting occurs amongst the males for possession of females.
Laying and eggs
When copulation ends the males usually remain for some time on the backs of the females. The females become restless and walk about carrying the males. They begin to select a suitable place to lay their eggs by probing and testing the soil with the tip of the abdomen. During this probing they can detect warmth, hardness, moisture and salinity (salt content) of the soil. They are also attracted to each other at this time, assembling together in groups. Selection of laying places then depends partly on the soil conditions and vegetation and partly on the presence of other locusts. Laying can occur at all times of day and night provided that the soil surface does not become too hot or too cold, and that the soil is moist, at least below the surface. Laying can also occur in a wide range of soil types varying from quite coarse sand to silty clays, but the female must be able to dig into the soil with the extremity of her abdomen. Generally the top layer, about 6 cm deep, is dry,
and there is a layer of damp soil below. This must be sufficiently deep to take all the eggs, that is, about 4 cm.
When a suitable place is found the female pushes the ovipositor into the soil and makes a hole. The abdomen stretches to about twice its normal length and the eggs are laid (Fig. 14). The whole process of probing, digging and laying takes 1.5-2 h. A copulating and laying swarm usually stays in the same area for 1-2 days. Sometimes copulation occurs with females which appear not to be fully mature, that is, females in which the eggs are not fully developed. Mature female locusts often dig holes without laying eggs in them, even though the soil conditions appear to be suitable. The reasons for this behaviour are not known. On occasions females have been seen to lay eggs on the surface of the ground or on trees. This is usually because the soil is too hard and dry. Once eggs are f