<title>Small Scale Vegetable Oil Extraction</title>
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
The authors:
S. W. Head
A. A. Swetman
T. W. Hammonds
A. Gordon
K. H. Southwell
R. V. Harris
NRI
Natural Resources Institute
Overseas Development Administration
© Crown copyright 1995
The Natural Resources Institute (NRI) is an internationally recognized centre of expertise on the natural resources sector in developing countries. It forms an integral part of the British Government's overseas aid programme. Its principal aim is to alleviate poverty and hardship in developing countries by increasing the productivity of their renewable natural resources. NRI's main fields of expertise are resource assessment and farming systems, integrated pest management, food science and crop utilization.
NRI carries out research and surveys; develops pilot-scale plant, machinery and processes; identifies, prepares, manages and executes projects; provides advice and training; and publishes scientific and development material.
Short extracts of material from this publication may be reproduced in any non-advertising, non-profit-making context provided that the source is acknowledged. Permission for commercial reproduction should be sought from: Publishing Manager, Publishing and Publicity Services Group, Natural Resources Institute, Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent, ME4 4TB, United Kingdom.
Cover illustration: Sunflower (Helianthus annuns L.) Reproduced by kind permission of The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
Printed by Hobbs the Printers, Totton, Hampshire.
Price £15.00
No charge is made for single copies of this publication sent to governmental and educational establishments, research institutions and non-profit-making organizations working in countries eligible for British Government Aid. Free copies cannot normally be addressed to individuals by name but only under their official titles. Please quote CRP4 when ordering.
Natural Resources Institute
ISBN: 085954-387-0
<section>Preface</section>
Oilseeds are the major source of edible oils. The oil-cake remaining after the greater part of the oil has been extracted is a valuable source of protein for animal feeds. Nutritionally, oils provide the calories, vitamins, and essential fatty acids in the human diet in an easily digested form. Oils are used in cooking to enhance the flavour and texture of food. It has been estimated that while 30% of malnourished children in developing countries suffer from a lack of both energy-producing and protein foods, the other 70% suffer from a lack of calories which could be obtained largely from oils and fats. The per caput consumption of fats in tropical Africa is roughly one-quarter of that in North America. Only a small number of developing countries have surpluses of vegetable oils for export. Malaysia and Indonesia export palm oil, the Philippines export coconut oil, and Brazil and Argentina export soy-bean oil. In most developing countries, vegetable oils are in short supply
with the rising demand due largely to population growth. The need to import uses up scarce foreign exchange.
Most developing countries have large-scale oilseed processing facilities which are generally located near large towns. Oilseeds grown in rural areas are normally transported to the urban oil mills for processing, but poorly maintained roads and vehicles make the transporting of oilseeds from rural areas to urban oil mills both difficult and costly. Haulage of cooking oil back to rural areas presents the same problems. The high urban demand for vegetable oil leads to shortages in rural areas. Oil that does reach the rural areas is sold at a much higher price than in the large towns.
Oilseeds are grown for cash and subsistence purposes. Local small-scale oilseed processing offers a simple way for rural populations to make oil using their own resources. There are a number of ways in which vegetable oil can be extracted on a small scale from oilseed. Examples of some basic oilseed extraction methods are:
o oil extraction methods using water
o manual methods using kneading
o hand-operated presses
o ghanis
o expellers
These methods may be used to process up to 100 kg of seed/in and are fully discussed later in this publication. The suitability of each method depends on individual requirements. The process offering the most efficient oil extraction is not always the most suitable option. An oilseed processing venture based on an apparently suitable technology can subsequently fail because it is not suited to the local culture. Success depends on assessing the local conditions which determine the scale of the operation required. These include the availability of power, the amount of seed available, the seed type and the seed/oil price ratio. Equally important are local conditions, the availability of support services, and good management skills. Careful consideration of these local circumstances is essential for the selection of the most suitable oilseed processing operation.
Some of these processes do not require expensive equipment and can be operated at a household level. For example, an individual woman householder processing only a small quantity of seeds per day to provide her family's food needs would probably find that a simple method using water to extract the oil would be suitable. At the other end of the scale, an expeller which requires a substantial capital investment would be more suitable for a dynamic co-operative producing large amounts of seed. Since the investment incurred has to be recovered from the proceeds of the operation, careful financial management is essential.
Many oilseed expelling operations can be run successfully by custom milling. An oilseed processor may extract oil as a service for the oilseed producer in exchange for a portion of the oil and the oil-cake. In this way, cash transactions between the expeller operator and the seed supplier are minimized. In addition, the farmer has a local, assured outlet for his seed, oil-cake to feed his animals, and a substantially improved supply of cooking oil for home consumption. The farmer also has the opportunity to sell surplus oil locally instead of relying only on seed marketing, as a source of cash income. Likewise, the oilseed processor can sell the oil and cake received in payment for the processing service.
Careful financial assessment is necessary to determine whether the operation is able to make an adequate profit after covering all the costs, including interest payments of any loans incurred. All this needs to be done before committing any financial resources.
It must be borne in mind that the advice offered by commercial manufacturers of oilseed processing machinery may be inappropriate as often they will be unable to take all these local considerations into account. Some manufacturers will not have the local knowledge required to help people with the specific operating problems encountered when using unfamiliar new equipment. Sometimes, installed equipment is left unused because the process does not fit into traditional social patterns. Several examples exist of equipment being set up in developing countries and then left unused because the cost of running the equipment could not be met from the proceeds of the operation.
We hope that this publication, written by processing technologists and socio-economists, giving information on technologies available and offering guidance drawn from experience in developing countries world-wide, will assist readers in choosing the most suitable oilseed processing option for a given situation.
<section>Chapter 1 Oilseed composition</section>
This section is intended to provide the reader with a basic understanding of the composition of oils and fats, and to define many of the terms used in their processing. A complete understanding of its content, although desirable, is not essential.
Oilseeds can be thought of as mixtures of oil, meal and water. Processing removes the bulk of the oil and the product remaining is called oil-cake. Oil-cake contains the residual oil, all of the meal and some water. Since the meal is mainly composed of protein, carbohydrate and fibre, oilseed-cakes in general are excellent materials for animal feeds. Table 1 shows the composition of copra (dried coconut kernel) by weight and weight percentage terms at various levels of moisture content.
Table 1 Composition of copra at various levels of moisture
Composition by weight
% Composition
Oil
Meal
Water
Total
Oil
Meal
Water
Wet copra
Underdried copra
Dry copra
Copra (moisture free)
Copra is usually considered to be dry when its moisture content is 6%. A typical oil content of dry copra is 65%, leaving a balance of 29% for the meal content.
The figures is Table 1 show the changes in oil and moisture content as a sample of copra dries out. The figures are composed so that the weight of 'dry' copra is 100 parts. Thus, 117.5 kg of wet copra containing 55.3% oil and 20% water will dry down to 100 kg of 'dry' copra containing 65% oil and 6% water. In other words, 100 kg of copra at 20% moisture only contains 55.3 kg of oil whereas 100 kg of 'dry' copra will contain 65 kg.
Because of the variation of oil content with moisture content, comparisons of oil contents are always made on a dry weight or 'moisture free basis' (MFB). The oil content of copra (MFB) in Table 1 is 69.1%. The following formula may be used to convert oil content (MFB) to oil content at any given moisture content:
% oil (at x% moisture) = % oil (MFB) multiplied by (100-x) / 100
Thus, if the oil content of groundnuts (MFB) is 50%, then the oil content at 10% moisture is:
50 x (100-10) / 100 =45%
<section>Extraction efficiency</section>
Extraction efficiency (EE), an important quantity in oilseed processing, is the percentage of oil extracted in relation to the amount of oil present in the seed. If 100 kg of sunflower seed (oil content 32% MFB) are processed to yield 29 kg of the oil, then the extraction efficiency is:
29 x 100 / 32 = 90.6%
Extraction efficiency tends to be related to the oil content of the seed. It is difficult to achieve high levels of efficiency with seed of low oil content. However, in general, large-scale processing operates with an EE of over 90%, whereas in small-scale processing, EE is usually in the range 60-65% and rarely exceeds 80%.
<section>Oils and fats - origin and definition</section>
Oils and fats are basically similar in composition. They are substances used by plants and animals mainly as an energy store. Some of their components are essential to metabolic processes. Many seeds are rich in fats which act as a food supply to the young seedling. The difference between an oil and a fat is that an oil is usually liquid at ambient temperature while a fat is solid. However, this simple definition can result in anomalies; coconut oil, for example, which has a melting range of 22-24°C, is usually a liquid oil in the tropics but a solid fat in temperate climates.
<section>Triglycerides and fatty acids</section>
Saturated fatty acids
Monounsaturated fatty acids
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Structures of some specific triglycerides
Fatty acid composition
Triglyceride deterioration and free fatty acids
Oils and fats are obtained from a wide variety of sources and each one has its own individual properties. They are, however, all of the same chemical type. The basis of a fat is a substance called glycerol which has a chemical formula that can be illustrated by the shape shown opposite.
Each of the 'arms' of this shape can combine with another substance known as fatty acid, to build up a molecule rather like the following:
Because of the way in which its composition is built up, the chemical substance having this form is known as a triglyceride, and all oils and fats are made up of a mixture of these triglycerides. A number of different fatty acids exist and, to a large extent, the character of a particular oil or fat depends on the actual fatty acids present in the individual triglyceride molecules. Some of these component fatty acids are longer than others and they can all combine with a glycerol 'arm':
In addition, there are three different types of fatty acids: saturated, mono-unsaturated and polyunsaturated.
Saturated fatty acids
In their simplest form, fatty acids are made up of a linear chain of carbon atoms linked to a group which provides the acidic properties. Such fatty acids are said to be saturated; the most common examples being lauric, myristic palmitic and stearic acids. These contain different numbers of carbon atoms and can be represented as follows:
Note that all these acids are solid at normal ambient temperatures and that their presence in high proportions in a triglyceride mixture is likely to make it solid.
Monounsaturated fatty acids
Sometimes the carbon atom chain contains what chemists call a double bond. A fatty acid containing one double bond is said to be monounsaturated, the most common example being oleic acid which, like stearic acid, has 18 carbon atoms.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Some fatty acids have two or three double bonds and these are said to be polyunsaturated fatty acids. Linoleic and linolenic acids are common examples of polyunsaturated fatty acids. They have the same number of carbon atoms as stearic acid, but linoleic acid has two double bonds and linolenic acid has three. The relationship between the common fatty acids with 18 carbon atoms (C18 acids) can be represented as follows:
It can be seen that the presence of a double bond lowers the melting point. Thus, a triglyceride mixture containing a high proportion of monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fatty acids is likely to be liquid.
Structures of some specific triglycerides
The following triglycerides are just some of the many that are found in palm oil.
The overall triglyceride composition is such that palm oil is liquid or semisolid at tropical temperatures but solid in temperate climates.
Fatty acid composition
Analytical chemists are able to measure the overall proportions of the different fatty acids present in an oil or fat. The fatty acid composition of the oil tends to be characteristic of the oilseed from which it is extracted. The fatty acid compositions and melting points of oils from different oilseeds are given in Table 2, together with the oil contents of the seeds.
Triglyceride deterioration and free fatty acids
Oils and fats generally keep quite well, but the following two types of deterioration can occur under poor storage conditions: oxidation, when the fat is attacked by the oxygen present in the air; and hydrolysis, when the fat is attacked by water. Usually hydrolysis occurs in the presence of an enzyme which either exists naturally in the oilseed, or is present in moulds which grow on it.
Oxidation
Oxygen in the air usually attacks the triglyceride close to the double bonds in the fat.
Thus, fats with few double bonds are more stable than fats with a large number of double bonds. The process of oxidation in oils and fats is accelerated by the presence of trace metals such as iron and copper. Mild steel equipment is frequently used in oilseed processing and should be kept free from rust as far as possible. Brass and copper induce a much more powerful oxidizing action than iron and so fittings made from these metals should never be used.
Hydrolysis and free fatty acids
Attack by water in the presence of an enzyme splits the fatty acid away from the triglyceride. Eventually, glycerol and free fatty acid (FFA) will be obtained, but intermediate stages, where only one or two of the fatty acids have been split away from the triglyceride, will also be present in the fat.
Hydrolysis can occur both in oilseeds and in extracted oil. Hydrolysis in oilseeds is accelerated by the presence of moulds. It is therefore very important to dry oilseeds to a moisture level which does not encourage mould growth.
The level of FFA in an oil extracted from a good quality oilseed is very low and so FFA content is used as a guide to the extent of deterioration in the quality of oils. Coconut oil from high quality copra can have FFA levels in the region of 0.1 to 0.2%, but levels as high as 5% can occur in oil from poor quality copra. Even good quality oil will deteriorate quickly if it contains oilseed residues or is stored in wet drums. To avoid deterioration, particles of seed debris should be removed from the oil as soon as possible after extraction and the clarified oil stored in clean dry containers.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to thank Peerless Food Products, a division of Pura Food Products Ltd, UK, for permission to use their pictorial concept of triglyceride structure in this publication.
<section>Chapter 2 Oilseed marketing</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
The techniques available for extracting oil from oilseeds will be described in subsequent chapters. The choice of technique may be determined by the amount of oilseed or financial resources available, or by the size of the planned operation. However, it will usually be necessary to consider financial and social aspects before choosing a technique. It is impossible to list all the factors which need to be considered as individual circumstances play a large part in the choice. The sections below are intended to provide a guide to the approach which should be adopted.
<section>The oilseed market system</section>
The oilseed economy
Sources of information
Marketing
The oilseed economy
Before deciding on the type and scale of processing technology to be used, all the factors which affect the oilseed economy of the area should be investigated. These should indicate where the venture will fit in and how it will relate to the existing overall production and marketing system. They should also indicate whether predictions or assumptions on, for example, the sale of oil or supply of seed, are realistic. The investigation should cover the following aspects:
o the quantities of oilseeds available, giving some indication of who produces them (estates or small-holders);
o how the oilseeds are used, including the importance of different products and the quantities of oilseeds used in them;
o the quantity of edible oil available, including a rough indication of the importance of alternative sources (imports, major factories, small expellers in provincial towns, and home production);
o the geographical distribution of production, processing and markets, and how easily these areas are linked by road or rail or across borders;
o who consumes the oilseeds and their products and the importance of oilseeds in expenditure and diet;
o why the production, processing and consumption patterns work, covering price structure, food and cash requirements, taste preferences, marketing, availability of substitutes, under-utilization of existing processing facilities, scale of processing operations, and production and processing constraints;
o the effects of government policies, including subsidies, taxes, import restrictions and exchange rate levels, and the effect of any changes in policy; and
o seasonal effects and variation, with some assessment of how predictable changes are and what causes them.
Sources of information
The degree of detail required will depend on the nature and scale of the proposed venture and the magnitude of its effect on the existing circumstances. In most cases, this information can be gathered from existing data sources and discussions with local communities, but its reliability and comprehensiveness needs to be assessed. Particular attention should be paid to the effect of any unrecorded trade, cursory treatment of the informal sector, and recent changes in the oilseed industry.
Observations of existing practices, and discussions with those involved, will yield important information on oilseeds, the quantities processed, seasonal variation, labour availability, electricity supply and costs. Depending on the circumstances, various methods can be used to acquire this information, such as informal interview and observation, or formal questionnaires. Rapid rural appraisal techniques can be useful where little documentation on, for example, household behaviour, exists. For a more detailed discussion of these techniques, see Gilling and Cropley (1993).
The characteristics of the prospective oilseed processing venture will have a major influence on the scale and type of technology selected and will vary greatly according to whether the venture is to be undertaken by individual households, farmers, farmer groups, rural communities, traders, women, men, entrepreneurs, formal established co-operative societies, or urban or rural dwellers. Each group will have different access to capital, transport, skills, communications, raw materials, information, markets and utilities. All these considerations will influence the cost, size and complexity of the venture. The following list of questions may be useful.
o Are oilseeds already being processed?
o Is the scale of operation realistic or suitable?
o What are the marketing expectations?
o Is group or individual operation planned? If group, is there experience of group operation?
o What is the access to power supply, water, raw materials and markets?
o What are the financial resources or constraints, and is there access to credit?
o Is there access to technical, managerial or financial skills?
o Do seed supply, markets, labour availability and transportation vary seasonally?
o Are there social, family or community considerations which might affect processing activities?
Marketing
Skills in marketing and access to market information are crucial to a successful business. They are of less concern where processors are dealing with markets with which they are familiar, but they may become crucial if output expands or if new products are introduced. Project planners can assist by finding ways for processors to gain marketing experience. It is particularly important to determine whether the enterprise will be critically dependent on one buyer and whether it will be able to influence prices.
Market research should not only include quantitative factors, such as prices and volumes, but should also consider the perceived product quality; different processing or refining methods may alter the flavour, colour, or physical appearance of the oil and oil-cake, thus affecting their value. The greater the shift from existing market conditions in terms of volume, form, timing and location of products for example, the more critical the marketing aspects are likely to be.
Discussions should be held with as many as possible of the people and groups involved in the production and marketing system, to enable a thorough understanding of the current situation and of how the proposed processing venture may alter it. These discussions should involve the agricultural extension agents who advise the farmers, local workshop managers who may be called upon to manufacture equipment spares or carry out maintenance, farmers who will supply the raw materials, existing traders, and those who may wish to assist in marketing the products. All these people may influence the decision-making process, and their support or direct participation will be important to the long-term success of the venture. Private workshops should be involved as early as possible in the manufacture of processing equipment as this will help to provide realistic cost estimates, and draw attention to manufacturing constraints or the need for imports.
Social and environmental factors
Development organizations intending to support such oilseed processing ventures may wish to consider social, environmental and economic factors as well. As traditional oilseed processing is often carried out by women, the effect the project would have on their well-being should be considered.
Environmental or public health consequences of existing or proposed processing work may also need to be evaluated.
Economic factors
Development agency planners may be interested in an economic analysis, as well as a financial analysis (see next section). The economic analysis measures the contribution which a project will make to the overall economic development of a country or region, whereas in the financial analysis the enterprise is considered from an entrepreneurial perspective.
Other factors
There are several other factors, broadly classified as non-technical and nonfinancial, which may affect the success of processing ventures and therefore need to be noted.
It should be established whether the venture makes assumptions about the literacy and numeracy skills of the operators, whether training is needed, and where such training can be obtained if required.
Where a community or co-operative activity is planned, the participants may not feel in control of the operation if they have to depend on outsiders to do their accounts. Such a system may be vulnerable to abuse.
Another important factor is management, particularly if a group is to run the venture. The existing management experience within the group, the need for training input, and the type of training required, would need to be assessed. Other projects and enterprises in the locality may be useful sources of information on the best management system.
There are a variety of other social factors which may be relevant. For example, if the project is to be carried out by women, it is important to consider the other demands on their time and labour, and whether it has been assumed that they can work or trade in areas traditionally dominated by men.
Equipment
For larger scale ventures it is important that a realistic assessment is made of the local manufacturing sector and its ability to meet the requirements for both initial equipment and subsequent spare parts. It is possible to import machinery but it is more likely to be affordable and accessible if it can be supplied and maintained by a local industry. Machine operators can be trained in the basics of regular maintenance operations, but for some processing technology, such as small-scale expellers, there may be an occasional need for more skilled inputs. Where machinery is locally made and supplied, the manufacturer should be able to meet these occasional maintenance requirements, but consideration should be given to this when planning a venture in a remote location. Where operators are given training at the beginning of a project, consideration also needs to be given to the transfer of their skills should personnel change.
<section>Financial analysis</section>
Financial analysis is necessary for any enterprise. There should be a feasibility study of the processing proposals, including consideration of the relative cost of the oilseeds, the values of the oil and oil-cake, the likely costs of equipment and buildings, and the labour needed to operate the processing technology. This study should also help to clarify the operational assumptions and highlight areas of uncertainty and undue optimism.
It is not the purpose of this manual to cover financial analysis in detail. Readers interested in this are referred to one of the many books on the subject; Gittinger (1982), and UNIDO (1986), give comprehensive accounts of financial and economic analysis. In the following discussion, some of the main issues to be considered are outlined and some frequently-used terms explained.
There are several fairly standard financial 'tests' and a series of information requirements. Financial analysis is concerned with commercial viability and whether the enterprise is profitable for the 'owner-operator'. Even when the output is for home consumption, there will still be important financial criteria which affect the uptake of the technique. It must be stressed that the economics of vegetable oil extraction are highly site-specific, with costs and revenues varying appreciably according to location.
Factors which will have a major influence on the viability of an oilseed processing venture are listed below.
o The market prospects for the oil and oil-cake in relation to their acceptability and to the prices and availability of competing products.
o The price and availability of oilseed.
o The yields of oil and oil-cake.
o The capital costs of the venture (including the delivered cost of the equipment, spares, and motors, and the cost of any building and site work.
o The working capital requirement.
o The operating costs (including raw materials, labour, maintenance and spares, energy, transport, packaging and overheads).
Other costs which have to be taken into account include the installation and commissioning of the plant, taxes, and personnel training. Contingency allowances should also be made. The availability of finance for equipment purchase and working capital, and the provision of technical and business back-up services need to be assessed. It is essential to establish an efficient accounting system to prevent mishandling of stock and funds.
Technical data on equipment (throughput and yields of products) can be combined with costs and prices to project the 'net income stream'. This should highlight any obvious financial problems and can be used to calculate the 'pay-back period' (i.e. how long it takes to recoup the initial investment). This information can also be used to calculate the 'financial rate of return' (see Gittinger (1982), or other references) which the prudent investor will wish to compare with other options. Another measure of project worth is 'net present value' which enables a comparison of the income streams of different projects to be made. These different measures of project worth can be used either in combination, or separately, depending on the size and nature of the investment or on the pre-occupations of the user group.
A 'sensitivity analysis' is also important. This means that the cost and income streams should be recalculated, using alternative values for anything which is not very precisely known (such as the number of days in a year that processors will be able to operate the proposed technology), or for things which are highly variable (such as raw material costs and product prices which may be affected by the weather). The purpose of the sensitivity analysis is to anticipate, as accurately as possible, costs and income before the investment decision is actually made. Much of the information required will have been obtained during the information-gathering exercise discussed earlier.
References
GILLING, J. and CROPLEY, J. (1993) Needs assessment for agricultural development: practical issues in informal data collection. NRI Socio-economic Series 1. Chatham, UK: Natural Resources Institute.
GITTINGER, J. P. (1982) Economic Analysis of Agricultural Projects. 2nd edn. Baltimore, US: Johns Hopkins University.
UNIDO (1986) Manual for the Preparation of Industrial Feasibility Studies. Vienna: UNIDO.
<section>Chapter 3 Oil extraction</section>
<section>Commercial oilseed processing</section>
The following paragraphs are included to give the reader an idea of the scale and number of operations required to extract oil from oilseeds at a commercial level, and how they relate to small-scale operations. The main difference is that commercial mills refine the oil before offering it for sale as an edible product. It must be stressed that good quality unrefined oils produced by small-scale methods are in no way inferior to refined oils, and that they are, in many cases, preferred by the consumer as they retain the flavour of the oilseed.
Figures 1 and 2 are flow diagrams showing various operations common to the processing of many oilseeds. Oilseeds are delivered to the processing mills by road, rail and ship. Typically, commercial mills can process about 8000 t of oilseed per month. The oilseed is often stored for several months before processing and needs to be kept at a moisture content low enough to prevent deterioration by moulds which grow at high moisture contents. Moisture content determinations are carried out on seed batches on delivery at the factory. The mills are equipped with their own laboratories to carry out the analysis. If necessary, the seeds are then dried, ideally using special dryers, to the moisture content required for safe storage.
Seeds are stored in special silos which are often fitted with ventilators so that air can be circulated through the oilseed to keep the moisture level and temperature constant. This is necessary to prevent localized high moisture levels being produced which would encourage mould growth. To accommodate 2000 t of seed, a silo 10 m in diameter and 36 m high will be required. Conveying equipment is used to transport seed from the silos to the factory processing equipment. Ei