<title>Pastoral development planning</title>
Julian Prior
Development Guidelines No. 9
Oxfam
UK and Ireland
© Oxfam (UK and Ireland) 1994
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 85598 203 9 Hardback
ISBN 0 85598 204 7 Paperback
Cover photo: Red Sea Hills, Sudan: a nomadic Beja boy watering livestock. (Niger Clarke/Oxfam)
Other titles in the Oxfam Development Guidelines series:
No.1 Credit and Savings for Development
No.2 Indigenous Peoples: A Field-guide for Development
No.3 Disaster Mitigation: A Community-based Approach
No.4 Income Generation Schemes for the Urban Poor
No.5 Evaluating Social Development Projects
No.6 Social Survey Methods: A Guide for Development Workers
No.7 Choosing Research Methods: Data Collection for Development Workers
No.8 Developing and Managing Community Water Supplies
Published by Oxfam, 274 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 7DZ, UK
(registered as a charity no 202918)
Designed and typeset by Oxfam Design Department OX611/PK 93
Printed by Oxfam Print Unit
on environment-friendly paper
Set in 10/12pt Garamond
<section>Preface</section>
This book is intended for community-development planners with a professional interest in pastoral development. It is particularly directed at those whose experience of pastoral development is limited and who require an understanding of where pastoral development has been, and where it may be going in the future.
Historically, pastoral development in the South has been the province of technicians, particularly those with training in range science. Recently, however, those with broader development concerns, especially from the non-governmental organisations (NGOs), have turned their attention to pastoral development. Often these people are deeply concerned with the economic, social and political rights of pastoral peoples. They may have extensive skills in development planning, but lack the necessary technical skills of pastoral development. For these people the practical techniques of pastoral development often seem to be shrouded in mystery. This book is an attempt to demystify pastoral development through an examination of the impacts of the more common forms of project experience. However, the discussion is less concerned with the technologies themselves than it is with the development environments and the development processes into which the technologies are often inserted. The
book also suggests future goals for pastoral development to which development planners may be able to contribute.
Community-development planners potentially have much to contribute in this area. To date, pastoral development has done little to lessen the vulnerability of pastoral communities to disasters such as drought and famine. Nor has development contributed substantially to strengthening the economic, social, and political rights of pastoralists. Indeed, despite development efforts over the last 40 years, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the security of African pastoralists is diminishing, while their vulnerability to disasters such as famine is increasing.
The book can be divided into three sections. The first, which includes Chapters 1, 2, and 3, examines the recent forces of change within the pastoral sector and appraises the development record in the light of the needs of pastoral peoples. The second section, Chapters 4, 5, and 6, examines in detail the experience and lessons of one pastoral development project: the Erigavo Erosion Control and Range Management Project funded by Oxfam (UK and Ireland) in North-West Somalia (an area which has since declared itself 'the Republic of Somaliland). The third section, Chapters 7 and 8, speculates upon the future of pastoral development. Chapter 7 examines approaches to pastoral development suggested by the preceding discussion. Chapter 8 highlights a number of high-priority future directions for pastoral development policy.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
I wish to thank a number of people who contributed in various ways to this book. Clare Oxby, Richard Moorehead, and John Rowley made valuable editorial comments on early draftrs of the full text. Roy Behnke made suggestions on an early draft of Chapter 3. Clare Oxby contributed material dealing with restocking and paraveterinary projects. Catherine Robinson's skilful editing transformed my original draft.
My thanks go to Oxfam (UK and Ireland) for giving me the opportunity to work in a development environment where the human needs of a pastoral people were allowed to shape the nature of the development process.
I am grateful to the pastoralists of the Erigavo District of North-West Somalia/Somaliland who happily shared their culture with me during the many hours we spent together.
I thank my wife Suleikha, now an unusual cultural mix of Somali-Australian, who offered me her observations, her views, and her support throughout.
Final responsibility for the opinions expressed within this book of course rests entirely with the author.
<section>Introduction</section>
The history of pastoral development projects in Africa has largely been an inventory of failures. In Does Aid Work.? a review of multilateral and bilateral agencies' development experience published in 1982, Robert Cassen found that the African pastoral sector experienced the greatest concentration of failed development projects in the world. The highest proportion of project failures was attributed to sub-Saharan countries.
The primary goals of pastoral development projects usually include the arrest of environmental decline, or improvements in animal productivity, or both. Yet despite considerable expenditure on research and development programmes within the African pastoral sector over the last 40 years, environmental degradation continues unabated, and pastoralist communities are more prone than ever to poverty, and more susceptible to drought. The development literature has been citing the shortcomings of pastoral development projects and programmes for some years. Yet the same mistakes appear to be repeated with each subsequent project, moving one reviewer (Goldschmidt 1981: 117) to comment that he wondered why writing was ever invented!
In general the poor record of pastoral development can be attributed to two interdependent causes. The first relates to weaknesses in pastoral development policy. Until recently pastoral development policy has been almost completely absent from the development planning process. Even when policy has been articulated, the policy debate has been narrowly focused, and preoccupied with technological and macro-economic issues. Consequently pastoral development policy has often failed to reflect the needs of pastoral peoples.
The second and related cause of the poor record of pastoral development concerns the shortcomings inherent in the nature of the development projects most often attempted. Some of these shortcomings reflect the policy vacuum in which development has operated. Others are concerned with the nature of the project-development process adopted, or the technologies attempted.
<section>The book's objectives</section>
This book aims to help answer the question of why the history of pastoral development projects has been so unimpressive. It seeks to suggest ways in which to improve this record. The book has five objectives:
o To explore the recent and rapid changes which are confronting pastoral peoples.
o To identify the reasons for the recurring shortcomings in pastoral development projects, and to attempt to explain their persistence.
o To suggest ways to overcome these shortcomings.
o To describe the successes and failures of one pastoral development project in the Erigavo District of North-West Somalia/Somaliland.
o To explore future directions for pastoral development policy; to seek new definitions of the pastoral development 'problem'; and in doing so to define outcomes of pastoral development which may be termed 'desirable'.
<section>The pastoral environment</section>
Pastoralists can be defined as those who primarily derive their living from the management of livestock (sheep, goats, cattle, and camels) on rangelands. Rangelands are those areas where limitations such as climate (rainfall and temperature) or topography restrict the use of land to extensive grazing of natural pastures, rather than cultivated pastures or fodder crops.
Pastoralists may be sedentary, more or less permanently settled with their animals within a defined area; they may be solely nomadic, moving with their animals and transportable homes over irregular routes, seeking pasture and water for their animals almost continuously; or they may practice semi-nomadism or transhumance, whereby they move with their animals over more or less regular routes, settling for part of the year in a permanent home area.
The sedentary pastoralist represents the Western pastoralist model, such as found in the United States and Australia. The African model, if there is one, would be more closely represented by the nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralist. Of those people in the world defined as pastoralists, more than half are in Africa, 15 per cent are in America, and fewer than one per cent in Australia (Sandford 1983: 2).
Pastoralists may derive all their income from grazing livestock, or a portion of income may be derived from agriculture. Those who engage in both pastoralism and agriculture are termed agropastoralists. In dry areas, owing to extremely variable rainfall regimes, agricultural work is an opportunistic, high-risk undertaking. Agropastoralists in these areas commonly view their agricultural production as a supplement to their livestock-raising activities, rather than vice versa.
The term 'pastoral environment' as used throughout this book implies much more than the physical environment. The pastoral environment will encompass the pastoralists (both male and female), their grazing animals, and the physical, economic, social, and political contexts in which they live. The pastoral environment is one of immense complexity. Individual pastoralists, when making management decisions with regard to their grazing animals, will be influenced by a wide variety of factors.
First among these decision-influencing factors is climate, particularly rainfall, and its variability over time and space within the arid and semi-arid rangelands. The distribution and timing of rainfall determines where, when, and how much pasture and water will be available to the grazing animal. This in turn will influence, along with other factors, the pastoralists' decision to move with their animals.
Pastoralists are influenced in their decision making and the identification of their goals and needs by other factors also:
o economic considerations (both monetary and non-monetary)
o social concerns
o political factors
o legal constraints or incentives
o ecosystem variables (other than climate).
Pastoralists thus operate in a pluralistic and complex planning environment influenced by a number of factors, some or all of which may be in a state of rapid change. Pastoralism is a dynamic system. Efforts at pastoral development, to be successful, must recognise and understand the dynamics of the system into which they plan to intervene.
The meaning of 'development' depends upon who is doing the developing and who is receiving the benefits of the development. Large multilateral donor agencies may employ an entirely different definition of development from small non-governmental organisations (NGOs), even though both types of agency may be working in the same area, attempting to solve the same problem. The various organisational definitions of development are discussed later in this book. For the moment we can use Sandford's (1983: 4) generalised definition of development, which states that it is the 'conscious pursuit of certain objectives with a view to increasing welfare'.
Over the past 40 years or so, a number of pastoral development projects employing a variety of Western-trained 'experts' have entered the pastoral environment, all attempting to solve the pastoralists' problem'--however that may be defined. Among the ranks of these experts have been the physical or rangeland scientists (botanists, range ecologists, soil scientists, range extensionists, foresters, animal scientists, etc.) and social scientists (anthropologists, sociologists, geographers, and economists). Yet despite the huge investment in financial and human resources over this period, the history of pastoral development projects in Africa has largely been one of failure. Projects have failed to address effectively issues such as environmental degradation, pastoralist poverty, and the vulnerability of pastoral communities to ever-recurring droughts.
This book's first objective is to examine how we might define the pastoral development problem. We will do this by looking at the evidence for a number of new and powerful forces of change confronting pastoral peoples. To a large extent these forces of change are beyond the control of pastoral communities. Yet these changes have very much defined the nature of pastoralists' current and future development needs.
<section>2. The forces of change: redefining the problem of pastoral development</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
The factors which determine growth or decline within the pastoral sector have undergone rapid change over the past 50 years. While accurate measurement of these changes is not currently possible, we can study the evidence which supports the nature and direction of the changes. The factors at work may be summarised as follows:
o increases in pastoral populations
o changes in the densities of pastoral populations
o increased spontaneous settlement of formerly nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists
o a trend towards market-oriented livestock production
o increased land degradation.
<section>Pastoral population increases</section>
Population growth-rates within pastoral societies have become an increasingly fundamental issue in the field of pastoral development. The importance of population growth lies in its implicit links to land degradation and pastoral communities' susceptibility to famine. The supposition that pastoral populations are increasing at rapid rates is often used to suggest that the net ecological carrying capacity of the range has been exceeded, resulting in the gradual destitution of pastoral people. Yet there is little hard evidence to support the belief that pastoral population growth-rates have substantially increased in recent times -- except in instances where formerly nomadic pastoralists have settled.
In any discussion of the population demography of pastoralists, several difficulties immediately arise. The first is the paucity and poor quality of data, explained by the isolation and mobility of pastoral populations. There are very few longitudinal studies of individual populations over extended periods of time.
The literature suggests that many human populations in Africa have undergone a period of rapid growth since the start of the colonial era. Broad regional studies such as those conducted by the World Bank (1992) and the UN (1982) have supported this view. However, there is considerable disagreement over extrapolating to particular pastoral populations from these observable whole-country trends. Nor can we make valid extrapolations to pastoral communities from empirical population studies of urban or agricultural communities.
There is evidence' to suggest that pastoral populations in general exhibit lower population growth-rates than either urban or agricultural populations. There is also evidence to suggest that population growth-rates increase among pastoral groups as such groups sedentarise. The theoretical mechanisms for changes in population growth-rates within non-industrialised countries of the South are still a matter for academic debate. Broadly this debate involves those who support evolutionary 'demographic transition' theories versus those who give weight to 'proximate indicators' (socio-economic changes) as causal factors of population changes.
In brief, the transitionists argue that before the colonial period, African populations had high birth rates and high death rates. With the advent of colonialism and better medical care, they argue, mortality rates markedly decreased, while birth rates remained high, with the result that populations grew rapidly. Others have argued that the empirical evidence supports the influence of socio-economic change upon population growth-rates. In particular, average age at first marriage, level of education, and factors influencing the exposure of couples to the risk of conception are major determinants of fertility levels. Thus ideas about demographic causality remain speculative. In the absence of empirical data, judgements about rates of pastoral population increases must remain similarly speculative.
However, speculations regarding the link between rangeland degradation and presumed pastoral population increases continue within the literature. The rangeland degradation currently concerning international observers and pastoralists alike is relatively recent, much having occurred within the last hundred years. For example, much of the range degradation of northern Somalia/Somaliland has occurred since the turn of the century. Evidence from the Erigavo District (Prior 1992a) suggests that within that area significant degradation has occurred in the last 30 years. If, as suggested by some observers,5 the net ecological carrying capacity of the range is exceeded in many areas because of pastoral population increases, several alternative explanations are possible:
o It may be that pastoral population growth-rates have not dramatically increased during this century, but have more or less maintained their previous historical levels. The fact that range degradation is now observed suggests that it is merely coincidental that some ecological threshold was exceeded during a relatively short space of time, over quite a wide range of environments and cultures.
o Perhaps as a result of some as yet unexplained influence, pastoral population growth-rates have increased dramatically during this century, up to a level where the carrying capacities of the range were exceeded.
o A third possible explanation is that we should not be concerned with population growth-rates per se, but rather with changes in the density of pastoral populations.
The validity of the first assertion is impossible to judge with any certainty. The pre-colonial population growth-rates of pastoral communities are unknown. In any event it is probable that they fluctuated widely over time, following environmental disasters, war, and outbreaks of disease. However, it is highly unlikely that a number of pastoral cultures, over a variety of environments, in maintaining their pre-colonial growthrates just happened to reach numbers which exceeded the ability of the land to support them, all more or less at the same time.
Within the literature the second assertion is perhaps the most widely-proffered explanation for the occurrence of range degradation. Yet again, there is little circumstantial or empirical evidence to suggest that the rates of pastoral population growth have increased during the twentieth century. There is empirical evidence of increases in some urban and agricultural population growth-rates.
It is probable that the isolation of many pastoral populations limited the impacts of modern medicine on growth-rates. For many of the pastoral tribes of Ethiopia and Somalia, for example, it is unlikely that mortality rates were significantly reduced through improved medical care. In such cases the 'demographic transition' argument would appear to have little relevance for explaining changes in the rates of population increase.
There is little doubt, nevertheless, that international famine-relief interventions have saved the lives of many thousands of pastoralists, particularly since the 1970s. However, one of the criticisms of international relief operations in dry pastoral areas is that displaced pastoralists who enter refugee camps and feeding centres tend to remain there permanently. Deprived of their livestock, they have no way of reentering their industry, and consequently become dependent on continuing handouts of food. For example, combinations of war and drought during the 1970s and 1980s have resulted in almost a million displaced pastoralists now living permanently in refugee camps in Ethiopia and Somalia. Some of the Ethiopian refugees now in Somali refugee camps have been there since 1973.
The alternative argument is that population increases are due primarily to variations in the immediate determinants of fertility. This hypothesis suggests that fertility rates may increase in response to external socioeconomic changes. Two socio-economic changes are reported over a wide range of pastoral populations. These are the spontaneous settlement of some pastoral communities, and the increased shift away from subsistencebased livestock production towards market-oriented enterprises. As we saw above, there is strong empirical evidence to suggest that settled communities exhibit higher population growth-rates than more mobile communities. Thus within those pastoral communities who settle, an increase in population growth-rates would be expected. As we shall see later, there is a tendency for increasing numbers of formerly mobile pastoral communities to settle. Thus there is at least circumstantial evidence that population growth-rates among pastoralists in areas of
settlement may be increasing, though this is a relatively recent occurrence.
However, when we focus on the possible causes of land-degradation, perhaps more important than the rate of pastoral population growth is the issue of changes in pastoral population density.
<section>Pastoral population densities</section>
The concept of population density has two dimensions: that of the number of people, discussed above, and that of the area of land to which they are confined. As suggested, pastoral populations are probably increasing, but (except for instances where formerly mobile pastoralists have settled) there is little empirical or circumstantial evidence to suggest any change in the rate of increase. In any discussion of pastoral populations, land degradation, and drought susceptibility, ultimately the parameter which begs measurement is that of pastoral population density. Yet to quantify this parameter for any given pastoral community, one must be able to measure both the human population and the area of land available to them. Clearly this exercise would pose immense difficulties.
Nevertheless, as land is a finite resource, we can deduce with some certainty, for reasons given below, that the area available for pastoral uses is declining. If it is assumed that pastoral populations are increasing, ignoring the argument regarding changes to the rate of increase, there is strong circumstantial evidence for reasonably rapid increases in pastoral population densities during this century.
The pool of land available to pastoralists has diminished in favour of other competing land uses. Foremost among the competing uses has been agriculture, both dryland and irrigated; but in some areas, such as Tanzania and Kenya, large formerly pastoral areas have been lost to game-park tourism. Several authors refer to the loss of land to agriculture from pastoralism. The effect of this loss of land to the pastoral economy is substantial, because it is usually the better-quality grazing land (with the best soil, rainfall, and location) that is transferred into agricultural use.
If we accept that the growth of non-pastoral populations will have the effect of increasing pastoral population densities through competition for land, then estimates of whole-country population increases take on greater significance when we try to discern trends in pastoral population densities. Table 2.1 indicates the estimated population growth-rates of six countries which have significant pastoral populations.
The significance of these figures is that in all cases except Kenya, populations are expected to continue to increase to the turn of the century. Consequently the loss of land from pastoralism to other uses will also continue during this period.
Table 2.1: Estimated population growth-rates for six selected countries with significant Pastoral Populations
Average annual growth of population (per cent)
Ethiopia
Mali
Somalia
Kenya
Sudan
Mauritania
(Source: adapted from World Bank 1992: 268)
Another significant factor is that pastoralists have become less mobile over recent years, owing to the demarcation of political boundaries and the advent of regional conflicts. So even if animal and human populations had remained static during the post-independence period, their effective density would still have increased.
In summary, the evidence for increases in pastoral population densities is strong. Increases in some pastoral populations, increases in non-pastoral populations, losses of pastoral land to other uses, and the decreased mobility of pastoral communities are all contributing factors.
<section>The sedentarisation of pastoral communities</section>
The spontaneous (as opposed to government-induced) settlement of formerly mobile pastoralists has occurred within a growing number of pastoral communities. The settlement of nomads may be partial, entailing a change from a completely nomadic existence to a form of semi-nomadism, or it may involve a more or less permanent settlement. In settling, pastoralists may remain entirely animal producers, or move towards opportunistic agro-pastoralism, or they may give up their dependence on livestock completely and become agriculturalists.
Nomadic settlement and the privatisation of formerly public range have produced enormous changes in some traditional pastoral systems. From this writer's observations in North-West Somalia/Somaliland, settlement seems to be the result of a number of factors, some of which must act in concert to bring about this change. These factors can be summarised as:
o physical advantages of the area of settlement, such as better quality, accessible pasture, and proximity to markets;
o increased density of livestock watering points;
o increased human population densities in some range areas;
o increased commercialisation of livestock production among some groups within pastoral communities;
o the emergence of a class of pastoral entrepreneurs, some of whom may not be pastoralists themselves, but who are willing to invest in livestock production by employing others.
The environmental prerequisites for settlement are that there should be a relative abundance of pasture and stock water for those maintaining livestock systems; or sufficient and reliable rainfall and productive soils for those undertaking agricultural production. For these reasons pastoralist settlement is more likely to occur in climatically favoured range areas. In terms of risk-spreading, agro-pastoralism has certain advantages in dry areas over either livestock production or agriculture alone. However, motivations for the movement of some pastoral communities towards more settled agro-pastoralism are more complex than merely being a reflection of a desire to spread environmental risk.
Several writers have described dramatic changes in the political economy of pastoralism. Briefly these changes fall into four areas: the increased commercialisation of livestock production; a distinct economic and political stratification among formerly 'egalitarian' communities; an increased tendency towards pastoralist settlement and range enclosure; and, in some instances, an observable breakdown in the traditional systems of social organisation and co-operation.
Given that some or all of these processes have been observed in countries as geographically diverse as Somalia, Kenya, Sudan, and Niger, several questions arise:
o Are there simple causal linkages between each of these processes, or are there additional external factors bringing them into being independently?
o Are these changes desirable or undesirable in terms of the productivity of pastoral production systems; the social and economic rights of pastoral communities; pastoralist resilience to adverse climatic conditions; and the processes of land degradation?
In both Sudan and Somalia, Roy Behnke (1986, 1988) concluded that the effects of range enclosure on livestock and range productivity would be the following:
o a disruption in livestock production from the regional nomadic herd, possibly causing a decline in regional production;
o an alteration in individuals' access to grazing resources, causing an increase in the social and economic stratification of pastoral communities;
o increased rates of soil erosion and vegetation loss through over cultivation and over-grazing.
Behnke noted that commercial systems of production associated with settlement had increased the supply of young high-quality male sheep for the Somali export market, and also that increases in mean farm size (including both agricultural and range lands) as a result of enclosure arose, not because of many individuals marginally increasing the size of their farms, but because of a small number of wealthy and politically powerful individuals greatly increasing the size of their holdings.
For many pastoral cultures, communal ownership of rangeland and the concomitant systems of social organisation are institutions which are hundreds or even thousands of years old. The magnitude of the changes to these institutions over the last 20 years is clearly immense. However, many of these factors are operating within other pastoral communities who have not responded by settling or by privatising public range.
<section>Commercialisation of pastoral livestock production</section>
Here we are concerned with the commercialisation of livestock production by pastoralists themselves. We are not concerned with efforts by external agents such as governments or development agencies to encourage or force pastoralists towards producing for the commercial market.
The transition from the subsistence production of livestock towards market-oriented production is a process that is difficult to define. Most pastoral groups conveniently described as subsistence producers will, for example, sell excess livestock such as young males and old females in the market place. What distinguishes subsistence groups from commercial groups is not so much the quantity of herd off-take for the market, but the quality of that off-take in response to the market demand. Subsistence producers aim to maximise subsistence production, i.e. meat and milk, for domestic consumption. Commercial producers sacrifice some of this subsistence production to increase the marketability of their livestock. Alternatively they can alter the composition of their herds, so that they are producing a type of animal which has a greater market value--for example, by shifting from goat to sheep production. Rather than conserving fodder to aid the survival of animals during the dry
season or drought, a commercially oriented producer will conserve fodder to fatten animals for the market.
Clearly, however, there is a graded continuum between the predominantly subsistence producer typical of the African pastoralist and the completely commercial producer in the Western mould. In order to describe a pastoral group as progressing towards commercial livestock production, there must be evidence of behavioural changes over time which discount subsistence production in favour of commercial production.
Certain preconditions are necessary for the transition of a pastoral group towards commercial production of its livestock. Firstly, there must be strong market demand for a certain class of prime animal. Secondly, there must be the development of a cash economy within which can be purchased consumer items deemed desirable by the pastoralists. Thirdly, the pastoralist must decide that the other noncommercial needs or values attached to livestock (such as subsistence, or maintaining ties of kinship) have been either devalued relative to the commercial value, or satisfied, before the sale of excess animals can take place. The satisfaction of the noncommercial needs is more likely to be achieved by a wealthy pastoralist with many animals than by a poorer pastoralist with few animals. Consequently owners of large herds have the ability to engage in and benefit from commercial livestock production and sale to a greater extent than owners of small herds. Some researchers claim to
have f