<title>Microfinance and poverty reduction</title>
Susan Johnson and Ben Rogaly
Oxfam (UK and Ireland)
© Oxfam (UK and Ireland) and ACTIONAID 1997
First published by Oxfam (UK and Ireland) 1997
Reprinted 1997
Oxfam (UK and Ireland), 274 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 7DZ, UK; tel. (0)1865 313922; e-mail publish@oxfam.org.uk
ACTIONAID, Hamlyn House, Macdonald Road, Archway, London N19 5PG
ISBN 0 85598 3698
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
All rights reserved. Reproduction, copy, transmission, or translation of any part of this publication may he made only under the following conditions:
· with the prior written permission of the publisher; or
· with a licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd., 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9HE, UK; or
· for quotation in a review of the work; or
· under the terms set out below.
This publication is copyright, hut may be reproduced by any method without fee for teaching purposes, hut not for resale. Formal permission is required for all such uses, but normally will he granted immediately. For copying in any other circumstances, or for re-use in other publications, or for translation or adaptation, prior written permission must be obtained from the publisher, and a fee may be payable.
Available from the following agents:
· for Canada and the USA Humanities Press International, 165 First Avenue, Atlantic
Highlands, New Jersey NJ 07716-1289, USA; tel. (908) 872 1441; fax (908) 872 0717
· for southern Africa: David Philip Publishers, PO Box 23408, Claremont, Cape Town 7735,
South Africa; tel. (021) 64 4136; fax (021) 64 3358.
Available in Ireland from Oxfam in Ireland, 19 Clanwilliam Terrace, Dublin 2 (tel. 016618544).
Designed by Oxfam Design Department OX410, RB 96
Printed by Oxfam Print unit
Oxfam (UK and Ireland) is registered as a charity, no. 202918 and is a member of Oxfam International.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
The authors wish to acknowledge the major inputs of Farah Batool (Pakistan case study), Martha Romero, Stephen Fogarty and Ofelia Guttierez (Mexico case study), Helen Derbyshire and Aggie Kent (UK case study), Ousman Cham and the staff of ACTIONAID The Gambia (The Gambia case study), Juan Serrano, Emilia Ferraro and Javier Herran (Ecuador case study). Stuart Rutherford provided a major and much appreciated contribution in the form of a background paper, A Critical Typology of Financial Services for the Poor, as well as making comments on the text.
Thanks are also due to the following: Shahin Yaqub, for a background paper, Macroeconomic Conditions for Succesful Financial Seruices for Poor People, Alfonso Castillo, and Md. Mumtaz Tanoli for additional assistance in planning and undertaking the case studies as well as commenting on the text; David Norman, Barbara Thomas and Helen Yanacopulos for research assistance. The following read and made valuable comments on the full text: Audrey Bronstein, James Copestake, Ros David, Helen Derbyshire, Heather Grady, Dot McCall, Amitava Mukherjee, Ravi Narayanan, Chris Roche, William Smith, Ines Smyth, and Ton van Zutphen. The authors are also grateful for the help and encouragement of Kirat Randhawa, Simran Rogaly, Deborah Eade, Pat Conaty, Carlos Ling, Michael Semple, Ceci Lopez, Pauline Wilson, and Nigel Twose. Any errors or omissions remain the responsibility of the authors.
Susan Johnson and Ben Rogaly
<section>Introduction</section>
During the 1990s, the provision of financial services dealing with very small deposits and loans-microfinance-and particularly the provision of microcredit, have been increasingly acclaimed as effective means of poverty reduction. There is continuing and quite rapid improvement in understanding how financial services for poor people can best be provided. This book sets out to draw together some of the most important lessons learned to date, as a useful resource for those considering financial interventions as well as those already involved. However, rather than setting out a single model of 'good practice', the book recommends an overall approach. In doing this, and in order to counteract the idea that credit alone can be a panacea for eradicating poverty, it reports on continuing debates about and different approaches to the provision of financial services to poor people.
Private sector non-profit organizations (referred to in this book as non-governmental organizations-NGOs) aiming to bring about reductions in poverty have become increasingly involved in providing financial services. Of those NGOs, most have experience of savings and credit, often linked to programmes of income generation. Very small deposits and loans are referred to together as "microfinance". This book focuses on microfinance and only briefly discusses its relationship to other development activities. The book does not cover financial service provision during complex emergencies or natural disasters, or for particular marginal or vulnerable groups, such as pastoralists or people with AIDS/HIV.
Before going further, the term financial services' needs explanation. Financial services are about enabling people to amass usefully large sums of cash (Rutherford, 1996). They can be divided into two main types: first, those that build up cash reserves through forgoing income. Saving does this by making deposits out of income now and so forgoing its current use in order to draw a sum from these savings in the future. Insurance performs a similar function: it allows the client to buy access to a future lump sum. Loans work in a similar way, but in reverse: they are lump sums which are given now in return for income forgone in the future.
The second main type of financial service allows assets to be converted into and out of lump sums of cash. Mortgages and pawns are the main examples of such services. A further type of service which poor people may need, but which is rarely discussed, is cash-handling, especially to allow the transmission of cash from one place to another. This is essential for long-term migrants, for example, wishing to send cash back to their relatives.
The elements of an effective approach to microfinance
The approach to microfinance proposed here has five main points. First, that NGOs should investigate existing financial services; who uses them and to what effect. Second, that before intervening directly, NGOs should assess whether they have the specialist knowledge and skills required to provide financial services themselves. Third, in order to design services which are relevant and useful to poor people, NGOs should understand local social and economic structures, and also macro-level trends. Fourth, NGOs should consider how the provision of services can be sustained in the long term. Lastly, the impact on poverty reduction should be continually assessed rather than taken for granted, which tends to happen if a microfinance intervention is covering its costs and has many low-income users.
The structure of this book
The book begins by setting out the main debates surrounding interventions to provide financial services, to provide a background to the rest of the book. Much of the discussion in this initial chapter is based on Rogaly (1996a).
In any situation there is likely to be an array of informal financial services which people are making use of. An overview of these is given in Chapter 2. There is now much greater understanding of the characteristics of such services and how they operate. The first task for an NGO proposing to intervene is to find out which services are already available to people and which additional ones they would find most useful. To do this the NGO must understand for whom, under what circumstances, and to what degree these services support or undermine livelihood strategies. This background information allows the design of financial services to be connected to an analysis of poverty and well-being, and at the same time establishes which existing services poor people may wish to retain, and which should therefore not be undermined by any new intervention. This chapter draws heavily on a background paper commissioned for the book: A Critical Topology of Financial Services for the Poor,
by Stuart Rutherford, November 1996.
The next step suggested for an NGO is to critically and honestly assess whether it is best placed to become a provider of financial services. In the past NGOs have not always achieved success in this area, and have failed to appreciate that specific skills are required. Alternative approaches which enable the NGO to utilise its skills in mobilising, training, and working with poor people to promote rather than to provide services should be seriously considered. Another possible role for NGOs is in advocacy with governments, to persuade them to make the necessary legislative changes, and with national banking systems to encourage bankers to work with poor people.
Recent microfinance interventions have made use of a range of design features, which are discussed in Chapter 3. They have focused on reaching the poor by keeping loan sizes small, targeting women, adopting group-based lending systems, and mobilising small and frequent savings deposits, and have tended to set interest rates at higher levels than in the past. Such interventions have demonstrated that poor people can and do repay loans, that they have the ability to save, and that they can pay higher interest rates. The discussion in Chapter 3 explores the assumptions behind these design elements of microfinance schemes, and the ways that they operate in practice. It emphasises the fact that different combinations of design features suit particular macroeconomic, socio-economic, and political circumstances. This suggests that interveners must continuously and critically assess the effects that elements of the design of their programme are having in practice. To do this, it is
advisable to start slowly in order that growing understanding of people's uses for microfinance can lead to adaptations in design.
The fourth element of the approach set out in this book is a focus on sustainability, and this is discussed in Chapter 4. Microfinance initiatives have increasingly reported high repayment rates and the ability to cover part of the costs of providing the service. This has raised the possibility that organisations providing these services may be able to become self-sustaining, and so ensure the long-term provision of financial services to their users. NGOs involved in (or seeking to start) the provision of financial services need to take the issue of financial sustainability seriously, and ways of measuring financial self-sustainability are discussed in the chapter. However, financial sustainability is only one necessary condition for NGOs to be able to continue to provide services in the long term. The organisational structure, management, and staffing of the NGO are equally vital components. In discussing the forms of organization that might be sustainable, some have argued
that NGOs should turn themselves into banks. There is unlikely to be a single answer: some NGOs may prefer instead to put groups in touch with existing banks so that they are no longer needed.
The final element-the assessment of impact-is explored in Chapter 5. This is an area in which there are many methodological difficulties. However, for those interested in poverty reduction, changes in users' livelihoods as a result of microfinance provision are of central importance. The approach proposed is one in which organisations continuously investigate and assess the usefulness and relevance of their services, and adapt their ways of working in response to the results they find. It is suggested that NGOs involved in microfinance should be modest and honest about their aims. Qualitative data gathering which involves users as well as the staff of the microfinance institution can help to clarify how different groups of people-- poor, poorest, men, women-are able to make use of the services and with what effect. This information is a vital adjunct to quantitative information on performance, such as numbers of users reached and number and amount of deposits, or volume and
size of loans dispersed.
The book makes use of five case studies of financial service schemes connected to or funded by ACTIONAID or Oxfam. In Chapter 6 these schemes are described and used to illustrate issues discussed in earlier chapters in a practical context. Chapter 7 then draws overall conclusions.
<section>1. Current debates in microfinance</section>
<section>1.1 Subsidised credit provision</section>
From the 1950s, governments and international aid donors subsidised credit delivery to small farmers in rural areas of many developing countries. It was assumed that poor people found great difficulty in obtaining adequate volumes of credit and were charged high rates of interest by monopolistic money-lenders. Development finance institutions, such as Agricultural Development Banks, were responsible for the delivery of cheap credit to poor farmers.
These institutions attempted to supervise the uses to which loans were put, and repayment schedules were based on the expected income flow from the investment. Returns were often overestimated. For example, calculations would be based on agricultural yields for good years (Adams and Von Pischke, 1992). As a result, loans were often not repaid. The credibility and financial viability of these subsidised credit schemes were further weakened by the use of public money to waive outstanding and overdue loans at election time (Adams and Von Pischke, 1992; Lipton, 1996; Wiggins and Rogaly, 1989). A dependence on the fluctuating whims of governments and donors, together with poor investment decisions and low repayment rates made many of these development finance institutions unable to sustain their lending programmes. Credit provision for poor people was transitory and limited.
<section>1.2 The move to market-based solutions</section>
This model of subsidised credit was subjected to steady criticism from the mid-1970s as donors and other resource allocators switched attention from state intervention to market-based solutions. Policy-makers were reminded that credit could also be described as debt and that the over-supply of subsidised credit without realistic assessment of people's ability to repay could result in impoverishment for borrowers.
At the same time the concept of 'transection costs', and the notion that full information about borrowers was not available to lenders, were used by the opponents of subsidised credit to justify the high interest-rates charged by money-lenders. Lending money carries with it the risk of non-repayment. In order to know who is creditworthy and who is not, and so reduce this risk, the lender screens potential borrowers. This involves gathering information on the circumstances of individuals, which may not be easy to obtain. Then enforcement costs are incurred to ensure repayment. Through this process risks are reduced, though not eliminated. Where a loan is disbursed on condition that it is used for a particular purpose, supervision costs also arise.
Using these tools of analysis it was argued that private money-lenders charged interest rates which were higher than formal bank-rates because of the high costs they faced in terms of risk, particularly when lending without physical collateral. At the same time, it was argued that money-lenders were an efficient source of credit because their greater knowledge of the people to whom they were lending lowered screening costs.
Moreover, potential borrowers faced high transaction costs when they sought loans from formal-sector finance institutions. These costs included the time, travel, and paperwork involved in obtaining credit, and were often prohibitive for poor clients, especially those most geographically isolated. On the basis of this analysis, a group of economists based at Ohio State University (USA), notably Dale Adams and J D Von Pischke, put forward the view that the provision of credit should be left almost entirely to the private sector.
In concentrating on the problems of publicly subsidised credit, these economists ignored the social ties, power relations, and coercion associated with the activities of money-lenders. However, detailed micro-level research has demonstrated the widespread use of 'interlocked' contracts to force exchange to the disadvantage of poor people (Bhaduri, 1981). Powerful local people, including landlords, employers, and traders, are able to influence the terms of loans made to tenants, workers, and small producers via conditions set in transactions involving land, labour, or crops. For example, traders frequently lend working capital to small farmers on condition that their crops are sold to that trader at a pre-determined price. Similarly, loans are made to workers against the promise of labour to be provided at below the going rate at a set future date (Rogaly, 1996b).
Against the background of these debates, recent developments in the design of microfinance schemes have generated an understandably high degree of excitement. This is because innovative features in design have reduced the costs and risks of making loans to poor and isolated people, and made financial services available to people who were previously excluded.
<section>1.3 Making use of social collateral</section>
There was little knowledge among formal-sector financial intermediaries of alternatives to physical collateral, until the 1970s, when the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh began using 'pear-group monitoring' to reduce lending risk.
The model for credit delivery in the Grameen Bank is as follows:
· Groups of five self-select themselves; men's and women's group are kept separate but the members of a single group should have a similar economic background.
· Membership is restricted to those with assets worth less than half an acre of land.
· Activities begin with savings of Taka 1 per week per person and these savings remain compulsory throughout membership.
· Loans are made to two members at a time and must be repaid in equal installments over 50 weeks.
· Each time a loan is taken the borrower must pay 5 per cent of the loan amount into a group fund.
· The group is ultimately responsible for repayment if the individual defaults.
· Between five and eight groups form a 'development centre' led by a chair person and secretary and assisted by a Grameen Bank staff member.
· Attendance at weekly group and centre meetings is compulsory.
· All transactions are openly conducted at centre meetings.
· Each member may purchase a share in the Bank worth Taka 100
Through this system the Grameen Bank has provided credit to over 2 million people in Bangladesh (94 per cent women) with a very low default rate. (source Khandker, Khalily and Khan, 1995.)
However, peer-group monitoring has not proved necessary to other institutions seeking to do away with physical collateral. In Indonesia, government-sponsored banks have successfully used character references and locally-recruited lending agents (shaves and Gonzales Vega, 1996). The peer-group method of Grameen and the individual-user approach of the Bank Rakyat Indonesia (see 1.4) can both be seen as attempts to lower screening costs by using local 'insider' information about the creditworthiness of borrowers.
The degree to which Grameen Bank employees themselves implement peer-group monitoring has recently been questioned. It is argued that the reason for the Grameen Bank's high repayment rates is the practice of weekly public meetings at which attendance is compulsory, for the payment of loan instalments and the collection of savings. The meetings reinforce a culture of discipline, routine payments, and staff accountability (Jain, 1996).
Another means of improving loan recovery is to insist on regularity of repayment. This is likely to reflect the actual income-flow of the borrower much better than a lump-sum demand at the end of the loan period. Borrowers can make repayments out of their normal income rather than relying on the returns from a new-often untested-mini-business. Nevertheless, where seasonal agriculture is the main source of income, and borrowers face seasonal hardship, regular repayment scheduling may cause problems.
Microfinance specialists have argued that the prospects for scheme's stability are improved by innovations such as social collateral and regular repayments instalments. Indeed, financial sustainability has become an important goal in itself. To achieve sustainability, microfinance institutions, be they NGOs, government agencies, or commercial banks, need to ensure that the costs of providing the service are kept low and are covered by income earned through interest and fees on loans (see Havers, 1996). As microfinance deals, by definition, with small loans, the income generated through interest payments is also small in comparison with administration costs. To generate profits, therefore, it is necessary to increase scale-in other words, to lend to a large number of people (Otero and Rhyne, 1994).
<section>1.4 Savings</section>
The regular repayments on loans required by large non-governmental microfinance institutions in Bangladesh (including BRAC, ASA and Grameen) provide evidence that poor people can save in cash (Rutherford, 1995a). These intensive repayment regimes are very similar to those of rotating savings and credit associations: steady weekly payments, enforced by social collateral, in return for a lump sum. Loans made are, in reality, advances against this stream of savings.
By insisting on regular savings, microfinance institutions can screen out some potential defaulters, build up the financial security of individuals, increase funds available for lending, and develop among members a degree of identification with the financial health of the institution. People involved in such schemes may previously have been unable to reach formal-sector banks, complete their procedures, qualify for loans or open savings accounts. 'A savings facility is an extremely valuable service in its own right, which often attracts many more clients than a credit programme, particularly from among the poorest' (Hulme and Mosley, 1996, p147).
This evidence that poor people can save in cash has opened up further debate. A distinction is made between schemes in which borrowers must save small and regular amounts in order to obtain loans (termed 'compulsory' saving) and those which offer flexible savings facilities. In the latter case people can deposit and withdraw cash in whatever amounts, and as often, as they wish. This distinction is made especially strongly by Robinson (1995) in her account of the Bank Rakyat Indonesia.
The BRI local banking system has about six times as many deposit accounts as loans. On 31 December 1993, BRI's local harking system had $2.1 billion in deposits. These were all voluntary savings. By 31 December 1995, there were 14.5 million savings accounts. Savers with BRI have access to savings whenever they want.
BRI deals with individuals rather than groups. Its savings programme was designed specifically to meet local demand for security, convenience of location, and choice of savings instruments offering different mixtures of liquidity and returns.
BRI's local banking system has a loan limit of about $11,000. The idea is that good borrowers should not be forced to leave until they can qualify for the loans provided by ordinary commercial banks.
In addition, BRI has a system which gives its borrowers an incentive to repay on time. An additional 25 per cent of the interest rate is added to the monthly payment. This amount is paid back to borrowers at the end of the loan period if they have made every payment in full and on time. There is a corresponding in-built penalty for those who have not. (Source Robinson, 1994.)
Robinson argues that there is an enormous unmet demand for flexible savings services. However, she also warns that managing a savings system of this type is much more complex than running a simple credit programme.
Schemes which operate under these 'new' savings and credit technologies are an improvement on the old model of subsidised agricultural and micro-enterprise finance. The story of how they have succeeded in reaching poor people is now the subject of a large literature (for example, Rutherford, 1995b; Hulme and Mosley, 1996; MansellCarstens, 1995). That many more poor people can now obtain financial services is a major achievement of these schemes. However, the questions of which poor people have been reached, and of whether poverty has been reduced, still remain.
<section>1.5 Can microfinance interventions reduce poverty?</section>
If poverty is understood as low levels of annual income per household, reducing poverty is about raising average income levels. If a particular level of annual income per head is used as a poverty line, poverty reduction could be measured by counting the number or proportion of people who cross that line-who are promoted out of poverty. Providers of financial services who aim to enable people to cross such a poverty line have focused on credit, in particular credit for small enterprises, including agricultural production.
However, attention to annual income can obscure fluctuations in that income during any given year. Poverty can also be understood as vulnerability to downward fluctuations in income. Such fluctuations can be relatively predictable, such as the seasonal decline in employment for agricultural workers, or a shortage of income and trading opportunities in the dry season or before harvest. Alternatively, fluctuations in income may result from unexpected shocks such as crop failure, illness, funeral expenses or loss of an asset such as livestock through theft or death, or a natural disaster such as a cyclone (Montgomery, 1996). Vulnerability can be heightened by the lack of saleable or pawn able assets and by debt obligations. Interventions which reduce such vulnerability and protect livelihoods also reduce poverty.
1.5.1 Poverty as powerlessness
A further dimension of poverty which is often the focus of NGO interventions is powerlessness, whether in an absolute sense or in relation to others. Economic inequality between and within households is likely to be associated with concentrations of political and social power. Inequality can increase whenever better-off people are able to improve their incomes faster than others. Even if the absolute level of material well-being of the worst-off people does not change, relative poverty (Beck, 1994) may increase, and with it a sense of powerlessness among very poor people.
Power relations are partly determined by norms of expected behaviour. Neither the relations nor the norms are static; they are contested and change over time. Powerlessness can be experienced in a variety of situations: within the household, as a result of differences in gender and age; and within the community, between socioeconomic groups, as a result of caste, ethnicity, and wealth. Defining poverty in terms of power relations implies that assessment of the impact of microfinance interventions should focus on their influence on social relations and the circumstances which reproduce them. Even in a similar geographical and historical context, it is important to distinguish between the ways in which specific groups of poor people (women and men, landed and landless, particular ethnic groups) are able to benefit from financial services or are excluded from doing so.
1.5.2 Credit for micro-enterprises
While there are methodological difficulties involved in measuring increases in incomes brought about by the provision of credit (see further discussion in Chapter 5), studies have demonstrated that the availability of credit for micro-enterprises can have positive effects. A recent survey collected data from government, NGOs, and banks involved in providing financial services for poor people. Twelve programmes were selected from seven countries (six of these are included in Table 1, Annex 1). Households which had received credit were compared with households which had not. The results demonstrated that credit provision can enable household incomes to rise.
However, taking the analysis further, Hulme and Mosley demonstrated that the better-off the borrower, the greater the increase in income from a micro-enterprise loan. Borrowers who already have assets and skills are able to make better use of credit. The poorest are less able to take risks or use credit to increase their income. Indeed, some of the poorest borrowers interviewed became worse off as a result of micro-enterprise credit, which exposed these vulnerable people to high risks. For them, business failure was more likely to provoke a livelihood crisis than it was for borrowers with a more secure asset base. Specific crises included bankruptcy, forced seizure of assets, and unofficial pledging of assets to other members of a borrowing group. There have even been reports of suicide following peer-group pressure to repay failed loans (Hulme and Mosley, 1996, pp120-122).
A much smaller survey comparing micro-enterprise programmes in El Salvador and Vanuatu found that the development of successful enterprises and the improvement of the incomes of very poor people were conflicting rather than complementary objectives. By selecting those most likely to be successful for credit and training, the programmes inevitably moved away from working with the poorest people (Tomlinson, 1995). Reviews of Oxfam's experiences with income-generating projects for women raised serious questions about the profitability of such activities. Full input coatings, which would have revealed many income-generating projects as loss-making, were not carried out. Omissions included depreciation on capital, the opportunity cost of labour (the earnings participants could have had through spending the time on other activities), and subsidisation of income generating projects with income from other sources. Market research and training in other business skills had often been
inadequate (Piza and March, 1990; Mukhopadhyay and March, 1992).
1.5.3 Reaching the poorest
Whether income promotion is based on loans for individual micro enterprises or on group-based income generation projects, its appropriateness as a strategy for poverty reduction in the case of the poorest people is questionable. Other evidence suggests that self-selected groups for peer-monitoring have not been inclusive of the poorest people (Montgomery, 1995). People select those with whom they want to form a group on the basis of their own knowledge of the likelihood that these people will make timely payment of loan and savings instalments: X will only have Y in her group if she believes Y is capable of making regular repayments and has much to lose from the social ostracism associated with default. This system might well be expected to lead to the exclusion of the poorest (Montgomery, op. cit.). Even the low asset and land-holding ceiling which the big microfinance institutions in Bangladesh have successfully used to target loans away from better-off people has not
necessarily meant that the poorest, who are often landless, are included (Osmani, 1989).
So while the innovations referred to earlier appear to have made loans more available to poor people, there is still debate over the design of appropriate financial services for the poorest. Hulme and Mosley's study strongly suggests that providing credit for micro-enterprises is unlikely to help the poorest people to increase their incomes. However, detailed research with users has found that some design features of savings and credit schemes are able to meet the needs of very poor people. For example, it was found that easy access to savings and the provision of emergency loans by SANASA (see 3.4.2) enabled poor people to cope better with seasonal income fluctuations (Montgomery, 1996).
Microfinance specialists increasingly, therefore, view improvements in economic security-income protection rather than promotion (Dreze and Sen, 1989)--as the first step in poverty reduction. "...from the perspective of poverty reduction, access to reliable, monetized savings facilities can help the poor smooth consumption over periods of cyclical or unexpected crises, thus greatly improving their economic security.' It is only when people have some economic security that 'access to credit can help them move out of poverty by improving the productivity of their enterprises or creating new sources of livelihood' (Bernet and Cuevas, 1996, authors' emphasis).
<sec