<title>Practical poultry raising</title>
Written by:
Kenneth M. French
Edited by:
Larry Ritter
Illustrated by:
Marilyn Kaufman
Peace Corps
INFORMATION COLLECTION & EXCHANGE
Manual M0011
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
INFORMATION COLLECTION & EXCHANGE
Peace Corps' Information Collection & Exchange (ICE) was established so that the strategies and technologies developed by Peace Corps Volunteers. their co - workers. and their counterparts could be made available to the wide range of development organizations and individual workers who might find them useful. Training guides, curricula lesson plans, project reports, manuals and other Peace Corps - generated materials developed in the field are collected and reviewed. Some are repented "as is": others provide a source of field based information for the production of manuals or for research in particular program areas. Materials that you submit to ICE thus become part of the Peace Corps' larger contribution to development.
Information about ICE publications and services is available through:
The Peace Corps Internet Web Site address:
http://www.peacecorps.gov
Please note the new Peace Corps Mailing Address from July 1998 on is:
ICE/ Peace Corps
1111 20th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20526
USA
Add your experience to the ICE Resource Center. Send materials that you have prepared so that we can share them with others working in the development field. Your technical insights serve as the basis for the generation of ICE manuals, reprints, and resource packets, and also ensure that ICE is providing the most up - to - date, innovative problem - solving techniques and information available to you and your fellow development workers.
This publication was produced for Peace Corps by TransCentury Corporation, Washington, D.C.
This manual may be reproduced and/or translated in part or in full without payment of royalty. Please give standard acknowledgment.
PRACTICAL POULTRY RAISING
February 1981
Prepared for the Peace Corps by TransCentury Corporation under Contract No. 79 - 043 - 1029
As with any manual, many people have contributed to the development of Practical Poultry Raising. The author is grateful especially to Walter S. Staples, Russ Staples and P.K. Nambiar who reviewed the manual for technical accuracy ant provided encouragement along the way. Peace Corps' Whett Reed oversaw technical aspects of the manual from the Peace
Corps perspective. Many thanks go to TranaCentury's Paul Chakroff, protect manager under whose direction this manual wee prepared, and to Pamela Ball for assistance in coordination. Thanks are due also to Marilyn S. Chakroff who edited, organized and coordinated the final production of this manual and to Linda Guaman for typing and layout.
<section>About this manual</section>
This manual is designed to provide development workers with the information and tools needed either to begin or to improve poultry production. For those who are inexperienced in poultry production, this manual can identify and provide the basic information needed to raise and market poultry successfully. More experienced poultry workers may find the manual sections on cultural considerations, nutrition, extension and additional resources useful for adapting their knowledge and skills to the conditions of a new environment. No matter what your previous level of poultry experience, you can help expand poultry production by helping farmers observe, question and find the gaps between actual and potential production, by suggesting improvements and by helping farmers evaluate the results.
Numerous sources were consulted in the preparation of this manual in order to make it useful for raining poultry under varying conditions.
This manual explores many different aspects of raising and marketing poultry based upon these sources and the author's and reviewers' experiences. Because ideas about poultry production vary greatly in different countries, IT IS HIGHLY RECOMMENDED WHEREVER POSSIBLE THAT A REVIEW OF THIS MANUAL BY A RESPONSIBLE OFFICER WITHIN THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT MINISTRY BE PERFORMED BEFORE THE SUGGESTIONS MADE IN THE MANUAL ARE IMPLEMENTED. There are special climatic considerations, feed ingredient problems, disease considerations and so on which can make sections of this manual inappropriate in certain areas of the world. If there are questions about the appropriateness of recommendations made in the manual, the experience of local authorities should have priority until research can be done to show the value of the new methods. It should be noted also that sources consulted for this manual do not always agree. On one issue, four highly experienced sources each gave different
recommendations for the same conditions. To make this manual
most useful, methods and tools described are based either on a majority opinion or upon the experience of the author.
Because this manual gives general instructions on poultry production, some recommendations and suggestions will not be relevant to every development worker's situation. Poultry workers will need to adapt methods and tools to their own specific needs. We would appreciate, therefore, your comments, corrections and suggestions for future editions of this manual. What information was the most useful? What was not covered that would be useful in revised editions? How did you use this manual? What was irrelevant or not useful? Please make comments and let us know how this manual helped you in poultry production.
<section>About the author</section>
Kenneth M. French has over fifteen years of experience in agriculture and rural development both in the United States and abroad. As a Peace Corps Volunteer in India, he conducted a scientific breeding program for poultry over a three - year period. Based on this experience and his own farming background, Mr. French served as a technical and cross - cultural trainer for Peace Corps Volunteers in India in poultry breeding and rural development projects. As the Associate Director of Peace Corpa/Malaysia, Mr. French was responsible for all Peace Corps rural agricultural development projects in Malaysia, supervising fifty Volunteers in fifteen areas. Projects under his direction included agriculture extension in crops and dairy management, rural credit, soil fertility research and conservation, forestry management and marketing systems. Mr. French's writing experience includes policy papers for the Malaysian Ministry of Agriculture on agriculture extension, cooperative
development and agriculture marketing. Mr. French has formal training in agriculture from the University of New Hampshire, where he majored in poultry science.
<section>1. Poultry production - An overview</section>
What is Poultry?
The word poultry applies to all domestic fowl raised for their eggs, their meat, or both. Poultry includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea fowl, pheasants, quail and pigeons. Chickens by far are the most popular poultry raised today, and this manual will concentrate on them. A brief section on other fowl is given in Appendix B (p. 185).
The first chickens (probably the species Gallus gallus) were lured or captured from the rain forests of Southwest Asia over 3,000 years ago. Since that time, chickens have been kept for meat and eggs by nearly every human group throughout the world. Over the years, the original chicken has been bred by selection and circumstance into many varieties.
Until recently almost all chickens were raised in small flocks and left to look after themselves. In many areas of the world chickens still are raised a few at a time for occasional eggs or to serve at a feast. There are people today who grow chickens only for cock - fighting or religious ritual. Some types of chickens with beautiful plummage are raised just for show.
In the past 40 years, the growing need for protein to feed the world's rapidly expanding population has caused farmers and scientists to pay more attention to chickens as food sources, ant to increase the efficiency with which they are raised. Genetic research has developed many different breeds and varieties adapted to different climates, farming methods and purposes.
Types of Chickens
Even though there are many different breeds and varieties of chickens used in farming, they all can be divided into three types: Layers - Bred primarily for egg production, these birds usually weigh about 1 - 2 kilograms (kg) (2.2 to 4.4 pounds). They are lighter than chickens bred to produce meat. Because they are smaller, they need less feed to maintain their body weight while laying as many or more eggs than the big birds. The layers also are eaten, usually after they have been producing eggs for a year to a year and a half. Farmers often do not keep the males of these breeds because it takes too much feed to bring them to a marketable weight. Birds that lay brown eggs usually are a little larger than those that lay white eggs. Meat Chickens - These birds grow rapidly and reach marketable size after two to three months. They are sold well before they reach egg - laying age. Whether a meat chicken is called a fryer or a roaster depends on its size and age. Meat chickens
usually are called broilers. Capons (castrated males) grow large, fat and tender as they get older. Dual - Purpose Chickens - These birds are raised for both eggs and meat. Females of the new, improved breeds are kept to lay eggs while the males are separated and sold for meat as soon as they reach about 15 weeks of age. Also, dual - purpose hens are sold for meat at the end of the laying time. The country chickens roaming free in most villages of the world are a kind of dual - purpose bird. Generally, it is more profitable to specialize in either layers or meat birds, for these improved breeds of chickens can reach very high levels of production. Some layers now produce at an average rate of 90% for a whole year. Meat chickens weighing 2 kg or more are ready for market in seven to ten weeks. However, unlike country fowl which, through many centuries, has developed resistance to many diseases and learned to take care of itself, these new breeds need the active care of the
farmer to protect them from disease and predators if they are to survive and produce well.
Why Raise Poultry?
Small Poultry Flocks - anything from a hen and a few chicks running free up to a group of 50 or so that receive some special care - can provide a family with important protein in its diet and perhaps some income through the sale of extra eggs and birds to neighbors. Feeding the birds food scraps and crop byproducts is a good way to use vegetable matter that the family doesn't eat. But, if country chickens are used, they will not produce very much, and it is difficult to use the new breeds efficiently in small numbers. By keeping costs low, some farmers can make sufficient profit on a small flock to allow for expansion to a larger flock. Medium - Size Flocks - one or two hundred birds or more - can increase significantly the local supply of high - quality protein, minerals and vitamins. This is especially important for young children and for pregnant and nursing mothers. These flocks also can:
o increase family income;
o increase local employment;
o use food processing by - products that normally are wasted;
o use relatively little land (chickens can be kept by urban as well as rural people);
o increase the supply of manure for fertilizer and methane gas production; and
o provide possible benefits when combined with other protein increase programs (for example, chicken manure can be used to fertilize fish ponds).
What Are the Disadvantages?
Of course, there also are possible disadvantages to raising chickens. Some people say that livestock in general are inefficient producers of food and that most developing nations cannot afford to use their scarce resources to raise them. By growing such crops as soybeans, they say, farmers can produce much more protein per acre. Livestock also often compete directly with humans for cereal grains such as wheat and maize (corn). But much agricultural land isn't suited for growing protein crops. Chickens eat less per unit of protein produced and require less land than other livestock. They also can be raised on diets containing foods not usually eaten by humans. Chickens provide high quality protein that is particularly well suited to human digestive systems and dietary needs.
Medium - size poultry operations in developing nations have other possible disadvantages:
o Poorly run projects can destroy a small farmer's scant savings or put him deeply into debt;
o Market cycles can hurt or destroy a poultry project, even if it is well run;
o Feed, water or labor stoppages can cause failure;
o These projects need specially bred birds, pharmaceuticals, markets, transport and technical advice that may not be found in your area;
o Compared to traditional ways of raising chickens, these projects need a large investment per bird.
After considering the advantages and disadvantages, most developing nations have decided to encourage poultry production. This encouragement has not yet reached many small farmers. Here is where you may be able to help.
What Do You Need to Raise Poultry?
Just as humans have certain minimum requirements for life, there are basic chicken needs which must be provided for by the farmer if the birds (especially the new breeds) are to be productive. These include: shelter; protection from disease, pests and predators; temperature and humidity controls; sanitation; control of light; and elimination of stresses.
Examples of stresses are: noise and other disturbances; dust; drafts; foul or stale air; crowding; changes in feed; introducing new chickens into established flocks; changes in weather; and keeping males with females. Stress factors are additive, that is, the more that a chicken has to bear, the worse the effect may be. An otherwise healthy bird may contract only a mild case of a disease when exposed to it; a bird that has worms, is crowded, or is not eating well may die when exposed to the same disease.
The most important element in poultry raising is a good relationship between the caretaker and the flock. A caretaker must like and understand chickens and be dedicated to seeing that they do well. In short, chickens need tender loving care.
What Do You Need to Expand Beyond the Farmyard Flock?
Interested Farmers - Unless farmers are convinced that poultry raising is a good idea and are ready to provide the constant care and attention, finances and other support that larger flocks need, there is no point in going on. You cannot and should never attempt to persuade farmers to do something that they don't think is in their best interest.
Cultural Acceptability - The chicken has been linked with human society for so long that many cultures have developed special ways of dealing with them. Vegetarians, of course, don't eat chicken meat and many don't eat eggs, especially fertilized ones. Other societies relish eggs in which the fetus already is formed. Some people regard fowl as sacred and will not eat them, while others won't touch them because of the worms and manure that chickens sometimes eat. Some cultures forbid eggs to pregnant women. There are many other such taboos and traditions throughout the world. In most places, however, people welcome chickens and eggs to their menus and willingly form a good market, but you must learn from local people about their customs and attitudes if you are to work effectively.
Financial Means - Farmers must have available cash of their own, be able to pool their resources through cooperative efforts or be able to borrow from private sources or government agencies. For small farmers, investing in the new breeds means that a large portion of their resources is not available for other uses. They must realize that they risk losing part or all of their investment. Even if they do make a profit, it may not be for some time - in layer operations this may take at least one and a half years, sometimes longer.
Local Supplies and Technical Support - You must have an assured supply of clean water and fresh, well - balanced feed for the life of the birds. This is easier to arrange for meat birds that are kept for only a few months than it is for layers that will need vaccines, medicines and food supplements, and advice on how to use them.
Markets and Infrastructure - Even if the people in your area enjoy eating chickens and eggs, they may be too few or too poor to justify an expanded chicken operation. Transport problems may mean that you cannot deliver your products, especially eggs, to market quickly enough so that they are fresh, attractive and earn a profit. Farmers near towns or good roads usually have a good market, even though competition may reduce their per bird profit. Those in remote areas often can't sell as many eggs and birds, but may make up for that by receiving higher prices.
Breed Source - A farmer who wants to start a medium - size poultry operation will need a source of an improved breed. Ways to work with and upgrade flocks of country chickens are described in Chapter 4 (p. 37), but if farmers are to spend their. limited resources on buildings, feed or other support, they should use birds with the greatest genetic potential.
Market Plans - Farmers will have to determine: when to start their flocks so they are ready for laying or sale in the most profitable season; which types of eggs and meat are most enjoyed by buyers; what quantities realistically can be sold if neighboring farmers also are expanding; what to do about other seasonal problems such as scarcity of labor during harvests, lack of water during dry seasons, and so on. These topics are discussed in Chapter 9 (p. 153.)
Where Has Poultry Development Worked Well?
Many developing nations have made big gains in their poultry industries in recent years. Poultry development in India serves as a good example of the way a developing country can increase its protein production.
Poultry Development in India
Most of India's poultry development has happened in the past 20 years. A country with minimal cereal grain resources, India faced many other problems as well. Many farmers could not afford even a small backyard poultry operation. The vast majority of Indians are vegetarians. There were transport problems, and difficulties with feed and medical supplies. Extension personnel were few, and though some were dedicated, others were not. Most areas had no poultry feed analysis laboratories. All viable improved breeds (breeds in which a high percentage of chicks live and turn into good producers) were being imported, usually through multinational corporations. Farmers were accustomed to traditional ways of raising chickens and were reluctant to change to new methods until they were proven.
While a few neighboring countries have had little success with poultry, India has made much progress. Much of it is due to intensive, broadly - based extension work, some of it done by Peace Corps Volunteers. Once farmers began taking advantage of the extension service, bought and raised better birds and found they were making money, they began to demand more service and even better birds.
The government and others responded to the new demands by establishing tax incentives for poor farmers, setting poultry feed ingredient standards, building more feed analysis laboratories, issuing loans, insuring experienced farmers, improving government breeding programs, increasing vaccine production and delivery, providing better disease diagnostic services, and expanding extension activity.
Peripheral industries sprang up. Small shops began making poultry equipment such as brooders, feeders, and supplies such as egg shipping cartons and baskets. Farmers in remote areas organized cooperative societies. With advice, loans and grants from the government and international agencies, the cooperatives began mixing feeds, buying supplies and equipment, building storage units and marketing members' products. They began contracting with farmers and rice mills, and growing their own feeds as well. Major breeding. pharmaceutical and feed supply companies also expanded and assisted farmers in more remote areas.
Marketing also had been a problem. The vast majority of Indians are Hindu, a religion which prohibits or discourages eating anything which is or has the potential to be animal life. It was believed that all eggs had the potential for life and therefore should not be consumed. Consumers were taught by poultry people and nutritionists that eggs could be produced without the presence of roosters and that a difference existed between the fertilized and unfertilized egg. Although some Hindus still will not eat them, most have accepted unfertilized eggs as part of their diet.
Today, the number of eggs produced in India has increased 600%, from 2 billion in 1969 to over 12 billion in 1979. The growth of egg production has outpaced population growth, resulting in lower egg prices relative to family income.
What India is learning about chickens can be and is being learned in other developing nations. As a poultry production worker, you can help make poultry an important food and income source in your area.
<section>2. What do you have to work with?</section>
<section>Assessing the local situation</section>
If you are living in your work area, you probably already know quite a bit about the local poultry situation. You most likely have bought eggs and perhaps chickens in the market and know something about the quality and quantity available there. Do people present you with a chicken as a token of their esteem? Does a neighbor's rooster awaken you? Or have you found yourself downwind from a poorly run chicken coop? We tend to notice first the things that affect us personally.
If you want to see whether you can be useful in poultry production, you must know much more about how the supply or lack of chickens affects the lives of the people around you. Do people eat eggs and chickens often or save them for festive occasions? Do local restaurants serve them daily? If so, where do they and the market sellers get their supplies? Is the neighbor's rooster or the upwind chicken coop unique, or are there many around? Do you think prices are high or low compared to other local foods? How do local prices compare with those in other areas of your country?
If you are in one of those rare places without chickens, what are the reasons? It may be a temporary condition caused by a severe outbreak of disease, a drastic increase in the predator population or a long drought. In such cases, you may be able to help reintroduce chickens to the area. In other cases, where people won't eat eggs and chickens and don't want to have them around, you may want to find another activity entirely.
<section>Which management systems are used in your area?</section>
From the small backyard flock to the 100,000 - bird automated house, poultry management systems can be classified in any number of ways. We have chosen the following six categories arbitrarily to give you a rough guide to what you may see in your area. You should observe local farmers closely, seeing which methods they use and why, finding out what they think their problems are, and finding out what kind of improvements they would like. Unless you already know quite a bit about both chickens and people, you should limit yourself to questions, for your purpose now is to learn.
The descriptions and illustrations in this section are included only for the purpose of showing a progression of technology and the basic types of poultry operations. A view in your own village may differ somewhat, but the principles will be similar. Following chapters explain advantages and disadvantages of each of the six systems shown here.
Country Chicken, Free Range
In this system the farmer makes no attempt to control the flock's food or water intake, although they may be thrown an occasional food scrap or handful of grain. The flock finds its own shelter and uses its instincts to avoid predators. The farmer provides no sanitation, and the only vaccinations that may occur are given by government agents during widespread epidemics. The hen tries to hide her few, small eggs and often succeeds. She hatches her eggs on her own. The farmer gets very few eggs, little meat and has very little of either to sell. Losses, especially of chicks, to disease, predators and theft are high.
Partly Controlled, Free Range
In this system the farmer provides overnight shelter and some supplemental feed. Breeding is uncontrolled, but the farmer does provide a nesting place where a brood hen incubates her own eggs and the farmer may place other hens' eggs under her as well. (A brood hen is a hen that wants to set and hatch eggs and take care of chicks.) The farmer may make use of the local agricultural extension system for some advice and vaccinations.
Contained, with Limited Range
There are many variations of this system. The essential feature is that the flock is contained in a shelter overnight and during bad weather. At other times the chickens are free to eat any grass and other food they can find within a fenced yard or run. Sometimes the shelters are small and portable, have wire mesh floors and are moved frequently to fresh ground and grass within the yard. Other times the shelters are larger and stationary. The chickens may be confined to one yard, or may be rotated every few months to fresh adjacent enclosures.
In limited range systems the farmer provides most, if not all, feed and water, sometimes outside as well as inside the house. The chickens may be either from local flocks or improved breeds. The farmer may have the benefit of technical advice beyond that available from neighbors. If the house is stationary, it may use either a deep - litter or raised - floor system (see below).
Contained, Deep Litter
In any contained system the chickens remain inside at all times. The breed source almost always is a commercial breeder. The farmer provides all feed and water, nesting boxes and perhaps perches (roosts) inside the house. The farmer usually has the benefit of technical advice. Losses to predators, disease and theft are greatly reduced compared to previous systems. The contained system requires a substantial investment per bird.
The floor of a deep - litter house is covered with up to 15 centimeters (cm) of bedding material (wood shavings; rice, wheat or other grain hulls; shredded sugar cane or shredded straw, etc.) that absorbs moisture from droppings.
Contained, Raised Floor
The characteristics of this system are the same as those of the deep - litter, except that the chickens live on a raised, semi - open floor, and droppings fall to the ground or to a light layer of litter below. The floors usually are made of spaced, wooden slats, but sometimes wire mesh or expanded metal is used. (Expanded metal is sheet metal which has been partially cut and stretched and looks like heavy gauge wire mesh with diamond - shaped holes.)
Cage or Battery
This system is used only for layers. The hens live in cages where food and water are provided. The cages may be placed in any sheltered area. The farmer most likely uses extension advice. The investment per bird may be the highest of all systems, especially if the cages are made of expensive wire.
<section>Can you help?</section>
We assume that anyone in an area where no chickens are being raised and where there is little hope of introducing them already has traded this manual for other reading material. If you are in an area where large - scale poultry raising is abundant, egg and meat prices are very low, and there is little chance of you contributing unless you are a highly skilled technician, you should be looking for something else to do. Both of the above situations are rare in the developing world. Usually there is room for improvement of the existing situation. The more you learn about chicken raising in general and the specifics in your area, the better you will be prepared to help. The following chapters will give you essential facts and some useful ideas for suggesting local improvements. The bibliography lists more reading matter you can order. But before you dive deeply into technical material, there is an approach to working with people in development (in this case, poultry farmers or
potential poultry farmers) that we suggest you keep in mind.
<section>Finding the gap</section>
Almost any poultry operation fails to reach its maximum production potential. You should try to assess the production potential in your area. What you are seeking is not some idealized situation where no error can occur, but what reasonably can be expected by your friends and neighbors if they work willingly and seek good advice. There is no exact formula to determine the production potential, although this manual does give you some production averages that are fair guides. Local conditions and attitudes always will determine the final outcome.
As you gauge the technical potential and compare it to the present situation, you will see some degree of difference between them. Production potential minus the present situation equals the gap. You will be working to help fill this gap.
Address yourself to the local gap. Don't worry about the big difference between what you see and the results obtained in industrialized nations. Work with possible local advantages, such as: small investments of more time, money and energy may yield relatively large returns; labor and some supplies may be relatively inexpensive in your area; market prices may be high, and minor decreases in them may increase de mend exponentially as poorer people see they now can afford some eggs and meat.
<section>Filling the gap</section>
The key to filling the gap is increased control over production factors. This may mean introducing new methods and resources, or it may mean cutting the costs of those now in use. The gap between the existing and potential situations often can be overwhelming. If you attempt to change everything at once, you and the farmer are likely to become frustrated. To avoid this, break the gap down into smaller increments that the farmer can handle. For example, if chickens are overcrowded, in a poorly ventilated structure, have intestinal parasites and are not properly watered or fed, you can first suggest selling off a few chickens to reduce overcrowding, increase ventilation, and provide proper food and water.
Although small, these changes will bring rapid results and are not costly. Then you can begin to address the other problems one at a time. Close the gap by helping farmers select increments that they can most easily absorb, and that have the best chances for early, observable results. This manual will describe most of the basic increments that may be of use and help you choose the ones you might suggest. To aid in determining the gap, use the Farmer Specific Assessment Criteria (Appendix C) for each farmer in your area.
<section>Evaluating your resources</section>
Appendix F (p.207) lists a few resources available to you, but most of them will be hard to obtain. It always is best to work with local resources. There should be many available if you seek them out.
Government Agencies
Before beginning any poultry activities, you should consult with the government poultry agency, usually a part of the Ministry of Agriculture. The people there can tell you about the support they offer. It probably includes recommendations on:
o Vaccinations and medications - dosages, schedules, equipment, emergency programs and free service available.
o Nutrition - feed mix sources, ingredient sources, costs, seasonal fluctuations, what works best in your area.
o Building designs - use of local materials, environmental considerations, cost reductions.
o Water supply - availability, water - borne diseases and treatments.
o Equipment - sources and designs.
o Stock - sources of chicks and pullets (female chickens less than a year old), breeds available and which produce best.
o Financial assistance - sources and application procedures.
o Laboratory facilities - where they are and what they can do.
o Cultural considerations - how to work with them.
o Local language extension publications - how to obtain them.
o Topics not mentioned in this list - there may be many.
Private Companies
It is in their interest to have farmers do well. They often offer information and advice difficult to obtain elsewhere. However, if you have a choice of more than one firm in a field, it is best to check with several and try to balance the various self - interests. Firms to look for inclu