<title>Animal traction</title>
Written by:
Peter R. Watson
Edited by:
Richard Davis
Marilyn S. Chakroff
Illustrated by:
Marilyn Kaufman
Mary Conn
This publication was produced for Peace Corps by the TransCentury Corporation, Washington, D. C., under Contract No. 79-043-0129
Peace Corps
Information Collection & Exchange
Manual M0012
August 1981
This manual may be reproduced and/or translated in part or in full without payment or royalty. Please give standard acknowledgement.
The Peace Corps Internet Web Site address:
http://www.peacecorps.gov
Please note the new Peace Corps Mailing Address from July 1998 on is:
ICE/ Peace Corps
1111 20th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20526
USA
<section>About this manual</section>
This manual is a practical guide to the use of draft animals and animal-powered farm equipment. It is written primarily for use by Peace Corps Volunteers and agricultural extension personnel working in animal traction development programs, but it can be used by farmers who are teaching themselves to use these techniques.
While some of the information contained in the manual is specific to the extension of animal-powered agriculture in Africa, the principles explained and illustrated are fundamental: they are generally applicable wherever the method is being used or introduced.
In writing the manual, priority has been given to information which the author, reviewers, and editors feel will be valuable to a majority of Volunteers working in animal traction programs. A resource guide is included to help readers find information specific to areas of interest or need. It should be further noted that authorities do not always agree on the importance of given techniques or the effectiveness of certain methods. In some cases it has been necessary for the author to make recommendations based on his experience as an animal traction Volunteer and as a Volunteer trainer.
<section>About the author</section>
Peter R. Watson has five years of experience working with draft animals, primarily in West Africa. From 1972 to 1976 Mr. Watson supervised 25 farmers and seven agricultural extension agents in a program to popularize the use of animals for power in Benin. He operated a small farm using animaldrawn equipment in the cultivation of a variety of traditional food and cash crops. In 1979 Mr. Watson was hired by the Peace Corps as an instructor for their animal traction Volunteers. Mr. Watson's previous writing experience included articles about the culture of the Bariba people of Benin and Nigeria, and an extensive report on the evolution and potential of animal traction technology in a traditional rural farming community in West Africa.
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
So many people have contributed to this manual that it would be impossible to thank them all individually. However, I do want to give my thanks to those reviewers who read and corrected previous drafts of the manual and to the people who gave special help during the research phase. I am especially grateful to Kelly Morris and Steve Joyce at Peace Corps and to Buckley Lye and Rob Shulman, who gave careful review of the manual and made valuable suggestions. At TransCentury I want to thank Paul Chakroff, Project Manager, for his continued support throughout the project, and Michael Costa for his review of the sections on animal health and nutrition. A very warm special thanks goes to Ben, Marcia, and Junior Ellingson for their help in giving me first-hand experience with catching bulls. Finally, I would like to thank the following people for their help in providing information for this manual: Carol and Fred Watson, Pat Wetmore, Helen Davidson, Andre Lona, Pierre Huet, Ted
Bermingham, Paul Schmidt, and Mrs. Thorsnes. And a special thanks to Cade Ware for his excellent typing and layout work.
<section>1. Introduction</section>
<section>What is animal traction?</section>
In many parts of the world, farmers have adapted hoes and cultivating tools so they can be pulled by people, animals or engines. This is called mechanized agriculture; the type of power used is called traction, or pulling power.
Animal traction, animalpowered mechanization, and animal draft are terms which describe the use of animals to pull farm equipment, vehicles, and other loads. The most common draft animals are cattle, horses and mules, but donkeys, camels, domestic water buffalo, yaks, dogs, reindeer and even elephants are used for traction in some parts of the world. The kind of animals used and the kind of work performed depend largely on people's resourcefulness in raising and training animals and devising hitches that allow them to pull.
<section>History of animal traction</section>
Illustrations on the walls of Egyptian tombs show farmers using animal traction from as early as 1400 B.C. In these hieroglyphics the handle of a hand-held hoe was extended and lashed to the horns of oxen with rope. These illustrations also show humans pulling plows.
The first plows, pulled by people or animals, probably were not used to break the soil but to stir soil which had already been loosened by hand-held hoes. Animals were used to pull branches across a seedbed in order to cover the scattered seed.
In the transition from manual hoeing to human or animal traction, the basic "elbow" or "checkmark" design of the hoe did not change. What changed was the method of pulling. Instead of being pulled in a series of short, individual strokes or chops, the hoe was pulled continuously. It was this continuous motion which transformed the hoe into the "plow".
<section>Why use animal traction?</section>
Agricultural mechanization has become a high priority in developing nations. This innovation is important because farmers using traditional techniques are unable to produce sufficient food for increasing populations. Mechanization can expand the area under cultivation and provide better soil preparation, leading to greater harvests. Government extension services therefore strive to give farmers tools, information and advice to enable them to increase productivity.
Benefits of mechanization to farmers include lightened workloads, better and more regular yields, or an easing of problems caused by short growing seasons or insufficient labor. Mechanization also can help to produce income with which farmers can acquire goods and services.
Yet mechanization is not practical or economical for every farmer. New tools are expensive. Acceptance of new techniques increases dependency on outside technical assistance. Thus the farmer who already produces enough food for his family may be reluctant to risk a known harvest (traditional yield) for an uncertain gain in productivity.
Efforts to revolutionize agriculture with machines, cooperatives, and market controls have met with social resistance and technical failure in some areas. Similarly, efforts to improve handpowered systems with fertilizers, pesticides, and improved seeds generally have not produced food surpluses nor eased the burden of manual labor.
The search for agricultural technology that meets the needs and desires of both farmers and governments has led to increased interest in animal traction ("antrac"), sometimes called "light mechanization". Farmers, agronomists and agricultural extension services often cite the following advantages of using animal traction:
o It reduces the difficulty of labor and makes farming a more appealing occupation. Farmers who might seek employment in other areas are encouraged to develop existing skills and abilities and improve operations.
o It increases productivity. Replacing handhoes with draft animals and equipment, farmers
can double or triple the area cultivated, thereby increasing crop yields.
o It is affordable technology. Animals and equipment are low in cost compared to tractors. With careful planning and application, the investment can pay for itself in a few years. Low-interest loans are often available through government or sponsoring agencies.
o Animals and equipment can be supplied locally, creating less dependence on external resources than tractors and other machinery. Tractors need fossil fuels, spare parts, and maintenance know-how which may not be available to farmers.
o Used on a small scale, it does not require radical changes in cropping patterns or the role of family or hired labor. Although it does reduce manpower needs in some field operations, the reduction is not drastic and labor can shift to other activities like planting, spraying, harvesting and caring for animals and harness.
o It creates work opportunities. The use of animal traction can stimulate the development of artisan resources, increasing jobs for local blacksmiths, carpenters, and leather-makers who produce needed equipment. It also creates work in the areas of transport, waterpulling, and till
age on a contract basis. (Farmers can hire out their teams and equipment.) Often new opportunities arise in marketing and agro-industry.
o It encourages livestock production and development of meat, leather and byproduct markets.
<section>Some considerations</section>
While there are advantages to using animal traction, there are possible disadvantages. Changes in one part of the total agricultural system may affect other parts of that system; without planning, the change from handhoe to animal traction may have negative effects on farming families. National agricultural goals like increased production, market growth, and agroindustrial development may be offset by disruption of important traditions and values. Here are some reasons why farmers may prefer traditional techniques:
o New techniques can disrupt established labor patterns and family organization. Farmers who use animals to plow extra land, for example, also must use animals to weed it. However, inexperience, animal or equipment loss, or poor advice from extension agents could leave farmers unable to perform mechanical weeding. The burden would then fall on their families.
o Surplus cropping may complicate traditional patterns of wealthsharing among family and friends. Farmers may be wary of jealousy, criticism, or demands that may result from increased production and selling of surpluses for individual gain.
o New technology can increase farmer reliance on outside technical assistance. Sometimes limited supplies, ineffective delivery chains, and absence of skilled agricultural and veterinary extension personnel have made it difficult for farmers to use animal traction successfully.
<section>How can animal traction be used?</section>
Animal traction farm technology can be adapted to meet the requirements of individual farmers. Nearly all manual tillage operations, such as hauling (by wagon), water-lifting, skidding (logging), and threshing, can employ animal power.
Animal traction can be used to complement ongoing manual operations or replace them entirely. Usually, mechanization of one operation requires mechanization of some others. In parts of Africa, for example, farmers plowing additional land using animals also have to mechanize weeding, because manual laborers don't have time to weed the extra crops. Harvesting and threshing, however, are done by hand because dry weather preserves crops, giving farmers time to complete these operations by hand.
As farmers increase productivity and earn capital, they are able to purchase more animals and equipment. Eventually, they may replace animal power with engine power.
But animal traction is not just for farmers who want to expand production. It is also for those who could or would farm if they did not have to do it by hand. While the logistics of financing equipment and technical assistance forces programs to concentrate on farmers who expand operations and stimulate markets, it should be clear that farmers who support themselves and their families contribute to the overall stability of national economies. The importance of this very fundamental view of animal traction economics becomes clearer as growing numbers of young people leave farms seeking an easier way of life in the cities. Animal traction technology can reverse this process by giving farmers tools that make their occupation secure and productive.
<section>Before beginning: what do you need to know?</section>
This manual is a practical guide to the selection, care, and training of draft animals, and to the equipment and field techniques used in animal-powered farming systems.
It is also a guide to animal traction extension, describing how instructors can teach these skills to farmers and other agents. Many animal traction programs offer special incentives and services to farmers willing to try new methods. These may include farm planning, financial assistance programs, veterinary and artisan support systems, marketing systems, and equipment supply and distribution procedures. Instructors must be familiar with these services and able to explain them to farmers.
Successful animal traction begins with farmers who understand and appreciate the value of draft
animals and who treat them with care and kindness. Instructors can help new farmers most, perhaps, by showing them what to expect from their animals, and what the animals need in return.
<section>2. Draft animal selection</section>
Farmers must be able to select the animal or animals most appropriate for their needs. The animals they choose must be culturally acceptable, trainable, maintainable, and profitable within the overall farm plan. It is also important that the animal be available locally, since these animals are already adapted to local feeds and climate and are likely to be resistant to diseases in the region. Of course, farmers should choose healthy animals from strong stock. In some areas, farmers must consider social or religious traditions which restrict the ownership or use of animals.
In this chapter the word "bovine" applies to cattle (or cows) and the word "equine'' refers to horses and horse-like animals (donkeys and mules).
<section>Popular draft animals</section>
Oxen
The most commonly-used draft animals are cattle. Among cattle oxen are often preferred, because they are well-muscled and have good temperaments. An ox is a bull which has been castrated and trained to pull loads, but the term is sometimes used to describe a working cow. In this manual, "ox" will refer to animals of either sex. Some stockmen define oxen by age as well, distinguishing them from younger "bullocks" by their full mouths (present at four years of
age.) Oxen are well-adapted to savanna and forest-savanna lands. Their use in rain forest zones has been restricted by disease, most notably trypanosomiasis, or bovine sleeping sickness.
Donkeys
In arid areas, the cost of maintaining cattle is often too great to make oxen a feasible source of farm power. Donkeys are better suited to these climates and often supply sufficient power for the kind of agriculture practiced. Donkeys are popular draft animals because they are inexpensive (often less than half the price of oxen on the live market), easy to train, and effective where shallow breaking rather than overturning of the soil is all that is needed before planting begins. The use of light equipment and the improvement of husbandry techniques has made it increasingly clear that donkeys are an important source of farm power.
Horses
Horses, by contrast, have not been popular draft animals in some areas of the world, notably West Africa. Horses can be more expensive to feed than bulls because they are not ruminant animals and therefore use roughage less efficiently. While they theoretically provide more power than bulls, horses do not deliver a sustained tractive, or pulling, effort under difficult conditions. However, horses are much faster than oxen.
Mules
Mules found in Africa are rarely used for draft purposes. Like horses, mules are expensive to feed. But where they are culturally acceptable (because they are a crossbreed, they are considered unclean by some Muslims), they have great potential. They have the intelligence and sure-footedness of the donkey and the strength of the horse, and are easily harnessed. A mule is a cross between a male donkey (jack) and a female horse (mare). The male offspring of this cross, called a horse mule, is always sterile, while the female offspring, or mare mule, is usually infertile. The female donkey, known as a jennet or jenny, is rarely bred with the male horse, or stallion. However, their offspring, the macho (male) and hinny (female), are basically indistinguishable from mules, and are good work animals.
Camels
Camels are used as pack animals through much of the Sahara. In Mauritania, Niger, Chad, Mali and Senegal they are used to supply power for drawing water; occasionally they are used to draw plows or light weeding implements. For information on husbandry and use of camels as draft animals, see page 234.
Buffalo
The domestic buffalo is used extensively as a draft animal in Asia; less commonly in Egypt and the Near East. Attempts have been made to cross Asian domestic and African wild breeds, but in each instance the resulting population succumbed to disease. Some researchers feel that futher experiments will prove the value of importing and breeding the animal in Africa, as its milk, meat, and labor potentials are high. Today experimental herds are maintained in Mozambique and Tanzania. Buffalo work at a slower rate than oxen, but are generally considered to be stronger and better adapted to wet terrain.
Except for camels, any of the animals mentioned above can be trained and harnessed using the methods described in the chapter on training.
<section>Determining power requirements</section>
Before attempting to determine the kind and number of animals required for any particular farm, animal owners should be familiar with the concepts of pulling (draft) capacity and power. They should also consider the work characteristics of draft animals.
Draft
In order to move any object, an animal must exert a force equal to the weight or resistance of that abject. For example, it takes 50 kilograms (kg) of force to move a 50kg log. If the movement is accomplished by pulling, rather than by lifting, or carrying, the force is called draft.
The draft capacity of an animal increases with its weight. A generally accepted rule is that an animal can exert a constant pull on a load which equals approximately one-tenth of its body weight. The rule applies when the animal is allowed to assume a natural pace and expected to produce an extended rather than a concentrated effort. A 300-kg bull, for example, can pull a 30-kg log all day, but if it is made to pull 130 kg, it will work only three or four hours before it tires. If it is made to pull at a faster pace, it also will tire sooner.
A draft animal must be able to produce bursts of extra force as well as work at a steady pace. Under normal conditions, 30 kg of force may be required to pull a log, but if it must be dragged up a hill, or if the log catches in a gully, the force needed (draft requirement) increases. Horses, mules and oxen are preferred draft animals because they can pull loads over long distances at reasonable speeds and, when necessary, provide extra pulling capacity.
Power
Power is the combination of pulling capacity and speed, or pace. Under normal conditions, a large horse will pull a 150-pound (lb) load at a steady rate of 2-1/2 miles per hour (mph). This rate of work is defined as one horsepower (hp). A bull of the same weight, pulling the same load, will assume a normal pace of 1-1/2 mph. At the end of an eight-hour day, the horse will have moved the load further, or produced more work than the bull, and is thus said to be more powerful than the bull.
Tests have shown that light horses, bulls, buffalo, mules and camels all provide about threequarters horsepower, cows about onehalf horsepower, and donkeys onethird horsepower. But it must be remembered that these are the rates at which the animals normally deliver force, not the maximum force they can produce in a given instant. In pulling tests, horses have, for several seconds, exerted pulls up to twice their weight and bulls have
pulled up to their actual weight. But the intensity of such efforts uses up the animal's strength and reduces the total time it is able to work.
Work Characteristics
Animals vary not only in their ability to pull loads, but also in the number of hours they will work. In the tropics, breeds of oxen will pull between one-seventh and onetenth of their weight for four to five hours per day. Donkeys will pull about one-fifth of their weight for three to four hours. In tests performed in Africa, bulls worked longer when the load was decreased slightly and the work done in two sessions, two to three hours in the morning and two to three hours in late afternoon. Donkeys refused to work beyond three or four hours regardless of how the work was distributed and in spite of a reduction in the size of the load.
(Source: CEEMAT, Manuel de Culture avec Traction Animale. 1968.)
<section>General rules concerning power requirements</section>
The above information, qualified by the following rules, makes it possible to determine the kind and number of draft animals needed to power various field operations:
o Given the soil conditions of a region, the weight of the implement to be used and the average depth at which the implement will work, the animal(s) must be able to deliver, for an extended period of time, a force equal to and preferably more than the total resistance, or draft requirement of the work. Tables 1 and 2 gives the draft requirements of various field implements.
o Work that requires frequent "peak efforts" (pulling a plow through rooted or rocky soil; pulling a cart over hilly terrain) tires animals quickly. The operator must compensate by reducing the length of the work day, reducing the intensity of the work (for example, taking smaller cuts with the plow), or providing frequent rests. The alternative is to increase the number of animals used.
o Individual animals do not pull to capacity when hitched in pairs or multiple arrangements. Tests have shown that the individual is 7.5 percent less efficient when it works within a pair. The percentage increases to 15, 22, 30 and 37 percent when the animal works in a team of three, four, five and six animals, respectively.
o As the line of pull is lowered (or as the angle between the line of pull and the ground becomes more acute), less power is needed to move the load. Donkeys and short-legged cattle can produce more power than their weight would indicate because they are closer to the ground.
o Animals deliver maximum performance only when the harness (yoke, collar or breastband) is properly fitted and provides a broad, smooth surface against which to push. Test evidence suggests that bovine animals can deliver 2550 percent more horsepower when harnessed in a breastband or collar rather than a yoke. The difference is explained in the lower point of draft, the increased comfort of the harness, and in the fact that the animal pushes against a much larger surface area.
o Animals must be in good health and properly trained.
<section>Method for determining size of the hitch</section>
A basic approach to determining the kind and number of animals required is to estimate the maximum power the farmer will need and then calculate the size of the animal or team of animals that could supply it. The combination of animals that will satisfy the farmer's power needs is called a hitch. The size of the hitch can be determined by using the tables below, or by making the calculations found in Appendix A.
Table 2 gives the draft requirements of various field operations. Remember that the draft requirement is the amount of power needed to pull an implement through the soil.
Tables 3 and 4 give the amount of power donkeys and bulls, respectively, can deliver in relation to their body weight and number of individuals in the hitch.
To determine the kind of hitch needed, first find the draft requirement of the most difficult operation to be performed (Tables 1 and 2). Use Tables 3 and 4 to find which size animal or combination of animals will deliver this amount of power. Then determine the weights of the available animals to match animal power to draft requirements.
For example:
Difficulty of work-The most difficult field operation will be plowing fairly light soils during the rainy season with a single moldboard plow. The farmer's fields are old (have been cultivated the previous season) and plowing depth will not exceed 15 centimeters (cm).
Draft requirements-According to Table 1 about 70 kg of pulling power are needed to do this kind of work.
Hitch options-Tables 3 and 4 can be used to determine two hitches that would satisfy the draft requirement:
1) two 300-kg bulls (69.5 kg of power or draft)
2) four 110-kg donkeys (69 kg of power or draft).
*See Chapter 7 for a description of these operations and implements.
Choice of hitch-The decision is made based on these criteria: availability of animals, cost of animals, daily work potential of animals, cost of harness, and availability and cost of feed.
If they are available and the farmer can afford them, bulls are generally the best choice because they will work longer hours per day and they require less harness equipment. Bulls weighing less than 300 kg each could be used if they were harnessed in breastbands or collars rather than in a yoke. Animals can deliver more of their potential power when working in these types of harnesses.
If animals to be used are of the same size, match draft requirement to figure in TOTAL columns. For example, an animal owner could meet a requirement of 56 kg of power by using two 150-kg donkeys, three 110-kg donkeys, or four small animals of 90 kg apiece.
If animals are of different sizes, use single animal column for any size hitch, and add individual power together to get hitch total.
<section>Determining weights of animals</section>
To determine an animal's weight, first measure the length of the animal from point of shoulder to point of rump (A-B) and the circumference of its torso at point of heart (C) with a tape or rope. (See the drawing on page 20.) When taking the torso or girth measurement, observe these rules:
o Measure in the morning before the animal drinks. Don't give it hay the night before.
o Have the animal stand squarely with its head in a normal position.
o Pull the tape snugly around the torso, at the smallest circumference behind the shoulders.
Next, follow these formulas:
For bovine animals
Substitute measurements A-B (length) and C (circumference of torso at point of heart, or girth) into this formula:
(girth x girth x length)/300 = weight
For this formula, measurements must be taken in inches. If a metric tape or rope/rule is used to measure the animal, centimeters must be converted to inches before the formula can be used. One inch = 2.54 cm.
Example:
Girth of bull measures 152 cm, length measures 135 cm.
152/2.54 = 60 inches (girth)
135/2.54 = 53 inches (length)
(60 x 60 x 53)/300 = 636 lbs
Since one kg = 2.2 lbs, the weight of the animal in kg is obtained by dividing 2.2 into the answer above (636 lbs).
636/2.2 = 289 kg
The bull weighs 636 lbs or 289 kg.
An alternate method for estimating the weight of a steer (castrated bull):
Live weight o 1.04 [27.5758 x heart girth) -1.04967]
Substitute measurements A-B (length) and C (girth) into this formula:
(girth x girth x length)/300 + 50 lbs = weight
Measurements must be taken in inches, or converted into inches, before the formula is used.
Example:
Donkey's girth measures 37 inches, donkey's length measures 35 inches.
(37 x 37 x 35)/300 + 50 = weight of donkey
160 + 50 = 210 lbs
If the animal's weight is to be expressed in kg,
210/2.2 = 95 kg
The donkey weighs 210 lbs or 95 kg.
<section>Selection of individual draft animals</section>
Once farmers decide what kind of draft animal will be used, they must be able to choose individual animals which are sound and trainable and have a considerable work expectancy and resale value. Selecting a good draft animal is a matter of evaluating both physical and behavioral attributes. Age, sex, conformation (shape), and temperament are helpful criteria for judging a draft animal's value. The farmer's total animal needs must be noted when judging an individual animal. If it is to be used as a pair, it should be roughly the same age and size as its work mate, and should be the same sex.
Age of Bovine Animals
Ideally, farmers should raise their own draft cattle or purchase them when they are very young. This allows the farmers to provide proper nutrition during the critical growth stage as well as to observe and shape the animal's behavior long before it is put to work.
Oxen are normally put to work between the ages of three and four years. They may be trained at two to three years of age and given light work for a season. However, before the age of three, oxen have little power, and hard work can stunt their growth or cause abnormal development of bone and muscle. After the age of four, animals may be difficult to handle and train; they must be broken of old habits before their power can be used.
Although oxen can work until they are 12 or older, many farmers prefer to sell them as soon as their work capacity tapers off. A common practice is to work oxen hard until age seven or eight, use them as a reserve or alternate animal (or pair) for a season or two, and then sell them for butchering.
When buying an ox, the purchaser can determine the animal's age by counting its teeth. Because the approach of an unfamiliar person may cause the animal to shy or to struggle, it is best to have the owner open the animal's mouth. Otherwise restrain the animal and pry open the mouth by pulling up on the nostrils and down on the lower jaw.
Age of Equine Animals Recommended ages for training and working equine animals are very similar to those outlined for cattle. However, in practice, these animals are worked until they are older because their meat is less valuable. The age of a horse, donkey or mule can be determined by comparing the animal's mouth to the diagrams on the following page. As the animal grows older, the enamed wears off the tooth, giving it a smooth, white grinding surface (the dark center disappears). The teeth grow longer and begin to slant; the entire mouth elongates. Compare the side views of the four-and thirtyyear-old horse and note the increased pointing of the jaw. The correct method for opening the animal's mouth is as follows:
o Place the palm of one hand under the animal's jaw;
o Insert the thumb and middle finger into the animal's mouth on either side of the lower jaw, at a point behind the teeth;
o Rub or press the gums with these fingers; this will cause the animal to open its mouth; o Grasp the tongue with the other hand, pull the tongue out, and hold it to one side so that teeth can be seen.
Sex of Bovine Animals
Sex has a bearing on the power and temperament of draft animals. As a rule males tend to be bigger, more powerful, and more difficult to train than females. Females have less endurance and, of course, cannot be used when they are carrying or nursing young. Studies of African cattle have shown that within the same breed and age bracket, males tend to be 50-100 kg heaver than females and can work twice as long during a given day
(bulls, five to six hours; cows, two to three hours). Studies from temperate zones show more pronounced differences in size and power.
Such evidence makes it clear that there is an advantage to using male animals. However, the males of some breeds of cattle and buffalo have proven particularly difficult to train. In these circumstances, the animals are castrated at the age of one and a half years in order to make them more docile. There is disagreement about the value of castration, however. Some farmers feel that this makes the animals lazy or interferes with their physical development. Tests have substantiated that castrating eight-month-old calves retards their growth. Other tests, comparing two-year-old cas-bated and entire male buffaloes, showed that the animals performed equally well. Castration also limits a small farmer's ability to raise his own stock, especially if he owns only a few animals.
Sex of Equine Animals
Castrated horses or donkeys (geldings) are preferred over stallions because they are eventempered and manageable in the presence of females. Female horses, mules and donkeys are nearly as powerful as males and geldings, but are known for their stubbornness and unpredictable moods.
<section>Conformation</section>
Conformation refers to the form or shape of an animal. An an