<title>Teaching conservation in developing nations</title>
Prepared by
Judith Brace
and
Ralph R. White
and Stephen C. Bass
Illustrated by
Anne Brace
with special display illustrations by
Kathleen R. Rafferty
A cooperative project, sponsored jointly by Peace Corps
and the National Audubon Society.
Peace Corps
Information Collection & Exchange
Manual M0007
INFORMATION COLLECTION & EXCHANGE
Peace Corps' Information Collection & Exchange (ICE) was established so that the strategies and technologies developed by Peace Corps Volunteers, their co-workers, and their counterparts could be made available to the wide range of development organization and individual workers who might find them useful. Training guides, curricula, lesson plans, project reports, manuals and other Peace Corps-generated materials developed in the field are collected and reviewed. Some are reprinted "as is"; others provide a source of field based information for the production of manuals or for research in particular program areas. Materials that you submit to the Information Collection & Exchange thus become part of the Peace Corps' larger contribution to development.
Information about ICE publications and services is available through:
The Peace Corps Internet Web Site address:
http://www.peacecorps.gov
Please note the new Peace Corps Mailing Address from July 1998 on is:
ICE/ Peace Corps
1111 20th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20526
USA
Add your experience to the ICE Resource Center. Send materials that you've prepared so that we can share them with others working in the development field. Your technical insights serve as the basis for the generation of ICE manuals, reprints and resource packets, and also ensure that ICE is providing the most updated, innovative problem-solving techniques and information available to you and your fellow development workers.
<section>Contents</section>
About this manual...
Reply form...
Foreword
Introduction
Chapter 1: The self-contained conservation education center
Planning
The building
Landscaping
The nature trail
Conservation demonstration area
Outdoor exhibits
Exhibits
Signs and labels
The conservation education center in shared facilities
Source materials - Chapter 1
Chapter 2: Conservation education in a school
A school conservation education outline
1. First Year: Looking at Your Environment
2. Second Year: Change in the Natural World
3. Third Yeah: How Environment Differ
4. Fourth Yeah: Talking Care of Natural Resources
5. Fifth Year: Use of Natural Resources
6. Sixth Year: Responsibility for Environmental Conservation
Conservation science fair
Source materials - Chapter 2
Chapter 3: Conservation education in a health center
Nutrition
Sanitation
Health
Source material - Chapter 3
Chapter 4: Conservation education in an agricultural extension center
Soil conservation
Erosion
Erosion control methods
Results of erosion
Control of nutrient loss
Source materials - Chapter 4
Chapter 5: Conservation education in a community center
Cooperative programs
Leadership training
The community environment
Source materials - Chapter 5
Appendix A: Exhibit and study materials
Visitor participation exhibits
Suggested exhibits
Collections for exhibit and study
Visual aids for exhibits
Display poster - Life pyramid/food chain
Introduction to concepts
Concepts about the ecosystem
Concepts about populations
Population poster
Concepts about water, soil and air
Studies about soil
Studies about water
Studies about the sun's energy
Studies about plants
Source materials - Appendix A
Appendix B: Nature Trails
Purpose of a Natural Trail
Characteristic of a Nature Trail
Constructing a nature trail
Features proposed for labeling and explanation along a nature trail in South East Asia
Source materials - Appendix B
Appendix C: Landscaping
Suggestions
Compost
Transplanting
How to select and collect seeds
Growing seeds
Suggested site plan
Source materials - Appendix C
Appendix D: Signs, labels and guides
Signs
Labels
Guides
A suggested nature trail guide for Guatopo national park, Venezuela
Source materials - Appendix D
Appendix E: Public facilities
Rest stops
Picnic areas
Latrine facilities
A calabash washstand
Parking
Source materials - Appendix E
Appendix F: Live animals
The collection
Aquariums
1. A freshwater aquarium
2. A marine aquarium
Terrariums
Ants
Earthworms
Cardboard insect box
Mammal cages
An outdoor bird attraction
Source materials - Appendix F
Appendix G: Endangered species
A school program
A community program
Endangered animals of selected countries
Source materials - Appendix G
Selected organizations concerned with conservation education
Selected environmental research centers
Glossary
<section>About this manual...</section>
Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations
is a how-to manual. It is designed as a working tool for Peace Corps Volunteers and other development workers: the suggestions which have been presented for conservation education activities or centers can be adapted as appropriate to any job or setting. The purpose of the manual is to help Volunteers and others to incorporate conservation education into their day-to-day community activities, and to suggest resources for those who choose to become more deeply involved in any aspect of environmental education.
The Preparation of Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations has been a cooperative project sponsored jointly by the Peace Corps and the National Audubon Society. The publication was initially undertaken by Ralph R. White and Stephen C. Bass for the National Audubon Society. Mr. White, while a Peace Corps Volunteer in Thailand, was instrumental in the development of a Nature Education and Wildlife Center for the Royal Thai Forestry Department. He subsequently worked at the National Audubon Society with Mr. Bass, naturalist/planner, and Kathleen R. Rafferty, cartographer/illustrator, to adapt his experience for other centers in developing nations. Their original document was then submitted to the Peace Corps information Collection and Exchange, which undertook to expand and adapt it for broader use, with the assistance of writer/editor Judith Brace and illustrator Anne Brace.
Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations is the seventh manual in the "Appropriate Technologies for Development" series being published by the Peace Corps. Since 1961 Peace corps Volunteers have worked at the grassroots level in countries around the world in program areas such as agriculture, public health, and education. Before beginning their two-year assignments, Volunteers are given training in cross cultural, technical and language skills. This training helps them to live and work closely with the people of their host countries. It helps them to live and work closely with the people of their host countries. It helps them, too, to approach development problems with new ideas that make use of locally available resources and that are appropriate to the local cultures.
Recently the Peace Corps established an information Collection and Exchange so that these ideas developed during service in the field could be made available to the wide range of development workers who might find them useful. Materials from the field are now being collected, reviewed, and classified in the information Collection and Exchange system. The most useful materials are being shared as widely as possible. The information Collection and Exchange provides an important source of field-based research materials for the production of ''Appropriate Technologies for Development" manuals such as Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations.
Note to the Reader
Due to the high demand for this publication, it has been reprinted without revision (e.g., selected organizations). Updates to the manual are now in progress.
- May 1997
Contributors...
Judith Brace, co-author of Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations, has written and edited a variety of reports and articles on conservation, environmental planning, and urban affairs. She has also conducted research projects in comparative education in several developing nations.
Ralph R. White served as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Thailand, where he worked with the Royal Thai Forestry Department. He subsequently worked at the National Audubon Society, and co-authored the manual, based on his experiences in Thailand.
Stephen C. Bass, who helped to research and co-author the manual, has served as a naturalist/planner for the National Audubon Society Nature Center Planning Division.
Anne Brace, who provided the illustrations for the manual, is currently studying at Scripps College, Claremont, California. Ms. Brace has provided illustrations for a variety of publications; her most recent work is in the field of animation.
Kathleen R. Rafferty, who prepared the special display illustrations for the manual, is a cartographer for the National Audubon Society Nature Center Planning Division.
Many thanks are also due to Brian Bedell and William J. Manly of the National Audubon Society, James A. Sherburne of the Smithsonian institute, and Richard A. Saunier of the inter-American Development Bank, for their technical review of materials in this publication.
<section>Reply form...</section>
For your convenience, a reply form has been provided on the following page. Please send it in and let us know how the manual has helped or can be made more useful. If the reply form is missing from the manual, just write your comments, suggestions, descriptions of problems, etc., on a piece of paper and send them to: CONSERVATION EDUCATION; Peace Corps information Collection and Exchange; 806 Conn. Ave.; Washington D.C. 20525; U.S.A.
PLEASE RETURN THIS FORM
NOTE TO THE USER: This manual was published because the Peace Corps and the National Audubon Society wish to help in an area of growing worldwide interest. In order to provide the most effective help, the preparers of the manual need to know how it is being Used, or how you feel it could better serve your needs. Please fill in the following form and return it to:
Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations
Peace Corps/ICE, 8th Floor
1990 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20526 U.S.A.
WHEN WE RECEIVE THIS FORM, WE WILL AUTOMATICALLY PLACE YOUR NAME ON A MAILING LIST SO THAT YOU WILL RECEIVE:
*Updates and/or additions and corrections to the manual, as they become available; and
*Notice of other publications which may be of interest to you.
If you have questions on the material presented in the manual, or if you run into problems implementing the suggestions offered here, please note them in the space provided. Use additional paper if you have to, in order to be as specific as you can about the problem. Wherever possible, we will try to provide you with or direct you to an answer.
Date
Your name
Your company or agency, if any
Your address
1. How did you find out about the Peace Corps/National Audubon Society Teaching Conservation in Developing Nations manual? How did you get your copy?
2. Which parts of the manual have you found most useful? Least useful? Why?
3. Did you find the manual easy to read, too simple or too complex, complete or incomplete?
4. How has this manual helped your work? What have you done to apply the information?
5. Can you recommend additional information which you feel should be included in a new edition of the manual?
6. What were your successes using the manual or implementing any of the suggestions? Problems? Please describe completely.
7. Do you have other recommendations?
Privacy Act Notice
: Furnishing the information requested herein is completely voluntary. It is requested under authorities contained in the Peace Corps Act (22USC 2501 et seq.). The only uses which will be made of this information are as follows: 1) For management purposes involving the format of future issues of this publication; 2) For incorporation in a mailing list for this and other similar publications.
<section>Foreword</section>
The natural resources of any country---its land, its rivers, its forests, and the like---are crucial to supplying the population with such basic necessities as food, water, and energy.
Unfortunately, human activities, particularly in the sectors of agriculture and forestry, often involve the destruction of these resources. Clearing of land for grazing and crop production, when followed by over-grazing oh improper agricultural practices, leads to a never-ending need to clear more, and often less stable, land. Such overutilization and deforestation of land (especially if combined with a rapid increase in human population and the demands that accompany such an increase) destroys the ecosystems necessary to human survival, silting up rivers, destroying watersheds, rendering soil unproductive, and ultimately leading to famine and the spread of disease.
This does not mean that land should not be developed to meet basic human needs. What it does mean, however, is that there is an immediate need to balance planning for development with conservation practices. Reforestation, rotational grazing, management of domestic herds, watershed management, development of alternative protein and renewable energy sources, improvement of sanitation, and wildlife management are a few of the ways in which natural resources can be used wisely or restored.
Before people will accept any of these methods as necessary, however, they must have an awareness of the environment and an understanding
of the reasons for conservation of natural resources. This manual, it is hoped, will provide Peace Corps Volunteers and other field workers with ideas, activities, and resources for incorporating conservation education into their day-to-day community activities. For awareness and understanding stimulated by conservation education can lead to interest, participation, and, hopefully, action on the part of people who are becoming more and more dependent upon the sound use of their own natural resources.
James A. Sherburne
Program Manager
Smithsonian/Peace Corps Environmental Program
<section>Introduction</section>
People will not preserve and protect a natural environment which they do not understand or respect. When people learn about the relationship of all forms of life to each other and to the earth, they begin to have a responsible attitude toward natural resources and their wise use.
The goal of conservation education is to lead the public through a series of steps about nature, land and natural resources. These are:
- awareness
- understanding
- respect
- responsibility
- action
The purpose of this manual is to show that conservation education can be presented in a variety of ways and in a variety of situations, and that there is no single method of presentation. The ideas which are presented here are to stimulate your own ideas which will relate to your own situation. It is generally easier if you have a physical setting such as a government building, a school, a community or other local center in which to present an on-going conservation education program by means of pictures and posters, exhibits and collections, films and discussions. This manual has been structured around this kind of setting.
The manual begins with a Chapter dealing with a self-contained conservation education center in order to give you the broadest possible range of ideas that could be used in presenting conservation education. Although you may not be planning this sort of center, as you read the Chapter look for general ideas which you could use in other ways. The Chapters which follow tell of ways in which a conservation education program can be incorporated into your activities if you are working in a school, a health center, an agricultural extension center or other community services. Again, as you read these Chapters, look for ideas you can use. The Appendices help you to carry out specific suggestions which are presented in the Chapters; at the end of the manual there is a list of places which can provide you with further information, and a Glossary of the environmental words used in the manual.
Do not
feel that it is necessary to have a formal setting in order to educate people about their environment. If you are a community leader, or a health or agricultural extension worker who visits several communities, you will find that many of the ideas presented in the manual can be adapted for informal presentation in your situation. If you are a school teacher, use the portions of the school conservation education program (Chapter 2) that are suitable to the needs of your school's community.
What is important is to start people thinking about how to improve their own lives by improving their natural environment. In addition to the ideas suggested in this manual, you might prepare a short daily message to be presented on the local radio to encourage people to start thinking about the practice of erosion control as a means to reduce crop loss (see Chapter 4). Or you might prepare a short weekly feature in the newspaper to tell which local animals are endangered, and why (see Appendix G).
All of these are ways to help you develop your community's interest and responsibility toward the environment. If you can bring an understanding of environmental interdependence to Just one area of community life, you have made a contribution to conservation as a whole.
<section>Chapter 1: The self-contained conservation education center</section>
A full-scale conservation education center consists of an interpretive building for visitors and an area of natural land with a trail for nature study.
The advantage of a full-scale conservation education center is that the entire facility can be planned around the directly visible and accessible characteristics of the local environment. Indoor exhibits explain and expand on what is seen out-of-doors. The outdoor trail demonstrates in a natural setting the interaction of the grasses, flowers, trees, fish, birds, insects, reptiles, mammals and geological features found there.
This kind of conservation education center aims for a complete presentation of the local environment and will include concepts which reflect the various specialized relationships of the region. If, for example, lack of water is a major environmental factor, study can focus on the inter-related effect this has on the soil, on the adaptation of plant and animal life, and on health and food problems.
<section>Planning</section>
If you are planning a full-scale conservation education center, you are probably working with a government agency and will have the technical assistance as well as financial support necessary for this major effort.
The land selected for use by the conservation education center will probably be part of an existing reserve of government land. If possible, considerations in the selection of the center's site should include:
1. ease of access by visitors;
2. variety of land features: water, open space, wooded area, land formations;
3. variety of wildlife population.
A desirable minimum site size for a full-scale center is 10 hectares. If a conservation education center is being considered within a city's limits, and a site this large is not to be found, it may be possible to use several smaller sites with each section assigned a different conservation education use.
Your site layout should be the result of careful preliminary planning to determine the kind of facilities you will offer. Will you be visited by school classes, by people in buses or cars, by hikers or picnickers? Will the nature trail be for general study only or will you want to include additional smaller trails which study a single feature, such as geology?
In its broadest form, a conservation education center could include not only the interpretive building and trail, but also a small-scale farm or natural resources management area where government technicians could demonstrate effective conservation practices for agriculture, such as:
Soil conservation practices
Compost pile
Forest management practices
Crop storage
Reforestation
Well with pump or windlass
Small vegetable garden
Smoke house
Pond for fish cultivation
Honey bee hive
Once you have decided what the conservation education center will provide for its visitors, you can then make a site plan to place each facility in the most desirable spot.
The Nature Trail (See Appendix B. Nature Trails) should link the most interesting natural features of the site.
The Interpretive Building should be located at the point of departure and return of the nature trail loop.
Picnic, Latrine and Parking facilities (see Appendix E, Public Facilities) should be located near the interpretive building.
Wherever facilities are provided, make it a point to do as little damage to the site as possible. Plan carefully to avoid cutting trees, to avoid excess earth-moving, to avoid unnecessary destruction of ground cover. Practice conservation techniques to reduce erosion, such as re-channeling water drainage, filling depressions with stones or gravel, rebuilding worn-away banks and planting ground cover.
<section>The building</section>
In planning the building you must decide what kind of indoor facilities you will be able to offer. The basic need is for an interpretive room where the exhibits are located. The interpretive space should be large enough that you can use it for a group meeting room, or for showing slides or films, if these are available from a government service.
Wall space can be Used for graphics, posters and hanging exhibits; counter tops can hold collections, aquariums or terrariums. Cabinets can provide storage for alternate exhibits and materials which might be loaned to schools.
Will you be able to provide office space for the center's staff? Can you provide a small laboratory for staff use and student training? Can you provide a small library where conservation books, magazines, photographs and other resources could be made available to the public? Can you provide a workshop for preparation of exhibit and interpretive materials? Can you provide indoor toilet facilities?
A simple layout such as the one suggested in Figure 1 can be adapted according to your program and resources.
The building materials should be chosen to blend with the surroundings. A building which clashes with the environment does not demonstrate the basic conservation point that people are a part of nature and should work in harmony with it.
Construction information for concrete and bamboo is available in the Village Technology Handbook, or Bamboo as a Building Material (see Chapter Sources).
<section>Landscaping</section>
The landscaping of the conservation education center (see Appendix C, Landscaping) should be a careful effort to develop methods and plant materials which visitors can adapt for their own uses. In a region of few plant materials, landscaping may mean that you will work with rocks and gravel to achieve an attractive visual effect. Pots or cans of flowering plants or vegetables may be an effective substitute for ground plantings.
Where there are abundant local plant materials, make a selection based on foliage shapes and textures, leaf and flower colors, height or density. Variety and contrast are important elements in any setting.
The quality of the soil you have to work with is important to your success in landscaping. The soil can need improvement for its texture or for its fertility. Generally speaking, you can tell yourself if it is too sandy, if it is all clay, or if it lacks topsoil. An addition of decomposed organic matter (which you can make in a compost pile) will benefit the soil quality. To check on the fertility of the soil, it is advisable to have a soil sample analyzed by a government agricultural agency, to see what minerals are lacking, and which fertilizers can be added to correct the lack.
<section>The nature trail</section>
The Nature Trail (See Appendix B. Nature Trails) of the conservation education center provides the most effective tool for teaching environmental relationships. Through direct contact with the natural setting, and with the help of carefully planned interpretive labels and guides, the visitor will be able to understand the living process which can be seen, touched and heard along the trail.
When there is enough space and the habitat is suitable, trails which specialize in the interpretation of one aspect of the environment (geology, wildlife, plant life) can be planned as side loops off the main trail. Other possible ideas for trails are discussed in Appendix B.
Remember that the signs which you provide for the nature trail are to give guidance and direction, and the labels are to do the interpretive work. Each label should be planned so as to stress the relationship of the interpreted feature with another aspect of the environment. (See Appendix D, Signs & Labels).
An alternative to the system of labeling trailside features is to provide a printed guide. Features along the trail are identified with a number; the corresponding number in the guide tells about this feature. Sample trail guides are provided in Appendix B and Appendix D.
<section>Conservation demonstration area</section>
A conservation education center is an ideal place to demonstrate techniques to improve environmental conditions in your region. If space and technical personnel are available, an area where visitors can see how to plant and improve crops, make compost piles, store crops, cultivate fish, etc., can be of great benefit. Peace Corps Manuals for a number of possible projects are listed in the Chapter Sources.
The planning and layout of such an area should be incorporated in the initial conservation education center planning, to assure the best land use both initially and for future development. Consult with regional technical specialists to identify special conservation problems of the area which would benefit from a demonstration project of this sort. Be flexible, innovative and responsive to cooperative efforts, because benefits to people from the total environment is the goal of any conservation program.
<section>Outdoor exhibits</section>
You can take advantage of an outdoor area to provide a number of outdoor exhibits which can be entirely separate from the nature trail. Exhibits of this sort will provide additional variety and interest to your conservation education program.
You may want to consider:
- A pool for fish, turtles, frogs or waterplants if there is a small stream which could be dammed;
- a medicinal plant garden featuring local herbs which are medicinally useful;
- a bird bath;
- a soil profile made by exposing the side of a bank, or digging a pit, to show the various layers of soil;
- a rock collection of large rocks labelled as to their type, or simply grouped for their color or shape;
- a tree-ring exhibit with two pieces of a large tree trunk:
1. a sectional slice, sanded and waterproofed with varnish or an oil sealer, can be labeled to tell about the growth rings. Each ring represents a year - the outer ring is the most recent. Dry years have narrower rings than wet ones. Please note that in tropical regions, rings are not an accurate measurement of age.
2. A split section lengthwise of the tree trunk, treated in the same way, can be placed next to the slice to show how the grain of the wood is caused by the yearly growth rings.
- A grass demonstration in which a plot of ground is seeded to show various grasses for erosion control.
<section>Exhibits</section>
(See Appendix A, Exhibits & Study Materials)
The purpose of the exhibits in a conservation education center is to explain, describe and interpret the natural world outside the center. No exhibit or series of exhibits has to be permanent. Just as the natural world is constantly changing, the exhibits which explain this world should change. This means that expensive and elaborate permanent exhibits are not needed. What is important is the appropriateness of the exhibit to the local conditions and the clarity with which each condition is explained.
Charts, posters, maps, collections, specimens, small animal exhibits and visitor participation exhibits can all be done in a simple, clear fashion and organized so that each one reinforces the relationships you are trying to demonstrate.
A method of changing exhibits which you might consider is that of providing progressively more detailed information as your visitors become more informed about exhibit subjects. For example, the initial food cycle concept to begin with in conservation education is that of the "food chain" (see Appendix A). As your visitors' understanding of this concept grows, you can present new exhibit material which will demonstrate that the food chain is actually a "food web" that there are generally several consumers at each stage of the cycle, and that there is a "web" of inter-relationships among the eater and the eaten.
Here are some suggested themes around which to organize your exhibits:
- a food chain
- the role of predators
- relation of plants and animals to their environment
- life in a pond
- life in a forest
- life in the desert
- importance of wetlands
- the make-up of soil
- important rocks and minerals
- geological history
- wind and water erosion
- how a plant grows
- seeds and seedlings
- parasitism (both plant and animal)
- water and air pollution
To provide guidance as you plan the center's exhibits, you will find suggestions for using some of these themes in exhibits, collections and study materials, in Appendix A. As you survey the situation in your own region, you will know what suggestions can be used, which need to be adapted, and which are not applicable.
It is essential that your conservation education program be directly related to the visitor's environment. Broad general themes or problems which exist in another part of the world are not part of the step-by-step development of a basic understanding which you are trying to achieve.
In Appendix F you will find suggestions for various ways to keep live animals that you might exhibit in your conservation education center. Although live animals can provide a good deal of variety and interest to your exhibits, remember that even the smallest insects need attentive care for effective presentation. You must have clean, well-fed and healthy specimens for visitor viewing, otherwise your conservation message is defeated.
<section>Signs and labels</section>
Signs at the conservation education center (see Appendix D, Signs, Labels and Guides) will inform the visitor as to places, directions, distances, facilities and regulations. Interpretive needs are usually filled by labels, but a larger sign might identify an unusual tree or other unique feature.
The labels for your exhibits should do two things: (1) identify the object and (2) give the visitors information and an explanation about the object. Identification of an object is short and simple, but how much information and explanation you provide about an object should depend on the visitors' needs. You may feel that some labels should give a good deal of information. In that case, be sure that other labels give just a little information. You do not want to tire visitors by giving them more information than they can absorb. Their experience in the conservation education center should be not only educational, but pleasant.
<section>The conservation education center in shared facilities</section>
A conservation education center which is given space in an already existing park (or other governmental) building will be basically an exhibits center. It may be possible, however, if park land is available, to develop some outdoor exhibits, or even a nature trail (Appendix B). Since the indoor exhibits should reflect what is seen outdoors, it would be ideal if the planning for both could be done at the same time. However, if there is resistance to using any land for conservation education purposes, plan your exhibit space to interpret the environmental conditions which are plainly visible outdoors for all to see.
Your exhibits could explain erosion problems, the status of area wildlife, water pollution, the area's plant life, etc. As your center develops and gains acceptance, it may be possible to proceed with a program of labelling interesting and related features found in the park land.
EXHIBITS
The space which you are provided for a conservation education center will determine the extent of your exhibits. Do not crowd your space by trying to demonstrate more ideas than there is room for. It is much better to announce changing exhibits and to feature only a few exhibits at a time. Since exhibits which feature living plants, insects or other animals may not last too long, they make excellent short-term exhibits. (For further di