<title>Agricultural extension</title>
Peace Corps
INFORMATION COLLECTION & EXCHANGE
M0018
Agricultural Extension
by Michael J. Gibbons
and
Richard Schroeder
Peace Corps
Information Collection & Exchange
July 1983
M0018
This manual may be reproduced and/or translated in part or in full without payment or royalty. Please give standard acknowledgement.
Information collection & Exchange
Peace Corps' Information Collection & Exchange (ICE) was established so that the strategies and technologies developed by Peace Corps Volunteers, their co-workers and their counterparts could be made available to the wide range of development organizations and individual workers who might find them useful. Training guides, curricula, lesson plans, project reports. manuals and other Peace Corps-generated materials developed in the field are collected and reviewed. Some are reprinted "as is"; others provide a source of field based information for the production of manuals or for research in particular program areas. Materials that you submit to ICE thus become part of the Peace Corps' larger contribution to development.
Information about ICE publications and services is available through:
The Peace Corps Internet Web Site address:
http://www.peacecorps.gov
Please note the new Peace Corps Mailing Address from July 1998 on is:
ICE/ Peace Corps
1111 20th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20526
USA
Add your experience to the ICE Resource Center. Send materials that you have prepared so that we can share them with others working in the development field. Your technical insights serve as the basis for the generation of ICE manuals, reprints, and resource packets, and also ensure that ICE is providing the most up-to-date, innovative problem-solving techniques and information available to you and your fellow development workers.
<section>Acknowledgement</section>
The most significant contribution to this manual has been made by farmers who have educated extension workers about the process of change. Andrea Eykyn and Julia Simmons are the technicians who produced the text. Sue Cass executed the illustrations.
We also learned from a host of extension workers with whom we've worked in various settings. These include Tom Mester, Peter Menard, Dan Nagengast, David Leonard, David Yohalem and our counterparts overseas.
This manual is based in part on the extensive Agricultural Program manuals produced by Basico, Inc. for Peace Corps in 1970, and on our experience training numerous Peace Corps volunteers in agricultural extension.
Thanks also to Donna Frelick, Calvina Dupre and Franklin Moore for support and advice.
Michael
Gibbons
Rick Schroeder
<section>What is agricultural extension?</section>
<section>Peace corps and agricultural development</section>
For Peace Corps, development centers on building local capacity and self-reliance among those who need it most. Accordingly, Peace Crops promotes approximately 35 agricultural extension programs reaching small-scale farming families world-wide.
As agrarian nations, developing countries look to agriculture to stimulate long term economic development. In addition, population growth has kept pace with increased food production since 1960, leaving the world hunger problem unresolved. Inequitable food distribution systems and post-harvest losses maginfy the current food deficit. These issues add up to a crisis and a mandate for agriculture in developing countries.
Being the most numerous agricultural producers, small-farm families are deeply affected by such challenges. The situation is made more urgent by the inaccessibility of agricultural support services. This is due to the pervasive skewing of support services to larger and more productive producers.
Peace Corps Agricultural Extension Workers attempt to alleviate this crisis by reaching out specifically and personally to small-scale farming families in the manner described in this manual. This is consistent with Peace Corps' mandate to help those most in need. Extension workers foster effective two-way communication between farmers and support services in the role of facilitators. They help farmers develop a new sense of COMPETENT AUTONOMY, as they confront together the world that is changing around them.
<section>The small scale farmer</section>
First and foremost, each farmer and family is individual, uniquely struggling to respond to the various factors which affect their success in the process of adaptation called farming. Despite rich personal, local and regional diversity, however, these people share a number of important characteristics:
They are much more than just farmers. For example, they may be parents, religious or community leaders, masons, carpenters, healers, blacksmiths, truck drivers, etc. In these diverse roles, small-scale farmers participate in complex local religious, social and economic patterns and are subject to a wide range of demands from them. Due to influences from beyond the village, these farmers also have changing aspirations for material well-being, status, etc. Many have changing social identities too, moving from family, village and tribe or region membership toward national citizenship. They all are cultural beings and family members first.
Secondly, these are skilled and experienced farmers. They are experts in the local conditions affecting agriculture. They are practitioners of local agricultural and other technologies (e.g.-hoeing, plowing with oxen, making tools, etc.) In the face of change, they are also farmers in transition between traditional and newer agricultural practices. They are aware of outside inputs and new techniques. They seem to be open to producing a marketable or barterable surplus once family food needs are met.
Finally, small-scale farmers have economic concerns. They participate in local barter or subsistence economies, in which goods are either exchanged among neighbors or grown to be used at home. In these self-contained economies, farmers are not in the habit of investing in outside inputs or of using credit, except for meeting home needs. These farmers are usually limited to the family labor supply, or to d communal exchange of labor among neighbors. Most small-scale farmers operate as if they own or rent their land, as independent farmers, even though some are subject to tribal or community controls or to insecure tenancy.
Small-scale farmers share a village agricultural point of view. It is characterized by:
o A holistic outlook - Agriculture is a central activity, but it is only part of a whole, connected way of life. For example, things which can be contributed to farm work like money and labor are constantly required to meet other family needs as well. The village family allocates these resources by looking at the whole.
o Environmental Sensitivity - All farmers have to be extremely sensitive to their environments in order to survive. They sense from collective and individual observation what elements of the environment are critical to their success as farmers. They are particularly sensitive to cyclical things like rainfall and storm patterns. More than any one else, they know the mini-environments of their individual farms intimately.
o Local Focus - Small-scale farmers especially know a lot about local things and much less about regional, national or global things. Most of these farmers interests are local as well.
o Self Interest - Each small-scale farmer has a list of priorities that helps her make decisions. This list defines a farmer's self-interest, which is a central part of her worldview.
o Farmer's Bias - A farmer's view of things is colored by the physical and economic realities of farm work. These practical preoccupations are uppermost in a farmer's mind.
o Tradition, Fatalism and Adaptability to Change - Carrying out the tradition of farming is a normal and reliable habit of mind. This unchanging habit of mind is negatively reinforced by adverse outside opinions about village people like small-scale farmers. It has also been reinforced by the inability of tradition to contend with the new problems brought on by accelerated change. As a result, one of the extremes of a small-scale farmers point of view is a kind of fatalism and feeling of impotence amid rapid change. The other end of the spectrum is a real, though often latent openness and adaptability to change, for farming is a constant process of successful adaptation. Like other people, small-scale farmers are ambivalent towards change.
For small-scale farmers with all the above characteristics, change is not worthwhile unless it is:
o culturally appropriate
o in agreement with self-interest
o respectful of tradition
o clearly beneficial
o not economically risky
Elaborating on economic risk , John Guy Smith offered this description in 1970
"Farming is subject to numerous risks from weather, pests, diseases, price flunctuations and other uncertainties. For the small-scale farmer, these risks are accentuated by her precarious economic condition. Much of a small-scale farmer's supposed conservatium is really a very shrewd attempt to avoid or minimize risk.
For example, Yigi Kamara grows rice in Sierra Leone. Every year, he grows his crop during May to September, the rainy season. In August and September, while waiting for the harvest, the stores from the previous year dwindle, and there is a "hungry season". Yigi plants millet and cassava on a hillside in March and April to deal with this. In order to grow rice year round and perhaps even grow a surplus, Yigi is thinking of building gravity-fed ditches and dikes in a swamp near his hill farm. The work will take four months, from January to May. Is it worth the effort? If he doesn't plant millet or cassava, will there be enough food this "hungry season"? Can he afford a shovel? Will his family be able to harvest, thresh, store and grind all the expected new rice? Can he sell some to make it worthwhile? What will his neighbors say? What about the old stories about the dangers of working in the swamp?
Small-scale farmers like Yigi confront change as individual cultural beings, as practical farmers, and as economic producers. They have considerable resources which they bring to bear on the problems of agricultural production and livelihood in developing countries:
o Expertise in local technologies and a variety of practical skills (e.g. masonry, carpentry, etc.)
o Expertise regarding local conditions affecting farming
o Status as independent economic units
o Experience as farmers (tradition)
o A practical, critical viewpoint
o Adaptability
o Openness to producing a usable surplus
Their limitations include:
o Lack of capital beyond family supply
o Habit of not investing in or using credit or outside inputs.
o Interests and roles which compete with agriculture
o Little access to outside agricultural support services
o Reluctance to take risks
Along with these, however, there are factors from beyond the village which also limit the small-scale farmer's ability to deal with change. Most directed technological change, like the promotion of new practices, is based on the priorities and interests of development planners and leaders. This may exclude small-scale farmers or be irrelevant to their needs. Governments, development agencies and private businesses promote change this way. Examples may be mechanization or mono-cropping (cacao or sugar cane) which benefit large-scale farmers and foreign markets more than small-scale farmers.
Like Yigi, these small-scale farmers are the special clients of Peace Corps agricultural extension work. Given the unique nature of the problems they face, their strengths and their limitations, Peace Corps promotes a specific kind of agricultural extension designed especially to help small-scale farming families participate in the development process.
<section>Two way communication</section>
Agricultural Extension is effective two-way communication. It is the best way to include small-scale farming families in the process of directed change which has evolved as a response to the crisis which agriculture faces n developing countries. The formal framework within which most agricultural extension takes place is called the Farming Research - Extension Chain. The chain is an organized process which directs technological change.
In recent years, the rate of change has accelerated to the point that farmers can hardly keep up with researchers. Two-way communication between practical farmers and scientific researchers is often strained and one-sided. In the United States where the research-extension process of providing new ideas to farmers is based on a tradition of farmer participation and control, one-sided communication can be held in check. But in developing countries, the situation is different. The research extension process in these countries was established and directed by distant governments for colonial cash-cropping purposes. For example, vast tracts of traditional subsistence farmland in southern Sierra Leone were planted as cacao plantations in the 1940s and 1950s for export to Great Britain. As a result, farmers were given seed, fertilizer and other new inputs, and were told how to grow the cacao. farmers in developing countries like Sierra Leone do not communicate with researchers via
extension workers.
Now that the rate of change dictated by scientific research is accelerating, small-scale farmers can be left behind or ill-served by change.
Because Peace Corps wishes to include small-scale farming families in the change process, it emphasizes two way communication as its extension strategy. This manual outlines the skills and knowledge Volunteers need in order to practice this kind of extension work:
RESEARCH and PLANNING
Learning what farmers know, what they want, what the local situation is like and planning with local input.
PROVIDING AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT SERVICES (Direct/Indirect)
Providing the services farmers need in order to develop, and understanding the important difference between working FOR and working WITH farmers.
FARMER TRAINING METHODS
Understanding how farmers learn and carrying out appropriate training methods.
ORGANIZING COOPERATIVE ACTIVITY
Understanding how people work in groups and building local institutions that capacitate and support farmers.
MANAGEMENT
Integrating these steps into well planned, carried out and evaluated village projects.
These extension tasks are at first carried out in rough chronological order. The entire process is cyclical, however, and each step is regularly repeated to insure two-way communication. This manual describes each extension task, illustrates it, and provides tools for carrying it out in the field.
Volunteers working on agricultural extension programs facilitate the two-way communication which invites small-scale farming families into the process of development. By doing so, Volunteers help develop the capacity and local self-reliance of those who need it most.
<section>Research and planning</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
An extension worker enters a community gradually. As an outsider she must first meet personal needs to establish social contacts with her neighbors and orient herself to her physical surroundings. Professional objectives are addressed later when the extension worker is more at ease in her interactions with the people she works with and can more carefully focus on agricultural practices and community problems. Regardless of the type of information being sought, however, an extension agent clearly establishes herself upon entering a community as one who is willing and able not to teach, but to learn.
Small scale farmers in developing countries have not traditionally had full access to extension services. There exists accordingly an acute lack of information as to how to make those services conform to small farmer needs. The extension worker assuming a learner's posture is one step toward bridging that gap. In order to complete the chain, villagers must step into the role of educators.
That villagers act as cross-cultural mentors of extensionists is assumed. What may be more significant is the vital function farmers can serve as historians and skilled practitioners of farming methods in a given area. When a small farmer educates an extension agent about what has happened in the past on her farm, the agent can help the farmer begin choosing appropriate steps to make improvements.
The information an extension agent gathers at the outset of an extension effort is based on a 'reality', a set of circumstances or perhaps an event. It is important to note that different individuals may interpret the same 'reality' in radically different ways. A jar is either half full or it is half empty; a harvest is either better than some years or worse than others.
Individual farmers' perspectives vary, and an outsider must be concerned with checking information gathered against independent sources. A similar check is warranted with regard to the extension worker himself. There is a strong tendency to 'selectively' hear answers to questions that conform to notions that prompted the asking of the questions in the first place.
This mutual 'filtering' of information occurs to a greater or lesser degree in all communication processes. Systematic checking of information will aid the extension worker in compiling a less-biased picture of the 'reality' referred to above.
The information-gathering an extension worker attempts is done in a cross-cultural context. Thus, sensitivity and respect are crucial to success. One must be willing to share information about oneself and must have the patience necessary to persevere under the sometimes difficult conditions imposed by linquistic and cultural barriers.
Information filters and cultural barriers provide cautions to an extensionist to go slow in the early stages of his work. One or more of the following suggestions could help an extension agent start on the right foot:
o Consciously employ observation skills to complement information gathered through the interview process.
o Engage a translator or assistant who can help ensure that research is done in a culturally appropriate manner. (Counterparts often play this role).
o Use some 'random' process to select sources of information to prevent a skewing of results in one direction.
o Establish a routine of note-taking and record keeping so that, later, information can be analyzed and plans can be made.
These and other choices pertaining to the methods used to gather information can be made more or less formal to suit the type of information being sought, the source, the interviewing 'climate' or the extension agent himself. After a body of information has been gathered, recorded, 'de-filtered', and analyzed, matches can be made between needs and resources, and the agent's role can be more clearly defined. Planning and problem-solving remain contingent, however, upon a continuing accurate flow of information between individual farmers and the extension agents who serve them.
<section>Understanding people</section>
OVERVIEW
Self interest is the basis for all that a farmer does. The source of a farmer's motivation, whatever it may be in a given case, can be quite obscure to the extension worker. A farmer who seems to be strong, intelligent, financially secure, and aware enough to be successful may still cling to his timeworn practices rather than opt for something new that he perceives to be against his interests. Neither repeated contact with an extension agent nor weighty scientific evidence will change his mind. The farmer's personal concerns - his religion, his desire for material possessions that he feels can be more quickly had by other means - are foremost in his mind. As such they are of primary concern to extension workers.
An extension agent needs to learn what the people she lives with value and consider important. This understanding is at the heart of the two way communication process. Without it, the extensionist can gain no perspective on the appropriateness of the change she promotes. Nor can she determine what training methods are most suitable to local people's needs. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the agent will be unable to empathize or even communicate effectively with her friends and neighbors.
To learn anything about a person's self-interest requires time and shared experience. It takes hours in hammocks and sweating over plow blades, eating from the same bowl and walking together in sadness in a funeral procession. The 'methods' used are informal, but the information gleaned is of crucial importance. The farming aspect of a villager's life, as was mentioned in Chapter One, is connected with all other aspects. Labor resources for farm work are also labor resources required by virtue of kinship and community ties to help maintain village roads and water supplies; money for improved livestock strains can just as easily become money for a niece's school fees. As an extension worker enters a community, then, and begins to make her initial social contacts, she should take note of the various special interests people display in order to better understand how to go about her work.
ILLUSTRATION
A case study of learning about self-interest:
Felicia had a special interest in serving the needs of the women farmers in her area. One of the agricultural tasks Felicia observed as primarily a woman's responsibility was grain drying. Hours each day were spent spreading grain on mats and concrete slabs where it was allowed to dry in the sun. Because chickens and free ranging goats often tried to eat the grain as it dried, someone had to constantly be on guard to shoo them away.
Felicia would often sit with her neighbors and talk as they watched their grain. She noticed that several of her neighbors occupied their grain drying hours by weaving mats. She asked the women if they were going to use the mats in their homes. Most replied that they intended to take their mats to a nearby market for sale. This they explained was the way that they were able to pay their children's school fees.
On closer inspection, Felicia discovered that school fees were a major concern of most of the women in town. She talked with women who made clay pots, women who dyed cloth and women who hired themselves out to help weed neighbors' fields and she found out that not only were school fees the sole financial responsibility of women family members, but that the fees at the local primary school had nearly doubled in the past two years. This information eventually led Felicia to concentrate her extension work on very small-scale, cash generating projects to help meet local women's needs.
TOOL
A suggestive and partial list of small-farmer self-interests and motivation' (derived from Chapter One)
o Pride in individual accomplishments
o Filling a particular role in a family or community
o Obtaining special material possessions
o The sense of fulfillment in being able to use one's existing skills
o Maintaining ties to tradition
o Avoiding risk
o Developing new skills
o Reducing work load of existing tasks
o Overcoming feelings of impotence
<section>Community survey</section>
OVERVIEW
Development must begin where village people are, not where the extension agent wants them to be. For that reason, extension workers study the local community and its connections to the outside world. Basic familiarity with a community helps the agent function more effectively in meeting personal and work needs. Beyond that, it is also a structured, practical task that an extensionist can set before herself to help build confidence in using a new language and practicing local customs.
A simple first step is drawing a map of the physical features of the community. Much of the map's contents - roads, houses, markets, etc can be gathered by observation. Details can be added by consulting neighbors. The point of the first rough sketch of one's site is to become oriented in a very general way to one's surroundings.
The newly arrived field worker should take care in the selection of initial informants. The easiest contacts to make are likely to be a landlady, her husband and relatives, the local government officials, talkative neighbors, a counterpart, or the "pet" farmers of the sponsoring agency. In any case, the extentionist should be careful not to let the earliest contacts weight impressions disproportionately.
It is also important not be overly formal in approaching a community survey. At this early stage, it is not wise to take written notes in the presence of an informant, though some sort of record is essential for later analysis and planning. What is known naturally by a local resident must be systematically written down by an outsider. Therefore, at the earliest opportunity after an interview - midday break or in the evening - new information can be preserved in a field notebook or diary reserved for this purpose.
The first round of information gathering is to help an extension worker orient herself to her surroundings. It is general and broad rather than specific and focussed on a narrowly defined aspect of a community. Naturally, a Community Survey is not completed in the first few weeks of a volunteer's service. It continues at various levels as an ongoing process in extension work. A single informant might during the course of a casual conversation offer interesting insights into a community as a whole as well as some of the more specific types of information referred to later in this chapter. At the same time he might display something of his personal interest (recall the discussion of information filtering in the introduction to this chapter). The task of the extensionist is to place each piece of information in its proper context. It is significant to note that regular repetition of research components serves as a means of monitoring change from the 'beginnings' where people
were when the extension agent began her work.
ILLUSTRATION
Overlay maps of the essential features of a community:
TOOL
Community survey checklist:
I. Facts about the physical community
A. Climate
1. Rainfall patterns
2. Frequency of drought, flooding
3. Seasonal temperature ranges
B. Water Sources
1. Rivers and streams
2. Swamps
3. Catchment areas
4. Water table
5. Bathing areas
6. Sources of drinking water
7. Sources of food
C. Housing and Roads
1. Number and kind of houses
2. Kinds and location of roads
3. Number of bridges, etc.
D. Vegetation
1. Firewood
2. Timber
3. Plants
4. Farm Crops
II. Facts about the people
A. Population
1. Number of people
2. Age distribution
3. Family size
4. Number of families
5. Density
B. Settlement Pattern
1. Are farm centrally located?
2. Is the village spread out?
3. Is there a center?
4. What is the distance to farmers' farms?
5. Who lives where?
C. Types of People, Ethnic Groups
1. Which groups exist in the community?
2. Which groups do what?
3. Who are group leaders?
D. Sanitation and Health Practices
E. Behavior and Norms
1. Awareness of problems and solutions
2. Receptivity to change
3. Interest in learning new ideas
4. Customs and practices
F. Sources of Income Outside of Agriculture
1. Civil Service
2. Retail or small businesses
3. Industry
4. Crafts
G. Local Leaders
1. Local authorities (head people)
2. Officials sent or appointed from the outside
3. Religious leaders
4. Traditional healers
5. School teachers
6. Extension workers
7. Club, group, union or cooperative leaders
8. Committees
9. Wealthy property owners
10. Opinion leaders among various groups
H. Education
1. Number of schools or nonformal learning processes
2. Kinds of schools
3. Number of students
4. Average level of education
<section>Agricultural survey</section>
OVERVIEW
Farmers are the experts in all aspects of the local agricultural environment. Extension agents are often trained in a limited set of agricultural practices. Therefore, it is necessary for the agent to turn to farmers and other local residents with a vested interest in a community's involvement in agriculture to gain a broader perspective on the local environment and farming practices.
In particular, an extension worker needs to know which farmers practice the type of agriculture she herself is most familiar with. Beyond that, she can contact other ag workers in the area, buyers of farm produce, suppliers of commercial inputs, and local truckers, all of whom possess intimate knowledge of certain agricultural practices. Their combined assistance should help the agent develop a well rounded view of local conditions.
Part of the information they supply will further orient an extensionist geographically. She needs to know where farms, farmers, suppliers and marketers are located with reference to the road network and dominant topographical features. What she cannot find out from local sources or through observation may be available from various government map-making agencies. Relief maps, road maps and soil survey maps can all prove helpful in supplementing hand-drawn charts. The latter are often more useful, however, because of the local detail they contain Government sources can also be some use in orienting an agent to local climate and weather patterns. Weather stations offer specific data that may or may not be useful depending upon the closeness of the station to an extension site. Relief maps also give some indication of relative temperature. (In the tropics, for instance, average temperature will drop by 3-4°F, for every 1,000 ft. rise in altitude.)
Climate and geography provide a backdrop for a consideration of more specific farming practices. An extensionist needs to identify specific crops and livestock operations underway in an area and more specifically focus on the different means of production and processing. Note that the objective of this aspect of information gathering is to describe actual practices of most of the farmers in a given area, not the feasibility of improvements. Some attention should also be paid to general levels of production and access to inputs and services. The sum of these collective inquiries will be a picture of the overall agricultural development in the village or community an extensionist serves.
While drawing this picture, an extension agent needs to try and develop an understanding of how all of a farmer's various agricultural pursuits fit together in an annual cycle. It is necessary to try and piece together bits of information to form calendars for weather, crop growing seasons, cyclical animal husbandry practices, social activities and other seasonal demands on a farmer's time and resources.
It will be useful after gathering some of the information above and becoming a bit more knowledgeable about farming in general to focus on the individual farm unit. It is at this point that the extension agent begins to become more actively involved in the analysis of the specific needs and resources farmers have. She looks at farm size and the farm family's labor resources, land tenure arrangements and land use management, the value of farm implements and the general extent of a farmer's debts. The way all of these individual factors add up will help determine what services she might be able to provide to a particular family. In the case of the small-scale farmer the Peace Corps serves, this individual attention and the level of understanding it promotes are necessary requirements for genuine communication to take place.
(The sequence of the TOOLS and ILLUSTRATIONS sections which follow has been reversed due to the tact that most of the points being illustrated are found in the survey tools themselves.)
TOOLS
Useful contacts for conducting an ag survey:
o Knowledgeable local farmers, specifically those farmers specializing in the same area as the extension agent.
o Ag workers stationed in the area.
o Buyers of farm produce.
o Suppliers of commercial inputs.
o Local truckers or boat operators.
Sources of maps:
o Geographic or geodetic service of the government: In most Latin American countries there is the military geographic service. This is normally the only source of relief maps.
o National resource inventory maps: These are useful for looking at the regional dispersal of resources, but are not much help in making a local inventory of resources.
o Road maps: Those secured from public works agencies will show greater detail than maps issued by other sources.
o Special sources: National or regional soil survey maps, regional development authorities, etc.
o Homemade maps: Most maps secured from official sources are not normally on a large enough scale to provide space for annotating such important local details as location of farms, secondary irrigation works, and unimprov