<title>Planning National parks for Eco-development - Methods and Cases from Latin America</title>
Volumes I & II
Written by:
Kenton R. Miller, Ph. D.
School of Natural Resources
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
USA
Peace Corps
Information, Collection & Exchange
Reprint R073
March 1989
Reprinted with permission of
Kenton R. Miller, Ph. D.
Fundación pare la Ecologia y pare la Protección
del Medio Ambiente
Madrid, Spain
Dedication...
to the park managers and rangers who carry the custodianship of their nation's natural and cultural heritage, to manage them for the benefit of present and future generations...
First Printing - 1978
Second Printing - 1979
Third Printing - 1982
Bibliographic Information
Miller, Kenton R. 1978. Planning National Parks for Ecodevelopment: Methods and Cases from Latin America. Center for Strategic Wildland Management Studies, The School of Natural Resources, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 625+ pages. (manuscript)
Copies of the English language manuscript may be purchased from the following organization:
Center for Strategic Wildland Management Studies
School of Natural Resources
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
USA
Miller, Kenton R. 1980. Planificación de Parques Nacionales para el Ecodesarrollo en Latiroamérica. Fundación para la Ecologia y para la Protección del Medio Ambiente, Madrid, Spain. 500 páginas. ISBN No. 84-300-2247-3
Copies of the Spanish language publication may be purchased from the following organization:
Center for Strategic Wildland Management Studies
School of Natural Resources
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 481C9
USA
The Peace Corps Internet Web Site address:
http://www.peacecorps.gov
Please note the new Peace Corps Mailing Address from July 1998 on is:
ICE/ Peace Corps
1111 20th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20526
USA
<section>Table of contents</section>
Preface
Chapter I. A conceptual framework for the management of wildland resources
Introduction
The conceptual framework
Appendix 1-A. What is ecodevelopment?
References for chapter I
Chapter II. The growth and development of national parks in Latin America
Introduction
The birth of the park idea
Development of common concepts for park management
Role of national parks in ecodevelopment
Political evolution of the park concept in Latin America
Appendix II-A. Convention on nature protection and wild life preservation in the western hemisphere
Appendix II-B. Convention on nature protection and wildlife preservation in the western hemisphere, 1940
Appendix II-C. Criteria for national parks prepared by the IUCN international commission on national parks, Banff, Canada 1972
Appendix II-D. Declaration of principles on policy for national parks, FAO Latin American forestry commission Quito, 1970
Appendix II-E. Notes on the 1974 IUCN system for classifying natural regions for purposes of conservation
References for chapter II
Chapter III. Planing national parks for ecodevelopment in Latin America
Introduction
Characteristics of planning
The basic steps for planning
Conditions necessary for planning
Transforming general conservation objectives into practical directives for action
Gathering field information on the areas to be planned
Resolving the conflicts for the use of space within parks
Establishing boundary lines for national parks
Designing management programs
Analyzing and evaluating proposals and alternatives
Establishing priorities for implementation
Appendix III-A: Methods for gathering field information in relatively known and relatively unknown areas
Appendix III-B. Development sequence for Santa Rosa national park, Costa Rica
Appendix III-C. Graphic presentation of development schedule for Santa Rosa national park Costa Rica
Appendix III-D. Development schedule narrative for Santa Rosa national park, Costa Rica
References for chapter III
Chapter IV. The evolution of national park planing in Latin America
Introduction
Evolution of park planning experience
Planning and management workshops
Planning manuals
Ecological guidelines for planning
Park planning: A tool for democracy or oligarchy?
References for chapter IV
Chapter V. A practical method for park planning
Introduction
The planning method in general terms
The planning method in detail
Appendix V-A. Checklist - Steps for the planning method for national parks
Appendix V-B. Strategies and tactics to plan national parks for eco-development
Appendix V-C. Suggested standard definitions and general objectives for national park zones
References for chapter V
Chapter VI. A practical method for planning national park systems
Introduction
Three fundamental concepts
Characteristics of systems planning
The method for planning systems of national parks in general terms
The method for planning systems of national parks in detail
Appendix VI-A. Checklist - Steps of the planning method for national park systems
Appendix VI-B. Summary of systems planning experience in Latin America
References to chapter VI
Chapter VII. The formulation of a strategy plan
Introduction
The basic concepts and principles
An example from Chile
A suggested method for strategy planning
Guidelines for application of the strategy planning method
References for chapter VII
Chapter VIII. Human and institutional capacity to manage national parks
Introduction
Basic concepts of managerial capacity
Kinds of personnel required for park management
Training park personnel to fulfill management functions
Organizing the capacity of a national park department to manage national parks
Institutionalization of national parks
References for chapter VIII
Chapter IX. Some guidelines from park management experience in Africa
Introduction
Guidelines for consideration from Africa
References for chapter IX
Chapter X. Major problems facing national park management in Latin America
Introduction
Ten major problems
References for chapter X
Chapter XI. International corporation and assistance in national park management
Introduction
International conservation programs, projects and activities
Problems common to international cooperation
International cooperative programs which relate to national parks and wildland management
Concerns for international cooperation in Latin America
Appendix XI-A. The biosphere reserve and its relationship to other conservation efforts40
References for chapter XI
Chapter XII. Strategy for regional and global cooperation
Introduction
General framework for regional cooperation on national park management
The strategy
<section>Preface</section>
This is a book about national parks. It deals with methods for planning national parks to enable them to provide the greatest possible benefit to mankind. And, it focuses upon Latin America where nations are forging ahead with development programs which include the search for means to provide adequate stewardship for natural and cultural heritage and for the maintenance of the biosphere.
The book has been written to provide a text for park managers, rangers, and students of middle- and university-level curricula in the field of natural parks, wildlife or wildland management. No other book exists in the Spanish language for practitioners in this field, and no book exists in any language which develops and integrates the theory and the practice of wildland and park management. The book is also written to share my experiences and those of the countries of Latin America with others in that region and elsewhere in the world. While the book concentrates on Latin America, various reviewers of the manuscript commented that the principles and guidelines were in fact of universal interest and applicability.
The subject is important because it relates to man and his most important assets: the natural heritage that gives him the resources with which he has to work to feed and cloth himself, to seek shelter; water, medicines, solace, education, identity and the other necessities of life; and the cultural heritage which shows him what he has done and from whence he is coming, in order to learn from the past and make out a path for the future. Wildlands are rich in both natural and cultural values for man. By their very nature, they are still available for human choice and consideration. The major choice, however, is to face up to the need to plan for the orderly employment of the Earth's remaining wildland resources, and to place them under the appropriate management towards benefits of high priority to mankind.
In this way, the material of the book relates to ecodevelopment - the way in which man organizes and manages his habitat to provide for his necessities both now and in the future. It integrates consideration of economic, social and ecological factors and accepts politics as a natural and valid aspect of human development.
Much of the book is based upon my personal experience. Following a U.S. education through the Ph.D. degree, I spent some 15 years residing and working in Latin America, the bulk of which was with the Food ant Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Shorter term activities and field work were realized in Europe, Africa and Asia. Thus, the ideas and suggestions represent a blend of cultural backgrounds and pretend to carry considerable sensitivity to the attitudes and realities of developing countries and the concepts for the "new world economic order."
The book is organized into 12 chapters. Chapter I presents a conceptual framework for the management and development of wildlands. It provides the context for viewing all wildlands and provides alternatives to employ them for ecodevelopment. From this overview, the growth and development of the national park in Latin America is reviewed. The remainder of the book then concentrates upon the national park as the most studied and developed category of wildland management in Latin America and the world.
The fundamental principles for planning national parks are established in Chapter III, and a review of park planning experience in Latin America is presented in Chapter IV.
The treatment of park planning is divided into three chanters: In Chapter V, a method for planning the individual national park is presented in considerable detail. Chapter VI explores the planning of systems of national parks to cover the requirements of entire nations. And, in Chapter VII, a method is suggested for planning the strategic elements of actually implementing the plans for individual parks and national park systems.
In the final analysis, the ability of any country to implement a national park program in any practical way will depend upon whether it can obtain and employ men and women capable of selecting goals, designing plans to meet those goals and then actually implementing the plans to achieve the goals. Chapter VIII focuses upon the development of managerial capacity.
In Chapter IX, a site-step is taken to consider the experience of developing countries in Africa. While the historical and cultural differences between Latin America and Africa appear to be insurmountable, there is much to be learned from several specific cases which can be safely generalized to Latin America.
The problems faced by the directors and managers of national parks in Latin America are many and diverse. Among them are several which relate specifically to developing the capacity to plan and manage national parka. Chapter X presents a series of problems which appear to me to be the most outstanding, and solutions are suggested which the individual park departments can employ according to their own needs and perceptions.
Chapters XI ant XII climb to the international level. First, a review is made of the several international agreements, conventions and projects which are currently active or under study. Particular emphasis is given to those institutions and programs which offer considerable promise for benefits to the Latin American nations. Some of these programs embrace activities which can be expected to be of critical importance for international cooperation in ecodevelopment in the near future. Second, the national- and international-level considerations posed in all of the previous chapters are integrated into a strategy for global cooperation.
I have tried to integrate theory and practice. Important emphasis is given to providing a solid conceptual basis for making decisions about the management and development of natural and cultural resources. Then pragmatic solutions are offered. This relationship between the overall perspective, scientific principles and pragmatic applications is complemented with examples from Latin American experience. I believe that there is no substitute for strong theory, fundamentals and principles in order to reduce the risks involved in managing and developing unique and irreplaceable resources, especially where experience is limited. Moreover, I believe in the need for pragmatic solutions which can be applied flexibly to the enormous diversity of circumstances found around the region. The examples attempt to convince the reader that a great deal of work has been done, that the theory, fundamentals and principles are indeed useful, and most humbly, that there remains a great deal of
work yet to be done.
Emphasis is placed upon the individual national park. While parks can only meet certain objectives for ecodevelopment, they are a key instrument for conservation action in Latin America and throughout the world. Emphasis is also given to the nation state. It is the key power capable of instrumenting action on conservation management. Plans for park systems, regional cooperation, international conventions and the like are ideals. They are necessary activities and are worth pursuing. They represent steps towards global conservation solidarity relating all humans to their shared environment. But, first and foremost, the basic elements must work: nations, both rich and poor, must develop the capacity to manage natural and cultural resources and must make a realistic commitment to a development which incorporates due considerations for the care and maintenance of the biosphere. And, conservation areas must be organized and managed to achieve objectives for ecodevelopment.
The argument for planning to meet the objectives of ecodevelopment is couched in terms of strategies and tactics for conservation. These terms are generally associated with war, and quite appropriately, they are useful in conservation where indeed a war is on between man and his life-support system. Peace will arise when man quits raping his resources and stops exploiting his fellow man. National parks as instruments for ecodevelopment can contribute in no small way to that end.
In preparing the citation of literature particular difficulty was found in following standard bibliographic techniques. Many references come from sources which are in mimeographed form and have received internal use or limited circulation only. The value of these materials is generally equivalent to most so-called publications, and suffers only from having been produced in places where formal journals are scarce and budgets for publication are often non-existent. I have placed all citations at the end of each related chapter in a format which combines footnotes and literature cited.
The book represents a first try. There is considerable risk of over-simplifying science, over-mechanizing procedures for planning and over-complicating the methods for management. It is hoped that this book can form a preliminary contribution, among others, to the development of a "science of conservation".
The author wishes to give special acknowledgement to the many colleagues who helped create and test the ideas in the book. Particular mention should be made of Jorge Barroso, Mario Boza, Julio Castellanos, Arne Dalfelt, William Deshler, Marc Dourojeanni, Simon Max Franky, John Moseley, Maria Tereza Jorge Padua, Arturo Ponce, Carlos Ponce del Prado, Allen Putney, Pedro Rodriquez, Paul Spangle, Kyran Thelen, Gary Wetterberg, C. William Wendt, and Bernardo Zentilli.
Colleagues in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) at Headquarters in Rome, and at the Regional Office for Latin America in Santiago, Chile, and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) at Headquarters in New York, were responsible for making much of the field work possible and for providing constant technical and moral support. Particular thanks go to Louis Huguet, Charles Lankester, Thane Riney, Armando Samper, and Jack Westoby. The OAS, and particularly Kirk Rodgers, has been supportive since the early work of the 1960's. Friends at the U.S. National Park Service have always provided information and dialogue, and Fred Packard gave special help in preparing the reference notes to the chapters.
Gerardo Budowski has been a constant source of inspiration, beginning as my first boss at the Center for Research and Training in Tropical Agriculture (CATIE) at Turrialba, Costa Rica, and later from his position at the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) in Switzerland.
The Rockefeller Brothers Fund (RBF), and particularly their officers William S. Moody and John Camp, warrant special mention. In 1970, at a time when other funding institutions were yet unprepared to give attention to these matters, RBF recognized the importance of managing wild natural resources for the objectives associated with rural development. RBF granted FAO one-half million dollars over the next four years to initiate the Wildland Management Program in Latin America which I was privileged to direct.
In 1975, RBF joined with the School of Natural Resources of the University of Michigan to provide me with the opportunity to write this book. The grant also covered additional field work in Latin America as well as in Africa. Without the financial support and constant moral support from RBF and the mentioned officers, much of the field work in Latin America and this book could not have been realized.
The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) provided me with a supplementary grant which was utilized to cover the costs of reproducing and circulating the manuscript for review and criticism.
I benefited from students who were subjected to these ideas over the years, and from the very dedicated individuals who reviewed and criticized the manuscript. They include Suzanne Barrett, Donald Brown, Mario Boza, Gil Child, John Camp, Marko Ehrlich, Harold Eidsvik, Edmundo Fahrenkrog, Norman Myers, Maria Tereza Jorge Padua, Allen Putney, Juan Jose Reyes Rodriguez, Kyran Thelen and Gary Wetterberg. Their patience and interest is very much appreciated and many of their arguments and suggested revisions have been incorporated. Furthermore, behind this effort lie my parents and three mentors: C.J. Albrecht, C. Frank Brockman and William A. Duerr, who gave me the vision, enthusiasm, tools and education to develop the interest and capability to write this book. However, any errors or erroneous ideas which remain are my responsibility.
Finally, a special form of gratitude is due to the author's wife and two children for their encouragement and tolerance during weeks and months of absence for field work and the many days shut away at the typewriter. During our decade together in Latin America, we were privileged to be able to share some of the most beautiful and meaningful natural and cultural experiences to be found anywhere.
<section>Chapter I. A conceptual framework for the management of wildland resources</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
Economic and social development is a fundamental commitment of the governments of Latin America. A wide variety of styles and methods for development are being followed. The political context within which development is taking place is variable, virtually every nation pursuing a unique path. In common, however, are the roots of Iberian culture mixed to varying degrees with Amerindian, African, Asian and recent European influences. Also in common is the pressure to establish economic and social justice.
Since World War II, development has given emphasis to industrialization, luring people to urban centers with the promise of employment and higher standards of living than in rural areas. Modern agriculture has been introduced and greatly expanded in order to support urban and industrial development. Modern transportation has penetrated areas which were until recently only vast wilderness territories. Raw material, semi-elaborated and elaborated products, and people pass along the expanding networks of roads. Thus, while some people are heading for the city to find their fortune, others are traveling to the interior to seek their future in agriculture, animal husbandry or the new development poles.
The benefits of economic and social development are apparent across the continent. Nutrition, health, sanitation, disease control, education and housing are generally improving, in some areas much more quickly than others.
But the results of development have not always been positive. The fruits of development have not reached all sectors of society. Many segments of the population still experience unacceptable standards of living. The different levels are exaggerated by the widening gap among the various strata of society within many countries. The displacement of people by the remnants of latifundio, development schemes and various forms of disaster forces millions of landless poor into the interior forests, onto areas marginal to agricultural production, high into the Andes.
Other negative effects of current forms of "modernization" and development include the alienation of both urban and rural dwellers from the realities of the human habitat. Urban people have forgotten where their food, water and wood come from. The land-use methods of rural people have crossed ecological thresholds and soils erode, water runs off the surface, and Fires burn the scarce organic matter of life. Together, both urban and rural peoples are building societies which only partially achieve sustainable growth and stability. While someone builds a hydroelectric dam downstream, another opens and burns the forest upstream. While one develops a fishery along the mouth of an estuary, another diverts stream waters for irrigation and returns the water laden with pesticides, salts, and sediment.
Economic and social development has also tended to limit its focus to specific problems or sectors. There are plans and programs or action for electric energy, transportation, irrigation and colonization. Where soils permit, there are projects for the development of particular crops or livestock. The more-enlightened development programs have tended to favor investments in the so-called direct human-oriented requirements. But, in virtually all cases little attention has been given to the whole in which the elements merely form parts.
The over-all human habitat has been neglected. The slopes of, the Andes are in accelerated erosion, the semi-arid lands are in desertification, the tropical forests are being cleared for unstable pasture, the sediment in rivers is pouring into major engineering works and out across coral reefs. Each country has its examples of flood and drought caused by human activity. Elsewhere there are examples of rivers which have lost their capacity to carry and filter wastes. Smoke and dust from fire and wind remain in the air and are carried hundreds of kilometers. Chemicals from intensive agriculture are becoming residual in soil and water. Species of plants and animals are being lost, and cultures are being erased. Man's activity is overwhelming the biological capacity of the planet.
But, there is no turning back. The thrust of economic and social development is strong. There are factions which prefer to push for development as quickly as possible, leaving the problems of the environment until later. Others argue for caution in the application of technology and development to avoid costly reclamation work or possible irreparable damage to the environment.
The solution is not to be found in a single over-simplified approach. The urgent need for economic and social development somehow has to be tempered with adequate protection of the environment.
For years. and even decades, there have been individuals and professional groups working with that conviction. At the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 at Stockholm, it was advocated that conservation principles be incorporated into development. Subsequently, this and related ideas have become more formalized under the term ECODEVELOPMENT which was coined by Mr. Maurice F. Strong, the first Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Ecodevelopment is based upon the concept that ... "Development at regional and local levels, should be consistent with the potentials of the area involved, with attention given to the adequate and rational use of the natural resources. and to the application of technological styles (innovation and assimilation) and organizational forms that respect the natural ecosystems and local socio-cultural patterns."^1
Fundamentally, the objective of ecodevelopment is to utilize resources to meet human requirements and to improve and maintain the quality of human life for this and future generations.^2 To face this challenge, development must take place in a manner which integrates biological considerations together with economic, social and political factors to address both human welfare and the human environment.
The concepts and principles of ecodevelopment were further clarified by Latin American governments and specialists at their meeting in Cocoyoc, Mexico in 1974.^3 The essential aspects of ecodevelopment and the Cocoyoc Declaration can be synthesized into eight points (See Appendix I-A):^4
1. The basic unit for development is the ecosystem or geographical region (watershed).
2. Natural resources and humans are to be treated on an integral basis as elements of one total system.
3. Mechanisms must be created which will provide for the active participation of all humans involved in, or to be affected by, the development process.
4. Development should give primary attention to meeting the basic necessities of the human population: food, water, shelter, health, education and the fundamental human rights.
5. Those technologies should be utilized in the development process which incorporate and enhance local culture and experience. Local initiative and self-reliance are to be respected and promoted, and imported technologies are to be screened to insure their adequate adaptation prior to implementation.
6. Human activities should be designed and operated to maintain and enhance the productivity of the biosphere - the surface layers of Planet Earth where all terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems operate and upon which all life depends.
7. Human activities should also be designed and operated to use wisely (conserve), the energy and materials of Earth and to respect, maintain and enhance the natural processes which produce and recycle energy and materials.
8. And finally, development should respect, maintain and enhance the diversity of natural life and human cultures to maintain and expand the availability of options for this and future generations of humans. This requires that homogenization of land use and human life styles be avoided.
Among the results of Stockholm and Cocoyoc the ball was put into the court of the ecology, forestry, and land management professions and related governmental departments. They are now being called upon to provide the necessary guidance for the integration of conservation into development. Pioneering contributions were made by Dasmann, Milton and Freeman in Economic Guidelines for Economic Development.^5 Ray and Dasman prepared guidelines relating to marine areas^6 and McEachern and Towle worked on island environments.^7 The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) together with the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and several United Nations organizations held a meeting in Caracas, Venezuela in 1974 on "The Use of Ecological Guidelines for Development in the American Humid Tropics." The innovative aspect of these efforts was their focus upon troth the development of humans and the human habitat as inseparable elements of the same problem.
The introduction of ecological considerations into development also brought into perspective the interrelationship between rural and urban areas. Rural lands have been "mined" to supply wood products, minerals, and other renewable and non-renewable resources to the urban and industrial centers of Latin America and around the world. They have become the "buffer zone" expected to absorb the landless migratory peoples and those displaced from areas damaged by over-utilization. Urban garbage and sewage, the runoff from industry, and the soil from upstream agriculture and grazing has begun to clog what has been essentially a "free waste disposal system."
National development planning has analyzed and treated those rural lands where soils have high potential for agriculture or pasture and where forest have high timber values. Other rural lands, however, such as the upstream catchments, mountains, swamps, estuaries, interior forests, coral reefs and coastal lands, are classified as "forest reserve" or simply, as unallocated public lands (baldio). These rejected areas cover a large portion of the region and it is there where major choices on land use have yet to made. Within these wildlands are elements of ecological systems which create and maintain soil nutrients, absorb and filter wastes, make streams flow with clean, regular water, and maintain the reservoir of the diverse forms of life on Earth. In these lands are links of chains upon which the security and stability of the human habitat depends. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries production depend upon the ways in which wildlands are put to use.
Also in these wildlands are features which are part of the heritage of all humans. There are the species which have evolved with humans and support them with food crops and medicines. There are ecosystems which regulate the Earth's environment. And there are cultural objects, sites, structures and technologies which tell of the human past and continue to provide guidelines for wise land use based upon thousands of years of the human experience. In these wildlands, humans can study and learn about their own habitat. This heritage belongs to people, in this as well as future generations. Thus, the decisions concerning the use of wildlands carry serious responsibility for those who must choose.
Ecodevelopment, as a newly emerging concept, is beginning to provide the conceptual framework to link all sectors of the economy to one another and to the overall environment. It suggests to those charged with making decisions about the use of land that the limits to which the natural processes of Earth can be pushed must be respected.
Yet lacking is a practical explanation of the relationship between wildland resources and the many diverse requirements of humans. This involves the need to clarify the dependency of humans upon wildlands. Alternative methods for handling wildlands as part of economic and social development need to be explained.
Through appropriate management, wildlands can support development and meet heritage responsibilities. The benefits from wildlands can be produced so as to be available to all levels of citizenry of any nation. Wildlands can be managed to produce a wide range of goods and services to benefit both urban and rural peoples and to provide added employment opportunities. Wildlands can serve to reduce the alienation of man from his environment. And through the permanent custodianship of key areas and resources by technically competent public agencies, development can become more stable and sustainable.
Some large areas must remain in their natural state on a perpetual basis. In that way the natural resources can best serve ecodevelopment. Other areas can be utilized to retain certain natural qualities but yield products from natural resources. Various combinations of land management methods can be suggested to provide for the many needs of man and his habitat. Just as man has great diversity in his social, economic, and political systems, and similarly, as nature has great diversity in her species and ecological systems, so must an array of methods for the management of wildlands be established for the use and care of natural and cultural resources.
