<title>ADCP/REP/82/17 - Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World</title>
<section>1</section>
ABSTRACT
The report summarizes the discussions and conclusions of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World held in cooperation with the Svanøy Foundation in Svanøy, Norway, 2-6 August 1982. The Round Table reviewed the present state of aquaculture and recognized that production has risen by about 42 percent in the last five years, when landings from conventional fisheries have shown only much smaller increases. There is now an increasing reliance on aquaculture as a means of achieving fishery production targets and for the generation of part-or full-time employment in rural areas. However, to achieve the potentials of aquaculture, third world countries require massive aid in the form of investment, research support, manpower development, technology transfer input production and distribution and organization of extension services. Though Scandinavian countries have provided extensive aid to developing countries for development of conventional
fisheries, their assistance in the field of aquaculture has been limited due largely to limitations of expertise in tropical aquaculture. The Round Table concluded that aquaculture deserves high priority in Nordic countries' aid programmes as development of this sector is likely to benefit the poorer sections of populations and contribute substantially to rural development. Recommendations were made on ways and means of improving competence in tropical aquaculture in Scandinavian countries and the nature of assistance to be offered to third world countries.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
The FAO/NORAD Round Table Discussion on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World was held in Svanøy, Norway under the auspices of the Svanøy Foundation. The objectives of the Round Table were to:
(a) review the policies, strategies and potentials in relation to aquaculture development in Third World countries;
(b) identify nature and magnitude of aid needed by them;
(c) review experience in aid utilization and
(d) formulate the elements of a recommended policy for the provision of appropriate aid for aquaculture development, including ways and means of effective implementation of investment and technical assistance projects.
The list of participants and the agenda of the meeting are given in Annexures I and II respectively. Mr. Nils Vogt, Assistant Director-General of NORAD, welcomed the participants and commended the initiative taken by the Svanøy Foundation to organize the Round Table and expressed the hope that the discussions will lead to concrete actions for the benefit of developing countries.
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, FAO, reminded the meeting that the first Round Table organized by the Foundation was on Planning of Aquaculture Development and that the Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Planning prepared on the basis of discussions at the meeting has been widely used as the basic document for a series of Planning Workshops in Asia, Africa and Latin America and recently as a text book on the subject for instruction in aquaculture planning in training institutions. He expressed the hope that the discussions in the present Round Table will make similar significant contributions to aquaculture in Third World countries.
A summary of the discussions, conclusions and recommendations of the Round Table are given in the following sections.
<section>3</section>
2. State of Aquaculture in the Third World Countries
The Round Table discussed the current state of aquaculture based on a review of the production statistics, technological advances, research approaches, training, extension and future outlook (Annexure III).
For a number of reasons, which include resource limitations, fishing costs and the new laws of the sea, increasing attention is now being given by almost all developing countries to aquaculture development. In fact, in some countries aquaculture is now considered to be the only means of increasing fish production as even the maintenance of present levels of production from capture fisheries may not be possible, if adequate management measures are not taken. There is hardly any country that does not have some type of aquaculture activity at present. Many of them are allocating increasing proportions of their budgets to aquaculture development. The world-wide increase of around 42 percent in aquaculture production in the last five-year period seems to indicate that the projected five-fold increase in aquaculture production by the end of this century is not unattainable. However, experience so far has shown that aquaculture programmes have generally a relatively long gestation
period. In most cases appropriate technologies and required skills have to be developed. The initial capital investments can be heavy and the time lag between initiation of a project and the attainment of production stage can be technologies is only beginning to be implemented. There is a rapidly increasing demand for aquaculturists with hands-on experience, but they continue to be in short supply. Despite these problems aquaculture has attained the status of a growth industry in all regions of the Third World. It has also achieved recognition as of special significance in integrated rural development, which is of high priority in many developing countries.
A close examination of current aquaculture production shows that more than 84 percent of it comes from Asia where aquaculture has a long tradition. While there is a potential for further expansion of area under culture in this region too, adoption of more intensive farming methods holds out greater possibilities and potentials in Asia. Africa and Latin America have very high potentials for the establishment of aquaculture as large or small-scale industries, when the basic requirements are met. Experience in some of the Central American countries and in parts of Africa clearly shows the social and economic benefits that can be derived through appropriate development programmes.
National policies relating to aquaculture have recently been influenced by the state of the fishery industries as a whole. On a global basis, there has been gradual reduction in the rate of increase in capture fishery production, affecting particularly the food fish production. Many countries have to resort to increased imports and due to shortages and other factors, prices have risen to such an extent that fish, and particularly well known species, are beyond the reach of low income groups. Governments are therefore forced to look for alternate means of fish production such as aquaculture.
The state of small-scale fisheries and particularly the income and standard of living of the fishermen have been matters of major concern on a national level in many countries. It is well known that the adoption of aquaculture as a part-time occupation has contributed very substantially to the income of farmers. Integration of aquaculture with agriculture and/or animal husbandry is becoming a major rural development activity in certain countries. Based on this example, it is believed that aquaculture can be an appropriate part-time occupation for small-scale fishermen families, with appreciable potential for involvement of women and the overall increase of family incomes and standards of living.
Interest in investment in aquaculture is now increasing. It is estimated that at least a 10 to 15 times increase in investment is needed in the next decade to achieve the production targets. Public sector investments in developing countries have largely been directed to food production for domestic consumption and rural development. Private investments of any great magnitude, on the other hand, have largely concentrated on high-valued products for export. Economic viability is the main consideration in private investment and demonstration of this is therefore of vital importance in attracting adequate investment into this sector. There are many factors that affect internal rates of return in aquaculture and their comparability with those of other agro-industries. The need for pilot operations to determine economic viability, where it has not been tested, is therefore self-evident. In some countries pilot projects have been initiated in the public sector with external
assistance. Greater involvement of the private sector in such activities can greatly facilitate future investments.
The strategy that has been generally accepted for aquaculture development in Third World countries is the one that was recommended by the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture in Kyoto, Japan, in 1976. The major elements of this strategy consist of:
(i) the adoption of a small number of selected farming systems that have the greatest potential for increased production in the near future;
(ii) wider application of known technologies for achieving a sizeable increase in production and the promotion of greater investment for this purpose;
(iii) organization of appropriate assistance for the formulation of sound investment projects based on feasibility studies or pilot operations; and
(iv) provision of support services in the form of applied research to facilitate technology transfer and improvement of techniques, training of core personnel and exchange of computerized information.
The UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme has taken a major role in implementing this strategy. Besides providing the assistance of multidisciplinary teams for feasibility studies and project formulation, the Programme has established a network of regional lead centres in Asia, and one regional centre each in Africa and Latin America, for research, training and information exchange. These centres will eventually be linked to strengthened national centres for the testing of technologies developed at the regional centres and for the training of technicians and extension workers, forming a global net-work. A computerized Aquaculture Information System (AQUIS) has been developed and is now being implemented in Asia. Proposals for the establishment of a regional centre for the Caribbean region are now under consideration. Arrangements have also been completed for the Fish Culture Research Institute in Szarvas, Hungary, to function as an inter-regional centre
for research on common problems of interest to all the regions.
The regional centres have been established with initial funding from the host governments and the United Nations Development Programme, with supplementary assistance from other multilateral and bilateral agencies. Funding assistance is now being sought to strengthen these centres and to strengthen the national centres to be linked to them, in order to ensure the continued operation of the networks on a permanent basis for the benefit of aquaculture development in the Third World countries.
<section>4</section>
3. Aid Requirements for Aquaculture Development
The projected increases in aquaculture production in Third World countries are contingent on the availability of substantial increases in investment, research support, manpower development, technology transfer, input production and distribution, and extension services. Obviously, most countries would need external assistance for the provision of these requirements in a reasonably short period of time, as outlined in Annexure IV.
As mentioned earlier, the investment requirements of aquaculture are relatively large. Even though in the immediate future, many of the countries may be in a position to use labour-intensive and low level technologies, experience shows that the need for more intensive methods of farming and mechanized operations often develop much sooner than expected. If this is taken into account, the possibility and need for cooperation between developing and industrially advanced countries in the field of aquaculture will become evident. The favourable climatic conditions in most developing countries stand out as a major advantage for cooperative ventures between them, either in the public or private sector, as appropriate. Most of the target countries rely on the private sector for commercial aquaculture. Therefore, joint ventures on mutually advantageous terms for large-scale aquaculture or even the production of aquaculture inputs, may serve to speed up development. Government
assistance in both donor and recipient countries would be needed to facilitate such cooperative efforts. It would appear that non-governmental organizations and private sector institutions will have significant roles in such arrangements.
The need for implementation of pilot projects to test the technical and economic viability of farming systems and to generate data required for investment decisions, has already been referred to. Technical and financial assistance for such projects as well as for large-scale aquaculture undertaking in the private or public sector deserve high priority. Investment guidance centres could play an important role in facilitating the provision of such assistance.
A close examination of development experience in most countries will show the crucial role of production and distribution of inputs in aquaculture. Of the inputs, probably the most important are "seed" and "feed". Although the methods often used in small-scale production of both these types of inputs may be different from those widely adopted in developed countries, when mass production is needed for farming on a large scale (either in small or large units) the need for adoption of more sophisticated techniques becomes apparent. Many countries have started the establishment of modern hatchery and nursery facilities for seed production. Efforts are also being made to identify suitable locally available feed ingredients and to formulate and prepare nutritionally adequate feeds. The advantages of rearing strains and hybrids of species with favourable culture characteristics are now well recognized and research efforts are being directed towards this important field. These
activities can greatly benefit from external aid. Although experience in donor countries may not strictly relate to the species cultured in developing countries, the expertise in relevant disciplines available in donor countries, when combined with culture experience in recipient countries, could produce results of great value and mutual interest.
Although pond farming continues to be the main type of aquaculture in developing countries there is now an increasing trend towards introduction and expansion of cage and pen culture. While the development of suitable feeds is a pre-requisite for most types of cage farming, the relatively lower investment costs and possibilities of intensive production make such culture an attractive proposition in most countries. Despite the fact that cage farming is traditional in some parts of Asia, there have been many modern developments in this field in industrially advanced countries such as Norway and Japan. Transfer of cage culture technologies and technical assistance in this field can contribute substantially to aquaculture development in Third World countries.
Another major field in which aid is urgently needed is aquaculture engineering. If engineering expertise available in developed countries could be combined with aquaculture experience in developing countries, the design, construction and management requirements of aquaculture installations can be adequately met.
Diagnosis and control of diseases is well developed in culture of cold-water species and certain warm-water species in developed countries. Although diseases have not yet been a major problem in aquaculture in the less intensive systems of farming adopted in Third World countries, it is bound to become serious as intensive culture practices become prevalent. Aid from developed countries in this field can contribute substantially to sound development of aquaculture.
Multidisciplinary training of personnel with adequate emphasis on practical work is widely recognized as of the utmost importance and urgency in development of aquaculture at present. It is also recognized that such training should be organized in the countries or regions where the personnel are required to work, based largely on species and culture systems that they are expected to work with. The development of regional and national institutions for this purpose should receive high priority as these are essential for developing national capabilities in science and technology. Support for the continued operation of regional training programmes already initiated in Regional Aquaculture Centres in Asia, Africa and Latin America and the proposed centre in the Caribbean region should be ensured. On a national basis facilities for the training of technicians and extension personnel should be established. In fact, this should form part of most types of aid offered in the field of
aquaculture.
The importance of applied research for the improvement of existing aquaculture technologies and the development of new ones has been well recognized. However, the multidisciplinary systems-oriented research needed for this purpose requires considerable investments for the development of facilities and expertise. Aid-giving agencies can play a major role in the development of research institutions. The regional aquaculture centres and the national institutions linked to them form the most logical mechanisms for this purpose and with necessary strengthening and assured support for continued operation, they can very effectively fill the research needs in this field. It will be of mutual benefit for these institutions to establish close linkages with research institutions in developed countries, for exchange of experience and expertise. The need for further development of the Aquaculture Information System (AQUIS) and the participation of developed country institutions in this
System, cannot be over-emphasized.
In view of the already available experience in aquaculture in some of the developing countries, the relevance of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC) in this sector has often been emphasized. However, it has been found that effective TCDC generally needs appropriate funding support and in its absence fails to produce the desired results. On the other hand, external aid combined with TCDC can be an efficient instrument for the transfer of appropriate technologies and mobilization of resources in rural areas for speedy development.
<section>5</section>
4. Aid of Scandinavian Countries for Aquaculture Development
The representatives of aid agencies from Scandinavian countries participating in the Round Table provided the following information on aid for aquaculture by their agencies:
DENMARK
Denmark has a rather extensive cultivation of rainbow trout. Some expertise is also to be found in other fields related to aquaculture, e.g. fish nutrition and diseases. In aquaculture, DANIDA is assisting developing countries, but has so far only given substantial assistance to one country, viz. Bangladesh. This aid has been concentrated on two projects, which are:
(a) Aquaculture Experiment Station, Mymensingh
(b) Fish culture component in the Noakhali Integrated Rural Development Project.
NORWAY
While capture fisheries all through Norwegian history have been among the main economic activities in the country, aquaculture is a fairly new phenomenon. In the 19th century hatching of salmon was started in order to stock the rivers, but the present production of fish (trout and salmon) for consumption dates from the fifties. The start was made in fresh water, but from the sixties it has mainly been carried on in marine waters. There is a production of some 7 500 tons from some 300 cage farms. There is also a limited production of molluscs.
Research and training has traditionally been concentrated on subjects of interest for capture fisheries, but in the later years more emphasis has been put on aquaculture.
Considering Norway's lack of experience in tropical aquaculture it is only natural that no requests have been addressed to Norway from the developing countries for assistance in aquaculture, while Norwegian (capture) fisheries projects are to be found in most of the countries receiving aid from Norway through its developing agency NORAD. It would also seem that no Norwegian business enterprise has taken any interest in going into joint ventures or other forms of profit-oriented aquacultural activities in the developing countries.
This being the situation one has up to now not felt the need in NORAD to debate seriously whether assistance for aquaculture should be part of its programmes for the developing countries and no specific projects have been studied, although the subject has been touched upon in connection with some integrated rural development projects.
It would appear that the time is now ripe to take this matter up for a thorough study with a view to formulating a policy, and if a positive attitude is decided upon, to give an indication to recipient countries that requests for assistance in this sector would be favourably considered. Before any decision is taken it would seem appropriate to enter into thorough-going consultations with the other Nordic countries.
SWEDEN
Sweden has good experience in cultivation of salmonids (mainly Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout), eels, fresh water crayfish and marine mussels (Mytilus edulis). There is also some experience in cultivation of other species, e.g., for stocking of lakes and for research purposes. Some people have experience of aquaculture in tropical countries. There is some expertise in fish diseases and fish genetics. Technically Sweden can contribute to constructing and equipping aquaculture sites, hatcheries, etc. and some private firms specialize in producing fish feed.
Swedish assistance to developing countries in the field of fisheries has mainly developed during the seventies. In 1974 the National Fishery Board became institutional consultant to SIDA and a special secretariat for assistance was set up.
The assistance has been both bilateral and multilateral and to some extent concentrated on the development of small-scale fisheries in a limited number of countries. The first real support for aquaculture was given at the turn of the seventies to the Bay of Bengal Programme, administered by FAO.
In connection with discussions on the state of world fisheries and the importance of aquaculture for the future food production, SIDA is now contemplating support to aquaculture programmes/projects on a wider scale.
There is already a close cooperation regarding assistance to developing countries between the Nordic countries. A Committee for assistance questions related to fisheries, reporting to the Nordic Council of Ministers, has recently been set up and it is suggested that a discussion on Nordic cooperation in the field of aquaculture be taken up both by this Committee and between the professional assistance agencies. Contact could also be made with relevant credit institutes and private enterprises interested in development questions.
In all the three countries there are institutions charged with promoting cooperation by providing cheap loans, etc., between companies in the home countries and counterparts in the developing countries.
Among programmes/projects which could be supported by the Nordic countries are:
(a) Training and information of various kinds and for various purposes
(b) Development of integrated small-scale aquaculture in rural communities
(c) Construction of hatcheries, especially for rural areas
(d) Finding of new, cheap feed sources for cultivated fish and shell-fish (incl. using of sewage and other waste material)
(e) Ecological, social and economical planning of aquaculture projects
(f) Promotion of suitable marketing techniques
(g) Research on genetical and disease problems.
<section>6</section>
5. Conclusions and Recommendations
The discussions at the Round Table clearly showed that there has been an increasing awareness of the importance of aquaculture both in the developing and developed world since the first Round Table was held under the auspices of the Svanøy Foundation in 1974.
Based on a review of the state and potentials of this sector to contribute significantly to solving the food problem in Third World countries, it was concluded that there is an urgent need for expanded aid for these countries to achieve their targets of production. As development of this sector is likely to benefit the poorer sections of populations and contribute substantially to rural development, it deserves high priority consideration.
Aquaculture development requires concerted efforts of the public and private sectors. It would therefore be very appropriate for governmental as well as private organizations in donor countries to be involved in aid programmes. The Round Table recommends that Nordic countries adopt aid programmes in aquaculture, including participation in activities such as research, training and information, as well as in investments and pilot projects. The developing countries are urged to take appropriate actions for obtaining the necessary aid.
The Round Table is of the view that lack of experience in tropical aquaculture should not be a major constraint to the involvement of Nordic countries in aid for aquaculture development in the Third World. Aquaculture research and development requires multidisciplinary expertise. Nordic countries have expertise in a number of disciplines involved and experience in cold-water aquaculture. If the available specialists in different fields are given opportunities to work in bilateral and multilateral programmes/projects as members of technical assistance or research teams with personnel with experience of tropical aquaculture, not only aquaculture programmes/projects can be successfully implemented, but capabilities in both the donor, as well as recipient countries can be enhanced. It is also recommended that an active programme for training of warm-water aquaculturists be initiated in Nordic countries, e.g. through the wider utilization of FAO's associate expert scheme and the
opportunities offered by the ADCP regional aquaculture centres for on the job training of associate scientists in aquaculture research.
Lack of experienced specialists in donor countries can be met by utilizing the services of nationals from other countries.
The network of ADCP regional aquaculture centres and the national centres linked to them is an important mechanism for provision of essential support services to aquaculture development and should be maintained on a continued basis. The Round Table recommends that the Nordic aid agencies favourably consider participation in their financing and operation. The Aquaculture Information System initiated in the regional aquaculture centres would be of considerable benefit to the aquaculture industry and to science, both in developing and developed countries. It is therefore recommended that support to this system and participation in it should be considered by aid agencies and relevant institutions in Nordic countries.
<section>7</section>
6. Acknowledgements
The Round Table expresses its sincere appreciation to NORAD, FAO and the Svanøy Foundation, for providing such a unique opportunity for representatives of donor agencies and recipient countries to meet and discuss in an informal atmosphere the problems of a new and emerging industry like aquaculture. It is hoped that by the time the next Round Table in aquaculture is held in Svanøy, an effective cooperative programme in aquaculture would have developed with the active participation of Nordic countries.
<section>8</section>
ANNEXURE I
List of Participants
Dr. M. Youssouf ALI, Additional Secretary - in - charge, Fisheries and Livestock Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dacca-2
Mr. G.K. LIBABA, Director of Fisheries, Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Tancort House, P.O. Box 2462, Dar es-Salaam, Tanzania
Dr. Vijai D. SINGH, Deputy Commissioner, Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi, India
Mr. B. HANSEN, Consultant, DANIDA, Asiatisk Plads 2, Copenhagen, Denmark
Dr. Bernt I. DYBERN, Director, Institute of Marine Research, Box 5, 450 00 Lysekil, Sweden
Mr. N. VOGT, Assistant Director General, NORAD, Victoria Terasse 7, Oslo 2, Norway
Dr. T.V.R. PILLAY, Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome
<section>9</section>
ANNEXURE II
AGENDA
1. Opening of the Round Table
2. Review of the state of aquaculture development in the Third World, with special reference to development policies, strategies and potentials
3. Aid requirement of Third World countries and experience in obtaining and utilizing aid
4. General review of current aid projects in aquaculture
5. Nordic aid and aquaculture development
6. Proposals for the provision of appropriate aid and follow-up action
7. Preparation and adoption of a report on the discussions
<section>a</section>
ANNEXURE III
STATE OF AQUACULTURE, 1981^1
1 Based on a paper presented by Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, FAO, at the World Conference on Aquaculture, held in Venice, Italy, 21-25 September 1981
1. Introduction
In order to facilitate discussions on trends in aquaculture development and aid requirements in the future, this paper attempts a general overview of the developments in the sector since the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture in Kyoto in 1976 and outlines the present state of the industry. Aquaculture appears to have reached a real take-off stage and there is now a greater need for wider recognition of the real needs of the industry, the appropriatness of available technologies, appreciation of investment requirements and realistic time frames for developmental activities. A proper understanding of these can contribute very substantially to a sound development of aquaculture.
2. State of the industry
The fact that there has been much writing, many meetings, a proliferation of aid projects, and some poorly planned investments, should not lead us to the conclusion that a mountain of effort has gone into this sector producing nothing more than a mouse. Despite its traditional nature and socio-cultural importance, aquaculture has, till recently, been only a marginal activity in a relatively large number of countries. This continues to be the case even now, although the number of countries involved is now somewhat larger. It may not be justifiable to interpret the presence of a so-called fish culture station or an experimental or demonstration farm in a country or locality as evidence of major efforts or investment. There is no doubt that an increasing number of countries, including some of the leading fishing nations, are now devoting greater attention to aquaculture. In fact, there is now hardly any country that does not have some form of aquaculture activity.
2.1 Production
One of the ways of judging the state of the industry may be by an assessment of the output in terms of production. Although some efforts are now being made to establish a system for the collection of aquaculture statistics, we have, unfortunately, still to depend on rough estimates. It may be recalled that FAO made an estimate of world production through aquaculture in 1975 for the Kyoto Conference. An effort was made to update those estimates for this Conference, and to get more detailed data. But for a few exceptions, most countries did not have enough details and we had to be content with data only for broad categories. However, the available figures (Table I) show that the total world production through aquaculture in 1980 was over 8.7 million tons, of which 37.1 percent are finfish, 36.7 percent molluscs, 5.4 percent seaweeds and 0.8 percent crustaceans. This is over 42 percent more than 1975. The increases are mainly in production of molluscs, crustaceans and seaweeds.
The data for finfish show some decrease, but this is accounted for by adjustments in fish production reported from China. A good percentage of total Chinese aquaculture production, which is still the highest, is now ascribed to coastal aquaculture which consists mainly of molluscs and seaweeds. It is still not very clear whether fish culture production from inland waters is as low as now reported. While the increased production of shrimps and prawns world-wide is undoubtedly due to the availability of export markets, the increases in the production of molluscs and seaweeds are probably due to the low input sim