<title>Wood fuel surveys</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication has been prepared as part of FAO's Forestry for Local Community Development Programme. It has been made possible by a contribution from the Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA) to FAO to support this Programme.
The publication is intended for persons confronted with the task of trying to deal with the growing fuelwood shortages which threaten so much of the developing world. It is designed to help develop the information needed in order to understand the reasons for a shortage and to identify and plan successful interventions that can improve the situation.
Fuelwood supply and usage are usually embedded in a complex system within which most of the factors that affect the ability to intervene with forestry solutions are of a non-forestry nature. They are primarily human factors, connected with the ways in which people organize their lives and use their land and other resources.
Simply measuring wood fuel use and the tree resource, while a necessary part of the whole, will by itself give very little indication of what can and should be done. It has become clear in recent years that in order to provide an adequate information base for planning effective fuelwood-related projects it is necessary to draw as well upon the techniques and experience of other disciplines used in the study of rural, and urban, problems and development.
Recently the gravity of the rural energy problem in developing countries has attracted the attention of researchers from a number of disciplines, and has led to various important innovative studies the results of which are already greatly expanding our understanding of the fuelwood situation. FAO therefore invited a number of people engaged in such work to write about various aspects of surveying rural energy situations dominated by wood fuel supply and use. This publication contains the papers thus prepared.
The publication is consequently designed primarily to make available to those in the forestry profession relevant experience from other disciplines. It does not deal with the forestry components of studies of fuelwood situations as knowledge of this is assumed in the audience to which it is directed. Nor, as the editors explain in their introduction, is it a manual. Rather, it attempts to provide guidance to those responsible for planning fuelwood-related projects in identifying the nature of the situation they are confronted with and the appropriate approach to assembling information for planning.
The authors of the five papers are: David Brokensha, Professor of Anthropology and Director of the Social Process Research Institute at the University of California, Santa Barbara, writing with Alfonso Peter Castro, also from the Department of Anthropology; Russell deLucia, President of Meta Systems Inc. in Cambridge, Massachusetts; William B. Morgan, Professor of Geography at King's College in London; and Amulya K.N. Reddy, Professor, Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, and Convener, Centre for the Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas (ASTRA) at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. In addition, Howard S. Geller, American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy in Washington, writing with Gautam S. Dutt from the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies at Princeton University, contributed the sixth paper on measurement issues which appears as an annex. The publication was edited for FAO by David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro.
FAO is most grateful to the many other people who contributed to the work in one way or another. In particular it wishes to record its appreciation to Deanna Donovan, James Douglas, David French and Keith Openshaw for their contributions to the annex materials, and to C. Anthony Pryor for advice and assistance in the early stages of the exercise and for hosting a review meeting of the authors at the Center for Integrative Development in New York midway through the preparation of the publication.
J.E.M. Arnold, Chief
Policy and Planning Service
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Notes on contributors
Russell J. deLucia is President of Meta Systems Inc., in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He has worked on renewable energy surveys, and other issues related to rural and renewable energy planning, in Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Peru, Philippines and Thailand. He has written widely on the subject and is the author, with H. D. Jacoby and others, of the recent book "Energy Planning for Developing Countries: a study for Bangladesh".
Amulya Kumar N. Reddy is Professor in the Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, and Convenor of the Centre for the Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas (ASTRA), at the Indian Institute of Science, in addition he is Secretary, Karnataka State Council for Science and Technology. At the time of preparing this paper he was also Senior Visiting Research Scientist at the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies, Princenton University. He has very wide experience with energy studies in developing countries, ranging from policy issues to the very intensive, detailed studies of individual villages that he and his colleagues at ASTRA have carried out in South India.
William B. Morgan is Professor of Geography at King's College, University of London. He is the author, with Roland Moss, of the book "Fuelwood and Rural Energy Production and Supply in the Humid Tropics". He has had extensive experience with wood fuel studies in western Africa, especially in Nigeria where he has been serving as consultant to the University of Ife/United Nations University Rural Energy Systems Project covering three urban areas and their rural hinterlands in the southwest of the country.
David Brokensha is Professor of Anthropology, and Director of the Social Process Research Institute, at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He has studied wood fuel problems in Kenya and Tanzania, and was one of the principal contributors to the USAID review study "The Socio-economic Context of Fuelwood Use in Small Rural Communities".
Alfonso Peter Castro is an advanced graduate student at the Department of Anthropology at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and was also a contributor to "The Socio-economic Context of Fuelwood Use in Small Rural Communities". He is familiar with the fuelwood situation in Central America, and is now engaged in field work in central Kenya.
Howard S. Geller at the time of writing this paper was with the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy in Washington, D.C. Earlier he spent fourteen months evaluating the performance of fuelwood cookstoves as a Fulbright scholar at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, India.
Gautam S. Dutt is a member of the research staff at the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies at Princeton University. He has been investigating energy technologies for rural areas of developing countries, including field analyses of cookstoves in India in 1978 and Upper Volta in 1980.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The whole world is experiencing, in different degrees, an energy crisis, as available supplies of energy dwindle and alternate sources cannot rapidly be built up. In developing countries there are two major and inter-related aspects. First, increases in the price of imported petroleum products has put great strains on the balance of payments, with many countries spending more than half their foreign exchange on fossil fuel. Second, there is the problem of wood fuels and other traditional biomass forms of energy (crop residues, dung), upon which three-quarters of the population of developing countries depend for energy for cooking and heating.
In some countries the problem is already of alarming proportions, and overall perhaps 100 million people already have to live with a shortage of fuel for cooking and other basic purposes. Probably a further 1000 million are living in situations where fuel supplies are being maintained only by destruction of the woody vegetation, so that the incidence of shortages is growing rapidly.
As fuelwood shortages grow, people have to walk progressively further to collect it, so adding further hardship to their lives. Crop residues which could be used as livestock feed and dung which could be used as a soil conditioner have to be diverted to fuel use. Trees of immediate economic value such as fruit trees have to be sacrificed to the need for fuel. Progressively more scarce cash income has to go on buying fuel, at the expense of purchases of other essentials. Eventually, fuel shortages can become so acute as to force reductions in the amount of cooked food that is available.
The consequences are to increase individual poverty and suffering, and to hasten environmental deterioration as trees are out down. This "other energy crisis" is an important part of the problems affecting so many of the countries which are experiencing rapid population growth combined with decreasing agricultural production. These problems were emphasized at the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy held in Nairobi. But even after all the publicity there are still difficulties in finding effective measures to deal with the problem of shortage of wood fuels.
One reason for this is that relevant information is often lacking, or it is not clear what sorts of basic facts need be known, and how these facts can be collected, and used effectively in planning. This is because fuelwood shortages are usually part of complex local human and resource systems which need to be properly understood if we are to be able to help. The failure of so many past wood fuel projects stems from incomplete and insufficient understanding.
We hope that this publication will help, by indicating what needs to be known and how the data can be collected. It is intended for people responsible for planning, policy and management in ministries of forestry, natural resources, energy or rural development, and also for officials working with donor agencies that are engaged in forestry projects.
The focus on forestry related solutions is because for the foreseeable future wood is bound to continue to be the principal source of energy in most of those areas now dependent on it. But maintaining or expanding fuelwood supplies can be only a partial solution. Throughout, therefore, we stress the need to look not only at all aspects of the problem, but also at all the possible actions which could contribute to an overall solution to domestic energy needs.
We have not written a manual which Sets Out precisely what to do. We rather seek to help people to define specific situations, to appreciate the dimensions of the fuelwood problem, to recognise what sorts of information are needed to indicate appropriate methodologies for gaining that information and to suggest further reading. Throughout this volume we stress the need to be "situation-specific", because of the variety of different situations. There is, first, a range of environmental factors (vegetation, soils, climate) which sets limits on what can be done. Then there is also a variety of: local societies and how they are organized; traditional uses of fuel; alternate fuels; governmental resources and other aspects, which combine to define what is feasible. Finally, information-gathering might relate to a single village survey, or it may encompass a national energy survey. Given the extreme variation, we have not attempted to write definitive guidelines, but instead we
indicate the scope of the problem and general ways of tackling it.
Our focus is on aspects that are often neglected in forestry projects, and forestry surveys - on social relationships and the complex social, economic and ecological interrelationships; commercialization of fuels; fuel use in urban areas and rural-urban links; on the need to integrate fuelwood projects with other development programmes; on methods of fact-finding. While emphasizing these aspects, we deliberately avoid coverage of areas which are well known to readers (such as species selection and other technical aspects of forestry) or which are well documented (e.g. statistical aspects of survey design; descriptions of alternative energy technology).
This book consists of five main papers, written by different persons, from different backgrounds (see "Notes on Contributors"). Each paper covers a distinct topic, but all topics are inter-related. Mid-way through their preparation all five authors met to discuss each draft paper before finalisation so that each would be aware of the contributions of the others. The papers are followed by annexes that deal with specific problems of fuel surveys (citing actual surveys), with technical problems of measurement and with alternative energy technologies.
In the first paper, Russell deLucia provides a general overview, in which he emphasizes the need to look at rural energy not in isolation but as part of a complex system which can be analysed as a system. As deLucia states, many developing countries are unlikely to make an easy transition from traditional to commercial fuels, which heightens the importance of having detailed knowledge about wood fuels. His paper covers most salient aspects, including energy inefficiency of many existing practices, and the dynamic nature of most situations in which we find fuelwood shortage problems. A major point he makes is that surveys should never be seen as simply fact-finding exercises, but should be related to the task of identifying specific actions that attempt to improve the situation. In deciding on actions, it is necessary to integrate social and technical analyses, as one without the other will not lead to effective approaches. He concludes by considering the need for different
types of survey at different levels, and he amplifies this approach in an annex.
In the second paper, Amulya Reddy shifts the focus from the general to the particular, providing a detailed and rich description and analysis of interactions within a village energy system. Although this village is based on the uniquely detailed and exhaustive examination that he and his colleagues have carried out in India, Reddy indicates how the analysis can be applied in other situations. Reddy is concerned with perceptions of the villagers, as well as of specialists from outside. He stresses the perceived advantages, and costs, for local people, of multi-purpose trees, and shows that other uses of trees for fodder or construction) must always be taken into account, together with the other uses of crop residues and dung used for fuel. A strong emphasis is placed on the inter-relationship of social, agricultural and forest ecosystems.
Next, William Morgan examines some particular problems related to commercialization of wood fuels, with emphasis on urban areas although the rural sector is also analysed. Drawing on his wide experience in West Africa, where he was a leading participant in what is probably the most extensive fuel survey ever undertaken, Morgan makes a comprehensive study of the nature of urban, industrial and commercial fuels. He presents the main features of dealer networks, and also considers problems of substitution (other fuels) and of innovation.
In the fourth paper, David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro are concerned with specific problems of methods and organization of fuel-related social surveys, with emphasis on rural areas. They insist on several basic requirements, explaining that a fuel survey can only be properly interpreted if certain salient facts about the local community are understood; they emphasize the importance of indigenous knowledge, and of local participation both in surveys and in consequent actions. They stress flexibility, saying that there is no one approach suitable for all situations. And they provide advice and suggestions of survey methods, and of managing a survey and interpreting survey results.
The fifth paper brings together advice from the different contributors on field techniques for gathering specific categories of information related to fuelwood supply and use. In the opening sections David Brokensha and Alfonso Peter Castro review the various categories of information that might need to be obtained using social survey methods. This is followed by a section in which Amulya Reddy discusses needs for information on land use and land capability within the rural village. In the last section, William Morgan outlines special survey needs for commercial wood fuel systems.
The first annex, on survey design and implementation, opens with a discussion by Russell deLucia of different categories of survey, of the strengths and weaknesses of each, and of the circumstances in which they could prove appropriate. This is illustrated in the second annex by descriptions of a number of actual surveys, and is followed by summaries, contributed by a number of authors, of a number of other surveys at different levels - national, regional, sectoral and village - and using different approaches. Each summary explains the scope, scale and objectives of the survey, how it was organized, the methodology and resources used, and the output from the survey.
The third annex, by Howard Geller and Gautam Dutt, deals with measuring the efficiency with which fuel is used. It starts from the fact that the agnitude of fuelwood use in developing countries is very largely a function of the inefficiency of traditional cooking mechanisms. In planning interventions, it Can therefore be very important to know the present level of efficiency, and how needs would change with the introduction of more efficient devices and practices. The annex describes methods for measuring stove performance, and procedures for conducting tests and interpreting test results. It is supplemented by a short note, by Keith Openshaw, on measurement of wood and charcoal.
The final annex contains additional background material by Russell deLucia relating to rural energy use and technology. It deals with changing energy use in agriculture and industry, and the principal features of biogas, solar, wind and other sources of small-scale renewable energy related to such uses, and their potential as viable alternatives to wood fuels.
<section>4</section>
1. Defining the scope of wood fuel systems
Russell deLucia
1. Introduction
2. Basic characteristics of wood fuel systems
3. Important system perspectives
4. Dynamic features of wood fuel systems
5. Information gathering
6. Wood fuel survey design
1. Introduction
This paper presents some ideas that my colleagues and I have found useful in thinking about energy issues for developing countries. In particular, it discusses factors which have influenced our thinking regarding the scope of wood fuel surveys and associated efforts. The chapter draws heavily on both earlier and ongoing^1 work. It reflects ideas developed over the last few years with a number of colleagues interested in these issues,^2 but the author is solely responsible for their interpretation in the present paper.
^1 Including other work of the author (deLucia, 1980 and 1981; deLucia and Tabors, 1980), corporate work (Meta Systems Inc., 1978 to 1980) in which the author participated, and recent work of a colleague (J.H. Arnold, 1980).
^2 I am indebted to a number of my colleagues - John Briscoe, Douglas Smith, Ramesh Bhatia, Mike Lesser, Richard Tabors, and John Arnold. In addition, there are a number of individuals elsewhere whose work or writing have particularly influenced the thinking that is reflected in this paper. They are too numerous to mention them all here, but Mike Arnold at FAO, M. Nurul Islam at the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dacca, and David Brokensha at the University of California deserve particular mention.
Wood fuel surveys can be, and have been, undertaken for a variety of purposes. The most important purpose for carrying out a survey is to prepare for action; that is, to gather information needed to improve the rural energy situation, in order to facilitate the process of development. This paper is concerned with surveys designed to serve this developmental purpose.
Within such a framework surveys may need to be undertaken for a spectrum of purposes, ranging from the estimation of the magnitude of fuel use, and/or the spatial variation in this use, to the planning of a specific project (or projects). Different surveys are likely to be needed to serve the process of planning at the macro, sector or project level, and they can differ widely.
The planner at the national level, concerned mainly with the share of fuelwood in the country's forest product balance, or of wood fuels in its energy balance, requires only broad aggregate estimates. To establish forestry or energy end use balances for a particular sector more detail would be needed - to differentiate use by household, commercial, industrial and transport sectors. Still more detail is needed if the aim is to differentiate among different types of fuel.
Estimates of traditional fuel^3 use, even those requiring information on end use, sector, fuel, and spatial variation, can be based on surveys of demand characteristics. Project evaluation of energy investments that depend on fuelwood requires a different sort of survey from consumption surveys. In many oases investment planning requires understanding of supply resources, the existing and potential demands, and the nature of the systems in which these supplies and demands are balanced.
^3 There is no universally accepted term for this class of fuels - i.e. fuelwood, charcoal, crop residues, animal dung. The frequently used term 'non-commercial fuels' is inaccurate since for some fuels - firewood, charcoal - there is usually a commercial cash market. Even where there may not be a cash market, there is frequently some form of 'in kind' exchange for the-commodity. The term 'traditional' fuels is used here to distinguish these from conventional fuels and energy sources which are fossil, hydro, or nuclear based. Thus the traditional fuels are part of the broad class of energy supplies based on renovable resources.
Rural energy systems, both those that are largely dependent on traditional fuels and technologies and those that are undergoing technological modernization, are characterized by interrelations that are important to understand for policy and project formulation. In subsistence situations traditional fuels are part of complex systems in which the important interrelations are social and institutional as well as physical. The use of now energy technologies affects (i) technologies that form different parts of the fuel cycle, (ii) the resources that these technologies utilize, and (iii) other possible uses of the same resources.
A basic premise of this paper, and of the rest of the publication, is that surveys will not be effective in providing the information that will allow the identification and planning of successful interventions in fuelwood shortage situations, unless they reflect the relevant interrelationships within the surrounding systems, and are correctly designed to elicit the appropriate level of detail. These points are stressed here because most past work on fuelwood, not, surprisingly, has not fully met these criteria. The perceptions of what is needed have taken shape only in the past few years. Most earlier work was consequently too narrowly conceived, failing to provide sufficient, or sufficiently precise, information on the factors determining fuelwood supply and use and the basis for understanding the relevant interrelationships.
The present paper is intended to provide an overview of the components of the process of defining and executing a wood fuel survey, the more important of which are discussed in greater detail in later papers, and to set these in broader perspective. The next section of the paper discusses various characteristics of traditional fuel and energy systems that can influence the scope and methodology of a fuelwood survey. A subsequent section discusses system perspectives that markedly influence surveys. This is followed by a treatment of difficulties in estimating both the supply and demand sides of traditional fuel systems, including questions regarding the use of statistical and other source material, which concludes with discussing the different types of survey appropriate to different levels of need-for information; also, some general principles are stated regarding recommended approaches in deciding what to do.
2. Basic characteristics of wood fuel systems
2.1 Ubiquitous use of fuelwood
2.2 Non-commercial nature
2.3 Availability and access
2.4 Seasonal variation
2.5 Efficiency in end use
2.6 Changes with income and price
The following sections touch on some characteristics of traditional fuel systems that appear in many situations and which need to be considered in identifying the information needs and methodologies. Much of this discussion leads to a viewpoint, presented explicitly later in this paper, that traditional fuel systems are part of complex physical and social systems, and that potential changes must reflect these complexities.
2.1 Ubiquitous use of fuelwood
Recent FAO estimates suggest that in 1980 approximately three-fourths of the population of the developing world - 2 000 million people - depended on traditional fuels for their domestic energy requirements, and that by the year 2000 this number could grow to 3 000 million (FAO, 1981). Traditional fuels, a large portion of the overall energy consumption in most developing countries, are used extensively and often exclusively in meeting the household needs of people in both rural and urban areas. They are also used to a varying extent in the commercial, agricultural and industrial sectors, including some large-scale industrial uses.
Traditional fuels represent as much as 90 percent of the total energy use in countries such its Nepal, Tanzania and Mali. Most developing countries lie in a range from 30 to 80 percent or more overall reliance on traditional fuels, and the importance of traditional fuels may well be increasing.
The transition from traditional to commercial fuels, common to the history of industrial development in the developed world, will in all likelihood not occur in many developing countries in the foreseeable future. Traditional fuel use will probably remain large in absolute quantity, even if most resource bases are deteriorating due to population growth and depletion of local forest resources. None of the alternative sources of energy, discussed later in the paper and in Annex IV, could be developed and put in place at acceptable cost in quantities likely to remove the dependence of the bulk of this enormous, and growing, number of people upon traditional fuels.
The use of traditional fuels in the domestic sector is not simply a rural phenomenon. Urban households rely on traditional fuels, often charcoal. Many of the more serious scarcity and environmental degradation problems occur in areas surrounding major urban areas. While the use of commercial fuels for cooking, water heating, and space heating is more common in the urban areas where incomes are higher and these fuels are more readily and cheaply available, traditional fuel use is extensive.
Domestic uses of firewood, charcoal and agricultural residues are for cooking, heating water and space heating. The last is relatively unimportant in the lowland humid tropics, but can be substantial at high elevations and during chilly seasons elsewhere.
Table 1-1 shows the estimated range of average per capita use of fuelwood in a number of broad regions in the developing world. The differences mainly reflect different climatic situations, and fuel availability and economic conditions which are discussed in the subsequent sections. Use in particular locations can vary considerably both within and outside these ranges.
Table 1-1 Fuelwood use in selected regions
m^3/cap/yr
Africa
Arid and sub-arid areas
Savanna areas
1.0 to 1.5
High forest areas
1.2 to 1.7
Mountainous areas
1.4 to 1.9
Asia
Indo-Gangetic plains
0.2 to 0.7
Lowland areas in S.E. Asia
0.3 to 0.9
High forest areas
0.9 to 1.3
Mountainous areas
1.3 to 1.8
Latin America
Andean plateau
0.95 to 1.6
Arid areas
0.6 to 0.9
Semi-arid areas
0.7 to 1.2
Other areas
0.5 to 1.2
Source: Map of the Fuelwood Situation in Developing Countries Explanatory Note. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, 1981.
Variations in consumption levels also reflect variable use of wood fuels in rural industries and agriculture. Though seldom approaching the scale of domestic use, these can be considerable an is shown, for example, by the results of the survey in Nepal by Donovan reported on in Annex II.
2.2 Non-commercial nature
The traditional fuels of firewood, charcoal, agricultural residues (rice, straw) and dung are, in most parts of the world, largely non-commercial in the nature of their paths from point of supply to ultimate use (charcoal is the one general exception). Most traditional fuels are gathered by the users, and women are the major users and gatherers in much of the world. Cash markets usually do exist, mainly for part of fuelwood supply and much of charcoal (the more concentrated fuels). Occasionally cash markets develop for dung and for crop residues, mainly for urban consumers, but also for some rural households and institutions (shops, schools, bars). Although cash or formal markets may not play an important role for many traditional fuels, such as rice or Millet straw, there are frequently complex service or exchange relations in rural societies in which traditional fuels are just one component.
This non-commercial nature of traditional fuels is one of the reasons why these energy supplies are not generally accounted for in forestry and energy statistics. Energy to the statistician has usually included only those energy forms marketed on a large scale through some centralized market system (coal, oil, electricity) - the supplies referred to as commercial energies. This has been a major factor in the widespread failure to recognize the size of the share of fuelwood in national energy and forestry balances. Although perceptions of the statisticians are rapidly changing in this respect, the statistics are at present woefully inadequate.
2.3 Availability and access
Because of its non-commercial nature firewood use is heavily affected by its physical availability to the user, which varies markedly from country to country, within a country, and even among groups within a specific village. There are a number of reasons for this.
Collection for own use requires that there be local supplies. These have often been heavily depleted by deforestation. Even when forest stands are close, government or other ownership and use regulations may prevent firewood use. Ownership or-use characteristics may also limit the access of available non-forest woodland along roads, between crop areas, or within homesteads.
In many countries major portions of forest areas are controlled by government departments and access and use for firewood offtake and/or charcoal production is limited, or prohibited, even if enforcement is limited. In other cases, while ownership may be at least nominally with central governments, control is with local public authorities. These local bodies are often influenced by larger landowners and other richer or powerful people, and so are unrepresentative of the whole populations, and likely to distribute production unevenly.
Access problems also exist for the poor or landless with respect to agricultural residues such as dung. However, here the problem is not just a matter of ownership, since animals that graze in forests and uncultivated lands produce dung which is less available than dung from animals kept in stalls. In many situations availability and access can vary significantly within a given village, according to kinship, class or patron-client relationships. Access is often strongly related to ownership of energy producing resources (forest or homestead lands, animals or crop land) with the small landowners and landless being at a distinct disadvantage. The distributional aspects can also be a function of location, particularly in hilly areas where a village can occupy an area encompassing significant differences in elevation, and resources (forest or good crop land) vary with elevation.
Availability may also be affected by alternative uses, and alternative fuels. For example, some countries mandate that residues be burned in the field to control disease (e.g., cotton in Sudan), a