<title>Unasylva - No. 140 - The importance of medicinal plants</title>
<section>1</section>
The healing plants
Edward S. Ayensu
EDWARD S. AYENSU, of Ghana, is Director of the Office of Biological Conservation, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. This article is a shortened version of "A worldwide role for the healing power of plants" which originally appeared in the Smithsonian Magazine, published by the Smithsonian Institution.
Medicinal plants native to developing countries are often exported to developed countries where they are screened, analysed and used in drug preparations, only to be returned as high-priced medicines.
The therapeutic value and healing powers of plants were demonstrated to me when I was a boy of about ten. I had developed an acute, persistent abdominal pain which did not respond readily to hospital medication. My mother had taken me to the city's central hospital on several occasions where different drugs were administered. In total desperation, she took me to Egya Mensa, a well-known herbalist in my home town in the Western Province of Ghana. This man was no stranger to the medical doctors at the hospital. He had earned the reputation of offering excellent help when they were confronted with difficult cases where Western medicine had failed to effect a cure.
After a brief interview, not very different from those that occur daily in the consulting offices of many general medical practitioners, he left us waiting in his consulting room while he went out to the field. He returned with several leaves and the bark of a tree, and one of his attendants immediately prepared a decoction. I was given a glass of this preparation; it tasted extremely bitter, but within an hour or so I felt some relief. The rest of the decoction was put in two large bottles so that I could take doses periodically. Within about three days the frequent abdominal pains stopped and I regained a good appetite. I have appreciated the healing powers of medicinal plants ever since.
My experience may sound unusual to those who come from urban areas of the developed world, but for those in the less affluent nations such experiences are a common occurrence. In fact, demographic studies by various national governments and intergovernmental organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) indicate that for 75 to 90 percent of he rural populations of the world, the herbalist is the only person who handles their medical problems.
In African culture, traditional medical practitioners are always considered to be influential spiritual leaders as well, using magic and religion along with medicines. Illness is handled with man's hidden spiritual powers and with the application of plants that have been found especially to contain healing powers.
Chief Joseph Olusola Lambo of Nigeria, in a recent interview for the Voice of America, described his own introduction to herbal medicine at the age of 15, some 40 years ago. Currently president of the Nigerian Association of Medical Herbalists, Chief Lambo became interested in traditional medicine as a result of a severe headache he had while very young. A relative escorted him to a village where a traditional medical practitioner washed young Lambo's head in a pool with a locally made soap containing native medicine. Soon after this treatment, his headache vanished. He was so impressed that he began his own research into herbalism. To him, this was "science in action".
Chief Lambo's youngest brother, Dr Thomas Lambo, is the Deputy Director-General of the World Health Organization and an internationally recognized psychiatrist. They are both very much concerned about the relationship between traditional medical practice and modern medicine. Chief Lambo explains: "In the olden days the relationship was very strained because the modern doctors did not believe in traditional medicine. They did not want even to see traditional healers. But lately they have found out that there is a lot to be gained from traditional medicine." The situation has improved so much that at the Drug Research Center at the University of Ife, in Nigeria, a herbalist is employed as a full-time consultant to Dr Abayomi Sofowora's plant chemistry programme. Dr Sofowora and his colleagues, while well-versed in modern scientific research, recognize the importance of herbal medicine and believe there is much to learn from reputable herbalists.
During a recent trip to New Delhi, I visited several "drugstores" filled with only locally manufactured medicinal plant products. One of the storekeepers handed me a tin of medicine labelled Baidyanath Chyawanprash Avaleha. "Take this and use it. It builds up vitality and memory. It can also cure bronchial and respiratory diseases. You can use six to 12 grams with milk or honey twice a day. It will be good for you," he said.
flowers of African tulip tree - Spathodea campanulata heal skin ulcers
peppers = base for many herbal remedies
African vine Strophanthus hispidus both an arrow poison and a cardiotonic
GRADUATION CEREMONY FOR HERBALISTS IN GHANA - many Western-trained doctors prescribe traditional medicines
A HERBALIST'S LABORATORY IN GHANA - local medicines are often healthier than expensive synthetic imports
I picked up some well-packaged bark and roots of Rauwolfia serpentina, a plant that was very well-known in ancient Asiatic medicine and contains the alkaloid reserpine. Before I could ask any questions about it, the storekeeper said, "This is a very important plant. It contains a lot of very powerful chemicals. Do you know that this plant has the power to lower your blood pressure and your pulse? Do you know of anyone who has hypertension? This is the best medicine for it. Well, we also use it to calm down mad people, because alkaloids in the plant have specific influence on the mind." The storekeeper, I later learned, had a medical degree from an Indian university but chose to administer herbal medicine because he felt his people were better off with local medicines than with the expensive, imported synthetic drugs that had no traditional, social or psychological meaning.
He proceeded to lecture me on the fact that India was one of the countries that had pioneered the development and practice of subsequently well-documented indigenous systems of medicine, the two most notable being the Ayurveda (Hindu) and Unani (Greek and Islamic). He stressed that the materia medica of these two systems encompasses a rich heritage of indigenous herbal practices that have helped to sustain the health of the peoples of India for centuries. "I am very much pleased and satisfied that after training as a modern medical doctor I have returned to our kind of medicine, which is most suitable for us," he told me.
In the neighbouring Himalayan Kingdom of Nepal, at the Royal Drug Research Laboratory, where an impressive programme of medicinal plant research is being conducted, I met the Director-General. Dr S.S. Malla, who also expressed tremendous satisfaction in the increased attention to herbal medicine in his country and abroad. He proceeded to remind me that medicinal plants have played an important role in Hindu culture, as shown in the Rig-Veda, which is said to have been written between 4500 and 1600 BC. Then he added, "It is unlikely that the Hindu culture will abandon such a rich heritage, especially in the face of escalating prices of Western drugs."
While on a tour of the research facilities, I was prompted to ask several questions concerning the acceptability of herbal medicine, especially among the Western-educated Nepalese. "Deep down they all trust the local medicines. Some of the crude drugs, species of Rauwolfia, Ephedra, Aconitum and Nardostachys, are still very popular for the cure of hypertension and many heart diseases," reported one of the staff members.
In recent years, medicinal plants have been recognized widely as "chemical factories". The Eurasian aroid Acorus calamus, for example, used currently in 51 different drug preparations because the rhizomes contain an essential oil with insecticidal and sedative properties, is under heavy collecting pressure.
Around the world, the bulk of the raw materials used in preparing drugs are mostly collected from the wild. In fact, heavy collecting of certain plants for local as well as foreign pharmaceutical markets has become a major problem. A striking example is the depletion of a much sought-after species of yam (Dioscorea), whose chemical compound diosgenin is used as the foundation material in the manufacture of birth-control pills.
Vincristine, the chemical derived from the Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) sells for more than US$ 100000 per 0.5 kg (1 lb). It has led to a remarkable decrease in mortality among young leukaemia patients. In China, at present, literally all available soil suitable for the growth of this plant is under cultivation. Because of the low yield of vincristine from Catharanthus roseus, it is necessary for the Chinese to process at least 100000 kg in order to recover a reasonable yield of the alkaloid. The leaves represent about ten percent of the total dry weight of the plant. Therefore the Chinese usually process about 900000 kg of dried plants at a time.
China is perhaps the leading country in systematically amalgamating herbal medicine into natural health-care systems. In several visits to China, I have had the opportunity to observe the practice of herbal pharmacology on a mass scale.
On the outskirts of Beijing, for example, there is an experimental plantation for the institute of Materia Medical This establishment, covering about 26 ha (64 acres), contains some 1500 species of well-tended medicinal plants. "Here about 10000 barefoot doctors are trained every year to gain experience in the cultivation of medicinal plants," an Institute official explained. "Our population is big' therefore we need more such doctors to work with the people in the cities as well as the remote areas." The plantation is also recognized as a reliable supply house where pharmaceutical research laboratories obtain sufficient authenticated plant material for biological evaluations or chemical studies.
In travelling through the developing world. I am pleasantly surprised to find mounting interest among even the best-educated people in traditional medicine. This observation is particularly true of people in the Indian subcontinent. The educated public in Africa and Latin America still have some way to go in reeducating themselves. I am particularly disturbed by Third World Western-trained doctors who show total disregard and disdain for the importance that herbal medicine plays in the world's health situation. Some of these doctors are even ashamed to admit that their parents relied on these ancient folk remedies to treat and save their lives during childhood. Many of the Western-trained doctors seem to have been brainwashed into believing that only drugs originating in the developed countries have healing powers.
Some of these same doctors seem unaware that the major pharmaceutical houses are constantly searching for new active compounds from the medicinal plants of developing countries. Confronted with mounting prices for drugs, particularly the synthetic drugs derived from petrochemicals, chemists are turning their attention back to herbs in their search for new drug substances that have to this day eluded them. Furthermore, many developing countries are aware that their native medicinal plants are imported into the developed countries where they are screened, analysed and used in drug preparations, only to be returned to them at exorbitant prices. This situation has been described by Dr Halfdan Mahler, Director-General of WHO, as "drug colonization".
For health, social and economic reasons it seems clear that developing countries should begin an extensive programme aimed at an examination of the most important medicinal plants. At the moment, information on such plants in most countries is dispersed and unorganized. Much of it is in the heads of aging herbalists who represent a dying breed.
an array of medicinal plants
A WELL-STOCK ED STALL AT AN OPEN MARKET - West Africa's typical "drugstore"
A MODERN HERBAL PHARMACY IN INDIA - a new wave of traditional medicine practices
CHINESE MEDICINE CHEST - a cornucopia of medicinal herbs
MODERN PACKAGING - a new image for traditional medicines
However, there is a general feeling among specialists that gradually the magic, superstition and dogma that surround medicinal plants are giving way to an understanding of the real basis of their curative powers. The proliferation of information on "natural foods" has influenced the recent great interest in herbal remedies.
More and more people realize that a substantial number of the prescriptions bought from drugstores contain different crude plant products. In 1973, the last year in which good data were available on prescriptions in the United States, it was shown that of the 1532 thousand million prescriptions sold in pharmacies throughout the United States, 41.2 percent contained natural products and of these, 25.2 percent were products from flowering plants. If prescriptions offered by state and federal hospitals in the United States alone are considered, it is estimated that prescriptions containing flowering plants or their products amount to US$4 thousand million a year.
For those in the affluent world, it may seem inconceivable that about 85 percent of the world's population in the poor nations, when they are ill, do not consult medical doctors and many never enter a hospital from the time they are born until they die. Such statistics have prompted the World Health Organization, after many years of benign neglect, to initiate a programme to promote and develop traditional medicine to be carried out throughout the developing world.
Traditional medicine "needs to be evaluated, given due recognition and developed so as to improve its efficacy, safety, availability and wider application at low cost," according to WHO reports. "It is already the people's own health-care system and is well accepted by them. It has certain advantages over imported systems of medicine in any setting because as an integral part of the people's culture, it is particularly effective in solving certain cultural health problems. It can and does freely contribute to scientific and universal medicine. Its recognition, promotion and development will secure due respect for a people's culture and heritage."
Dr R.H. Bannerman, until recently the Programme Manager for Traditional Medicine at WHO, summed up the current feeling on traditional medicine as follows: 'There are those who lake a hostile attitude toward traditional medicine, and those who, without reservation, accept all things handed down by tradition. Both of these attitudes are indeed wrong. The more realistic tendency which is emerging is discriminating and discarding the crude and harmful practices while retaining the refined and useful methods for further development and application."
All countries belonging to WHO have pledged to provide primary health-care for all their people by the year 2000. Obviously, we cannot continue to rely exclusively on the administration of Western medicine. This is particularly self-evident when we realize that, for example, there are more medical doctors currently within the metropolitan Washington, D.C. area in the United States than there are in the whole of Black Africa. As traditional medicine gains the respect of our modern societies, there is the likelihood that a new breed of practitioners will emerge. I can foresee a transformation: the development of well-educated herbalists who can write down their diagnoses, follow up their clinical observations, and record the efficacy and safety of the herbs administered. Finally, one hopes the traditional healer will retain the trappings of his medical practice and maintain his psychological position in the community.
<section>2</section>
Medicine trees of the tropics
Robin Levingston and Rogelio Zamora
ROBIN LEVINGSTON, of the FAO Forestry Department, Rome, deals with afforestation. ROGELIO ZAMORA is with the Forest Research Institute, Ministry of Natural Resources, College, Laguna, the Philippines.
Medicinal plants play an important role in the lives of rural people' particularly in remote parts of developing countries with few health facilities.
"LA FORÊT DE LA LAMA" IN THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN - a source of many forest trees with medicinal uses
Tropical forests are the source of a large proportion of the world's recognized medicinal plants. It is variously estimated that there are between 200000 and 700000 species of tropical flowering plants. Such a wealth of identified species, which have been in no sense thoroughly investigated, constitutes an enormous potential source of plant-derived chemicals useful to man.
Tropical forests are disappearing at a frightening rate and man is unwittingly observing the decrease of a natural resource which has been described as a "power-house of evolution" and a major source of "wild medicine". FAO, UNEP, Unesco and IUCN have realized the implications of this steady loss and are trying to stem such destruction of forests, largely caused by shifting cultivation arising out of rural poverty and a hunger for land for subsistence farming.
Since May 1978 the World Health Organization has been making a study of medicinal plants. This study prompted the initial identification of 20000 species of medicinal plants and a more detailed investigation of a short list of 200. A great many of these plants have their origins in the world's tropical forests and their present use is largely rooted in traditional medicines which play a major part in maintaining the health and welfare of both rural and city dwellers in developing countries.
The disappearance of the natural vegetation and even its replacement with artificially established forests of exotic species are changing the ecology of the environment with a consequent disappearance or change in occurrence of many medicinally useful species, thus depriving rural communities of their benefits.
How can FAO assist in the conservation of these species? The most appropriate programmes appear to be those dealing with forest conservation and management and forestry for local community development. The former provides the rationale and systems for managing forests and the latter helps identify and promote the cultivation and use of forest-derived species, which are appropriate for establishment by rural communities because of their potential multiple use.
What appropriate species of medicinal value are already known? The following arc relevant examples and there are no doubt many others awaiting discovery both from literature as well as from field identification and study.
One of the medicinal plants that thrives in humid tropical forests is Mallotus philippensis (Lamk.) Muell-Arg. (fem. Euphorbiaceae) commonly known as "kamala". The natural range of kamala extends from the rain forests of tropical Australia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and southern China to the moist evergreen or semi-evergreen forests of India, where kamala is often a secondary species.
The tree itself is generally narrow-stemmed and grows up to 15-20 m in height whereas in India a smaller many-branched evergeen tree with a short buttressed bole is found. Kamala is recognizable by its deep red slash and the downy reddish glandular underside to its shiny-surfaced leaves. The fruit is a globose capsule densely covered with a reddish-brown glandular pubescence from which the main medicinal products are derived.
Kamala has a wide variety of medicinal uses. All parts of the tree can be used as external applications for parasitic infections of the skin. The powdered glands and hairs of the fruit are a useful anthelmintic and extracts of kamala and hexachlorethane have given encouraging results in treating fascioliasis (liver fluke) in cattle. The fruit is also used to treat intestinal worms.
Other functions of kamala include the use of its leaves as fodder; its oil as a fixative in cosmetic preparations, colouring of foodstuffs and beverages and the use of kamala wood in light construction, tool handles, turnery and even for paper pulp. In Australia the wood is used for brushware, flooring, and packing cases. It is also the long-valued source of the dyeing substance used on silk and wool, also known in the trade as "kamala".
Another genus of medicinal value from the humid tropics is Rauwolfia (fem. Apocynaceae). Like kamala, it is pan-tropical and comprises 100 species. The two most important species appear to be Rauwolfia vomitoria Afz. from the humid tropical secondary forests of Africa, ranging from Senegal to the Congo, Uganda and East Africa and Rauwolfia serpentina Benth and Kurz, from the moist deciduous forests of tropical Asia.
The Rauwolfia species have three main medicinal uses: raw material for the extraction of isolated alkaloids, preparation of extracts with a standardized alkaloid content and the production of powdered Rauwolfia roots. The pharmaceutical derivatives are used mainly as antihypertensives and as sedatives. Folk medicinal uses of the root bark and roots are extensive, particularly for their aphrodisiac, emetic, purgative, antipsoric, dysenteric, sedative, abortive and insecticidal properties. Decoctions of the leaves of R. vomitoria have a powerful emetic effect and chopped leaves stewed with animal fat are applied to swellings. In India, R. serpentina root preparations have been used for centuries in the relief of disorders of the central nervous system, as an anthelmintic and for the treatment of intestinal disorders as well as the stimulation of uterine contractions.
Medicinal types
Abortifacient: inducing abortion
Anthelmintic: expelling or destroying parasitic worms, especially of the intestines
Antipsoric: relieving itches
Aperient: gently moving the bowels: a laxative
Astringent: drawing together soft organic tissues; a styptic
Bechic: tending to cure or relieve a cough; an expectorant
Cardiotonic: tending to increase the tonus of heart muscle
Diaphoretic: increasing perspiration
Dysenteric: dispelling dysentery or severe diarrhoea
Emetic: inducing vomiting
Emmenagogic: inducing menstruation
Expectorant: promoting discharge of mucus from the respiratory tract
Haemostatic: stopping bleeding
Hypotensive: causing low blood pressure or a lowering of blood pressure
Febrifugic: mitigating or removing fever
Purgative: purging or tending to purge: cathartic
Rubefacient: inducing redness of the skin by external application
Vulnerary: speeding the healing of wounds
The main buyers of products derived from Rauwolfia in the early 1970s were the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Switzerland and the USA. Prices then were US$ 3.75-4.00 per 0.5 kg (1 lb) for powdered root of R. serpentina and US$ 0.30-0.40 per gram for the alkaloid, reserpine. The root and root bark of R. vomitoria commanded a price of DM 46 per kg/c.i.f. and at that time the market appeared "remarkably stable".
A third important medicinal plant comes from the tropical forests of South America. Variously called "Tofu balsam." "Peru balsam" or "Quinoquino," Myroxylon balsamum (L.) Harms. (fem. Leguminosae) is another large forest tree growing up to 35 m in height. It is a native of the forests of Venezuela, Peru, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala and Colombia, ranging from subtropical dry to wet to tropical dry zones.
The species can be distinguished by its yellow-spotted grey bark and evergreen, oddly pinnate, oblong leaflets 6-9 cm long and 3-4 cm wide. The white flowers are borne in axillary racemes 10-20 cm long and produce a winged indehiscent pod (samara) 5-10 cm long with a single seed.
The medicinal product is a balsam: an important ingredient of tincture of benzoin. It is also used in ointment as an antiseptic, in cough syrups as an expectorant, as an inhalant for catarrh and bronchitis and is said to have bactericidal, pectoral, tonic and vulnerary properties. An ethanol extract is an antibiotic against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It is also used to treat skin complaints, haemorrhoids and bedsores.
Tolu balsam's other non-medicinal uses include the flavouring of cough syrups, soft drinks, confectionery, ice-cream and chewing-gum. Oil of Tolu balsam is used in cosmetics and soaps. The wood can be used for purposes ranging from railway ties to cabinet work. The seed provides flavouring for the alcoholic drink, aguardiente; the tree provides shade for cultivated crops and it is also used ornamentally.
Annual world production (1981) of Tolu balsam is about 65 tonnes of which El Salvador exports 48 tonnes or 74 percent. The price of Peru balsam is US$ 1.30-2.40 per 0.5 kg (1 lb), and roughly half the world's production is exported to the USA.
AT A RURAL COMMUNE HOSPITAL - where Chinese health-care relies on herbal medicines
AT A RURAL COMMUNE HOSPITAL - where Chinese health-care relies on herbal medicines
Less generally useful but of considerable pharmaceutical interest is another representative of the family Apocynaceae, the red or Madagascar periwinkle Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don - syn. Lochnera rosea (L.) Reichb, f. or Vinca rosea (L.), which originates in the tropical forests of Madagascar and is now found pan-tropically.
Its unprepossessing common name (red periwinkle) belies the potency of the alkaloids produced from the whole plant, such as vincristine and vincaleukoblastine, which helped in producing a breakthrough in the chemotherapeutical treatment of Hodgkin's disease and leukaemia. Parts of the plant are also used in the preparation of remedies for diabetes in places as far apart as Natal, Viet Nam and Queensland. A wealth of folk remedies are prepared from the plant, which is regarded as having astringent, diaphoretic, emmenagogic, abortifacient, bechic, cardiotonic, hypotensive, febrifugic and tranquillizing properties.
The primary active chemical constituents which are most concentrated in root bark are the alkaloids ajmaline, serpentine and reserpine, but at least 12 others have been positively identified, including leurosine and vincaleukoblastine. Vinceine, tetrahydroalstonine and lochnerine, which are also present in the root bark, are important for pharmaceutical purposes.
There are commercial preparations known as Velban, Covincia and Vinlin, but the main extract is vincristine which sells for around US$ 200000 per kg and requires about 530 tonnes of plant material for its production. The worldwide trade in vincristine is worth about US$ 50 million per annum.
In the arid tropics there is another medicinally valuable species worth mentioning: Jatropha curcas L. of the family Euphorbiaceae, commonly known in Portuguese as "Pinhão de Purga" or "Pinhão de Paraguai" and in English as "Physic nut" or "Purging nut". The species was originally found in tropical America but has now spread to all parts of the tropical world.
In Burma, the seeds are used as an aperient and are edible once the embryo has been removed. Oil from the seeds has been described as laxative, emetic and even drastically purgative. It is also a rubefacient for rheumatism as well as in alleviating toothache. The leaves are antiparasitic and a decoction of these is used as a vulnerary or with natron for gonorrhoea. It can also be used as a cough remedy, if the roots are included, and as an antidiarrhoeic.
Jatropha curcas forms a large shrub 3-4 m high with broadly ovate, cordate, acute, lobed, glabrous leaves measuring 10-15 cm long by 7.5-12.5 cm wide. Its small yellowish-green flowers are in loose panicles of cymes; its fruits are 2.5 cm long, breaking into three 2-valved cocci containing ovoid-oblong dull brownish-black seeds.
Jatropha curcas is drought resistant, and has spread naturally in many tropical countries. It is now even found in the arid Cape Verde Islands from sea-level to 1000 m and thrives particularly well at 450-750 metres.
The shrub is grown readily from cuttings 45-100 cm long, and can also be propagated by seed although growth from cuttings is more rapid. Bushes start to yield seeds at 4-5 months of age and have a life span of about 50 years. When dry, the seeds are retained on the bush for a long time. The leaves are not browsed by goats and the bush stands lopping and trimming well. This, together with its ability to sprout from cuttings, makes it a good hedge plant. The species could also be considered for soil and water conservation purposes on eroded catchments as it is extremely adaptable to most soil conditions.
The seed oil contains curcasine or curcin, a toxalbumin resembling ricine and a resinous substance (resinolipoid) which are both poisonous. Another component is curcas oil which contains myristic, palmitic, stearic, arachidic, loecic and linoleic acids. The seeds owe their purgative property to the above oils.
The abundant sap contains 10 percent tannin and is soapy to the touch; it can be used as marking-ink. The bark contains 37 percent tannin and is said to yield a dark blue dye.
The species is commonly grown for hedges and fences and was introduced by the Portuguese into Asia and Africa where it is still cultivated as an oil-seed crop in the Cape Verde Islands and Madagascar. In Madagascar it is also grown as a support for the vanilla plant. The plant can be used as fish poison and the seed oil is used commercially for the production of soap, a textile lubricant and as an illuminant. Tender leaves are often eaten cooked in Java and Malaysia and used to cultivate the Eri silkworm in Assam.
Commercial yields of seed are said to be In the order of 400-1200 kg/ha in Cape Verde. The seeds are collected and exported mainly to Portugal and France for oil extraction.
The well-known acacia, Acacia nilotica (L.) Del. and A. arabica Willd, of the family Leguminosae are other arid-zone species of medicinal plants. The former covers an area from northern Nigeria to dry tropical East Africa and the latter spreads from South and East Africa through Arabia to northwest India and Pakistan.
The high tannin content of the soap, leaves, bark and young pods makes their extract very astringent and therefore useful as a haemostatic and a remedy for diarrhoea and dysentery. The gum of both species is edible and is useful for the relief of throat and chest complaints. The pods and young leaves are good fodder, and the wood of both species is hard, durable and commonly used for wooden handles, agricultural implements, turnery and cabinet work. It also provides good fuel and charcoal. The trees afford valuable shade in dry hot regions and their bark is a rich source of tannin for processing leather. The gum can serve as a substitute for the "gum Arabic" normally harvested from A. senegal.
The use of medicinal plants plays an important role in the lives of rural people, particularly in remote parts of developing countries which are poorly served with health facilities. Products derived from plants found in the tropical forests are not only useful for traditional medicine, but also often have a considerable market value. The sale of raw materials for pharmaceutical purposes can be especially important for subsistence farmers.
There is therefore, a need to identify tree species which are capable of multiple uses, such as wood production as well as alternative products such as medicines. This would promote recognition of the value of particular species and result in their inclusion and consideration in forest management planning.
It is evident that certain trees, of which only a very few have been described here, can serve man's medicinal and many other needs while assisting in protecting the environment upon which he and other living creatures depend. The cultivation of this type of tree amongst others (whose main uses may be the production of food, wood energy, fodder and wood for industrial purposes) can help to rehabilitate degraded forest lands. Research into the identification of such multiple-use species should continue and be intensified.
References
BAILEY, L.H. 1949 Manual of cultivated plants. New York, Macmillan Company. 812 p.
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH. The wealth of India: a dictionary of Indian raw materials and industrial products, Vol. 6, p. 229-233.
DALZIEL, J.M. 1937 The useful plants of West tropical Africa, p. 202-204. Crown Agents for Overseas Governments and Administrations, Millbank, London SW1, UK.
DUKE, J.A. 1981 Handbook of legumes of world economic importance, p. 911, 173-177. New York and London, Plenum Press.
FAO. 1981 Agriculture: toward 2000. Rome, FAO.
FRANCIS