<title>ADCP/REP/83/18 - Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme. Fish Feeds & Feeding in Developing Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
Feed is one of the main inputs in aquaculture production and a key element in intensive culture. Even in culture systems where the main source of nutrition for the cultured stock is natural food produced by fertilization, supplemental feeding is needed to achieve high production. However, nutrition and feed technology are relatively underdeveloped areas of aquaculture science, particularly in respect of warm-water species and their culture systems. Because of this, the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) adopted 'Feed Development' as an important item of its activities.
Fish feed development in developing countries is very much hampered by the lack of necessary expertise to formulate, prepare and test appropriate feeds and demonstrate their nutritional and economic value. Therefore, one of the early activities that ADCP undertook was the organization of a specialized Training Course in Fish Feed Technology at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. 9 October - 15 December 1978. The immediate objective of the course was to create a small core of trained personnel in selected countries to initiate programmes of feed ingredient surveys, diet formulation, processing and testing of feeds for species currently cultivated. The texts of lectures at the training course have been compiled and published (ADCP/REP/80/11) and this is now used in the senior aquaculturists training courses in the ADCP Regional Aquaculture Centres in Asia, Africa and Latin America for instruction in nutrition and feed technology.
Following the feed technology course, preliminary surveys of feed ingredients and feed milling facilities were started in a number of countries, with the assistance of the personnel trained in Seattle and others. The opportunities offered through FAO and UNDP technical assistance projects also were utilized in this survey and in formulating feeds based on locally available feed ingredients. The ADCP Feed Technologist Dr. K.W. Chow worked for varying periods of time from January 1980 in the ADCP Regional Aquaculture Centres [Dhauli (India), Bangkok (Thailand), Pirassununga (Brazil), Port Harcourt (Nigeria)] and in some FAO and FAO/UNDP technical assistance projects in Venezuela, Mexico, Tunisia, Egypt and Malaysia to assist in the formulation and testing of diets for some of the important cultivated species.
Work on formulation, preparation and testing of feeds based on locally available ingredients is continuing and investigations directed towards finding inexpensive protein sources for fish feeds, are starting in the ADCP Inter-regional Aquaculture Centre in Szarvas, Hungary. This is an interim report of the work so far done under the Feed Development Programme of ADCP. Besides being of value in selecting feed stuffs and formulating compound feeds, it is expected to stimulate further work in this important field in aqua-culture institutes and agencies, as well as in the feed milling industries.
May, 1983
T.V.R. Pillay
Programme Leader
<section>2</section>
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This report describes the results of a fish feed survey conducted in twelve developing countries, review of each country's ability to meet future feed demand for aqua-culture, and results of the initial efforts of the ADCP fish diet development programme in the areas of fish feed formulation, diet testing and feed manufacture in those countries. This work was carried out with the cooperation of Government fisheries departments and research institutions and with the assistance of national counterparts.
The countries covered in this report are: Brazil, Egypt, India, Malaysia, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, The Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tunisia and Venezuela.
The present work was started in early 1979 as a follow-up of the UNDP/FAO Training Course in Fish Feed Technology in Seattle (ADCP/REP/79/8).
<section>3</section>
2.0 FEED INGREDIENT SURVEY
2.1 Feedstuffs for aquaculture
2.2 Composition of feedstuffs
2.3 Feed quality
The survey of feed ingredients in each country covered all materials of proven value as fish feeds currently used in traditional aquaculture as well as those materials heretofore not utilized as such in that country but, by virtue of their nutrient composition and established safety for use on livestock, are considered suitable for incorporation into formulated feeds for fish. The latter consist largely of what are commonly referred to as "conventional" feedstuffs, such as fish meal and animal rendering by-products, feed grains, and by-products from the milling of cereals and oil seeds as well as the so-called "non-conventional" feedstuffs such as processed waste from the food industry, and protein-rich single-celled micro-organisms from the biotechnology industry.
The survey was carried out at both local and national levels. Essential information on quality and availability was obtained for each ingredient. A questionnaire prepared specifically for this purpose was used (See examples in Annexes).
2.1 Feedstuffs for aquaculture
2.1.1 Legumes
2.1.2 Miscellaneous fodder plants
2.1.3 Roots and tubers
2.1.4 Cereals and cereal by-products
2.1.5 Oilcakes and oil meals
2.1.6 Feeds of animal origin
2.1.7 Miscellaneous feedstuffs
Feeds traditionally used for feeding monogastric farm animals are believed to be suitable for feeding fish (Ling, S.W., 1967; Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976, 1976a; Hastings, W., 1975; Randall Robinette, H., 1977). These materials include the feed grains, oilcake and meals, animal by-products (including fish meal), and an assortment of industrial and agricultural waste products. Most of these, however, have not been properly evaluate as fish feed. Judging from those that have been, their feed value depends invariably on digestible nutrient content. Although fish, being poikilotherms, are less capable of utilizing carbohydrates at low temperatures, they utilize fats and proteins at least just as well as land mammals. Fish, the herbivorous species excepted, are not capable of utilizing cellulose.
The feedstuffs described below represent the broad spectrum of feed raw materials known to be available among the twelve countries covered in the survey. Some feedstuffs are indigenous to a few countries and are not available even as imported items elsewhere. Others such as rice bran are widely available. Because the quality of the same feed material is expected to vary from country to country, indeed among different production sources within a country, there is no single set of compositional analysis that can be generally applied in the feed formulation process. The data reported in the Table of Composition of Feedstuffs in this section were drawn from major published sources (Göhl, B., 1980; Sen, K.C., 1978; Devandra, C., 1979; Oyenuga, V.A., 1968; McDowell, et al., 1974) and represent average values for feedstuffs from the respective regions. Only in one instance (in Orissa, India) was it possible to carry out actual chemical analysis on a variety of indigenously
available feedstuffs. The results of those analyses are included in the table.
Selection was based on known value or potential value of individual feed ingredient for aquaculture production. In classifying each ingredient, the simple, and more practical, system of the FAO's Animal Production and Health Division (Göhl, B., 1980), rather than the complicated INFIC ^1^/ nomenclature for feedstuffs, is employed. The list is not exhaustive and does not include live foods and animal waste materials such as manure used primarily for increasing natural productivity in ponds. Certain food materials normally reserved for human consumption have also been included because of occasional availability of substantial quantities rendered unsafe for that purpose but usable as feed for fish and livestock.
^1^/ International Network of Feed Information Centres. See Harris, L., 1980
Few comparative feeding trials have been conducted to evaluate the relative feed values of common feedstuffs for fish. Studies reported in the literature deal primarily with high protein feed materials (Fowler, L.G. and J.L. Banks, 1976; Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Matty, 1982; Tiews, K., J. Gropp and H. Koops, 1976) although reports from Auburn University in the USA have also focused on relative energy values of various feedstuffs (Lovell, R.T., 1977).
2.1.1 Legumes
Legumes are potentially a valuable feed resource for aquaculture in the tropics because of their widespread distribution in those areas. As feeds they are rich in protein and minerals. Despite the many varieties that have been identified for use as fodder for livestock, only a few have been utilized commercially for feed manufacture. The raw seeds of many legumes contain anti-nutritive factors (Liener, I.E., 1978). This problem can usually be overcome by processing. Most varieties have not been evaluated as feed for fish.
B.31 Red gram or dahl (Cajunus cajan L. Huth)
Red gram is grown primarily as food for humans. It is one of the most common legumes of the tropics and sub-tropics. The upper (leafy) part of the plant has a high protein content and is usually fed to cattle. The seeds are often used at up to 30 percent in poultry rations. Red gram bran, a by-product of gram flour production, has almost the same protein content as the seed and is used for the same purpose. Although not evaluated as feeds for fish, both seeds and bran are judged safe for incorporation into fish feeds at moderate levels.
B.41 Chick pea, Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum L.)
The chick pea is native of India but is also cultivated in other parts of the tropics. Although grown mainly for human consumption, the seeds of the chick pea are frequently used as feed for poultry and livestock. Although not evaluated as a feed for fish, it is presumed to be safe for inclusion as a major constituent in compound fish feed. The leaves of the plant are also suitable for feeding to fish.
B.65 Lablab or Egyptian bean (Dolichos lablab L.)
A perennial plant native of India, the lablab is grown in many parts of the tropics. The seeds of the lablab, which are fairly rich in protein, have been fed as concentrates to livestock, but have not been evaluated in fish. This plant is not to be confused with lab-lab, an algal complex fed to milkfish in the Philippines.
B.79 Lentil or red dahl (Lens culinaris, Medik)
The red dahl is native of Asia but is also grown in Africa. The plant is cultivated for its seeds which are used primarily for human consumption. During the milling of the seed, a bran rich in protein is produced. The material has a high feed value and, although not evaluated in fish, probably can be used at fairly high levels in compound fish feed.
B.81 Ipil-ipil or kathin (Leucaena leucocephala, Lam de Wit)
The ipil-ipil is one of the two legumes whose leaves and stems have been used commercially on a regular basis in animal feed manufacture in many parts of Asia. Ipil-ipil leaf meal is fairly rich in protein but may not be fed at excessive levels to farm animals due to the presence of the toxic amino acid mimosine. Ipil-ipil has been used at low concentrations (5-10 percent) in compound fish feed in Thailand and the Philippines without noticeable adverse effects. One study conducted on tilapia showed very poor growth when Leucaena constituted 25 percent or more of the dietary protein (Jackson, A.J., B.S. Copper and A.J. Mathy, 1982).
B.84 Lupin (Lupinus spp.)
The lupins are grown in the cooler parts of the tropics. Both the leaves and seeds are rich in protein, the latter fed at up to 20 percent in rations for monogastric animals. Although not evaluated as a feed for fish, it is believed that the seeds of the lupin can be fed at moderate amounts to fish without harm.
B.88 Lucerne or alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)
The alfalfa is the better known of the two legumes whose leaves and stems are exploited commercially as a principal ingredient in compound feed manufacture. Alfalfa meal, unlike ipil-ipil, does not appear to contain anti-nutritive factors that limit its use in compound feeds. The protein content of alfalfa is comparable to that of ipil-ipil. Alfalfa is known to be safe for incorporation into compound fish feed.
B.106 Velvet mesquite (Prosopis veleutina, Woot.)
A shrub native of Mexico, the mesquite produces an abundant crop of pods which are sugary and contain seeds rich in protein. The seeds are encased in a hard shell which must be crushed to enhance digestibility.
B.110 Saman or cow tamarind (Samanea saman, Jacq. Merr)
The samman is a tree that grows in the tropics. Its leaves are fairly rich in protein but also high in tannins. Its seeds are also used as concentrates for livestock. Both leaves and seeds have not been properly evaluated in fish although preliminary studies in Venezuela have shown that the ground pods fed at moderate levels have no adverse effect on the cachama (a native species belonging to the Characidae family) ^1^/.
^1^/ Studies conducted at the Warmwater Fish Culture Station at Guanapito
B.111-113 Sesbania (Sesbania grandiflora, L. Poir.)
These small fast-growing shrubs are very common in the tropical lowlands of Asia. Its leaves are rich in digestible protein and its seeds are often fed as concentrates to poultry. Although not evaluated in fish, ready acceptance of both leaves and seeds by poultry indicates its safeness.
B.130 Mung bean or black gram (Phaseolus mungo L.)
The mung bean is a native of central Asia, grown primarily for the bean which serves as food for humans. Both leaves and seeds are fairly digestible for monogastric animals. Although not evaluated as feed for fish, the absence of glucosides in the seeds makes them safe for use at moderate levels.
B.132 Red bean or rice bean (Vigna umbellata, Thumb. Ohwi & Ohashi)
Grown primarily for its seeds which are used for human consumption, the red bean is found throughout tropical Asia. It has not been evaluated as a feed for fish, but only the seeds appear suitable for use in compound feed.
B.133 Horse gram (Dolichos biflorus L.)
Also a herb found in tropical Asia, the seeds of the horse gram are used as concentrate feed for cattle. Although not evaluated in fish, because of their low fibre content, these seeds appear suitable for use at moderate levels in compound fish feeds.
B.134 Cow pea or black-eye pea (Vigna unguiculata L.)
The cow pea is grown primarily for human consumption. Its seed is usually too expensive for use as feed for livestock. Its leaves, however, are equally good and appear quite suitable for use in fish feeds, although no evaluation has yet been made.
2.1.2 Miscellaneous fodder plants
Although there are many varieties of fodder plants which can be fed to fish, their exploitation for this purpose, for the most part, has been hindered by low digestibility of nutrients and difficulty in obtaining adequate and regular supplies. Two exceptions in this category are the sago and the kangkong which are relatively abundant in the tropics and which have high feed value for animals because of their high digestibility.
C.62 Kangkong or swamp cabbage (Ipomoea aquatica, Forsk)
Mainly cultivated for food, the kangkong has also been used as stock feed in South East Asia. It has a fairly high feed value, with a higher protein content than alfalfa. Kangkong has been fed successfully to carps in Sri Lanka as a principal component of compound feed.
C.73 Sago palm (Metroxylon sagu, Roth)
The sago palm, which often proliferates in freshwater swamps, is valued for the starch contained in its trunk. The starch, which is normally extracted in small village mills, has a variety of industrial uses apart from its value as food. The unrefined starch, or meal, has been fed to livestock and is considered equally safe for fish. Small quantities incorporated into compound feeds improve pellet quality because of the easy gelatinization of sago starch under the conditions of pelleted feed manufacture.
2.1.3 Roots and tubers
For the most part, roots and tubers are grown as food for human consumption in the tropics. However, because of their high starch content, some varieties are grown as industrial raw material. Notable among these is cassava or tapioca. Roots and tubers are also suitable for feeding to fish, although their use for this purpose appears very limited due to their relatively high cost. Also, because the feed value of roots and tubers is in their carbohydrate content, they cannot be used at too high levels in feed for fish, which have a lower tolerance for carbohydrates than farm animals.
E.13 Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas, L. Lam.)
Sweet potato is mainly grown as food for human consumption in the tropics. The tubers consist primarily of carbohydrates with a high content of sucrose. Protein content, although low, is almost twice that of cassava. The leaves of the sweet potato are highly digestible, free from toxins, and fairly rich in protein. The starch in the tuber provides good binding for dry and moist-type pellets if heat processing is employed.
E.14 Cassava, tapioca or yucca (Mannihot esculenta, Crantz)
Fresh cassava is seldom used as feed for fish. Most varieties are toxic unless properly processed to prevent the release of hydrocyanic acid by an enzyme present in the tuber. Heat applied during processing destroys the enzyme.
Cassava has low feed value in diets for fish but its presence in small quantities improves the water stability of pelleted feed. Fresh cassava has been included in the diet of milkfish in Indonesia (Hastings, W., 1975).
2.1.4 Cereals and cereal by-products
Grown primarily for human consumption, cereal grains are no less important as feed for efficient animal production. Present-day high energy diets for monogastric farm animals often contain up to 80 percent cereal grains and their by-products. The use of grains is somewhat restricted in fish diets because of generally lower tolerance for dietary carbohydrates by fish. This effect appears to be more pronounced among cold-water species such as the trout than among warm-water species.
While cereal grains are considered mainly as a source of dietary energy, their byproducts represent a fairly rich source of protein and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA).
Cereal grains sometimes constitute a significant percentage of fish feed processed into pellets. Starch present in cereals act as good, natural binders when gelatinized under normal pelleting conditions, giving products that have high water stability. Consequently, cereal grains are indispensable in the manufacture of floating-type pelleted feed.
F.1 Millet (in the tropics, mainly Eleusine coracana, Paspalum scrobiculatum and Pennisetum americanum)
Grown primarily for human consumption, millet is only occasionally available as feed for livestock. Its use as a feed for fish has not been documented. Judging from favourable growth response of monogastric farm animals fed the cereal, millet should, at least, be comparable to maize in feeding value. The seed is hard and proper grinding is necessary before use in fish diets.
F.7 Rice (Oryza sativa L.)
Rice is seldom used for animal feeding because of its high cost, although damaged grain and portions considered unfit for human consumption, viz., sweepings from warehouses and mills, are available for that purpose. In a few countries, notably Thailand, where it is the principal grain crop, rice of low commercial value such as broken rice is also used as livestock feed. On the other hand, by-products from mills are more generally available and constitute the most important feed resource in all rice-producing countries. The by-products include: rice bran, rice polishings and rice mill feed. Rice and its mill by-products are important feed constituents in fish feeds in each of the countries covered in this survey.
Broken rice and cargo rice
Rough rice is very seldom fed to fish. Instead, broken rice (polished) and cargo rice (unpolished) are used in the preparation of traditional type fish feeds as well as in compound diet formulations. The rice is first boiled in water before mixing with other ingredients to make the ration. Rice is an excellent energy source with a low but fairly good quality protein content. No digestibility study has been made with fish but for mono-gastric farm animals, uncooked rice is more digestible than maize. Cargo rice, especially, is rich in the B-vitamins.
Rice bran
Freshly produced rice bran has a high oil content (14-18 percent). The oil is sometimes recovered by solvent extraction because of its high commercial value, especially in countries where demand for cooking oil exceeds supply. The oil present in the bran is rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids which undergo rapid oxidation under normal storage conditions. Rice bran that has turned rancid has markedly reduced feed value. Rice bran has a higher protein content than the grain. It is also fairly high in fibre, thus limiting its use in fish feeds. Often, rice bran is mixed with rice polishings at the mill and sold as rice bran. Adulteration with hulls lowers its feeding value considerably. Good quality pellets can be made from feeds containing unextracted rice bran.
Oil extracted rice bran is almost totally devoid of oil. It is the type of rice bran favoured by feed mills because of its longer shelf-life. Its protein content is somewhat higher than fresh rice bran while its energy content is lower. Pelleted feed containing a high proportion of de-oiled rice bran are not very water-stable. This is because of the water absorption characteristics of fibre, which will be fairly high in such feed.
Where available, rice bran has been successfully used in compound fish feeds for both warm as well as cold water species.
Rice polishings
Rice polishings are produced during the scouring of rice after the bran has been removed. The material, therefore, contains a higher proportion of starch but is lower in protein and fibre content. It is not produced in as large quantities as rice bran, and, in most mills, is often mixed with the latter to give rice pollard. This, however, is usually sold as a grade of rice bran in most countries.
F.9 Sorghum (Sorghum bicolor and S. vulgare)
Sorghum is grown in warm areas where rainfall is inadequate for maize cropping. Its feed value is comparable to maize for most species of livestock. In Mexico where maize is normally reserved for human consumption, sorghum is used as a substitute in compound feed for trout and carp.
Sorghum contains tannic acid which decreases the availability of methionine in the diet. The amount of tannic acid in sorghum depends not only on the variety of sorghum but also on the conditions under which the crop is cultivated.
Sorghum is available in the majority of the countries covered in this report.
F.10 Wheat (Tritricum aestirum L.)
Although primarily a crop of temperate countries, wheat is also grown in parts of the tropics where there is a long period of relatively cool weather. Where it is not grown, it is imported for flour production. Wheat products are, therefore, available in practically every country.
Wheat, often used as an ingredient of compound fish feed in temperate countries is seldom used in the tropics because of its high cost. Damaged grain is, however, frequently available and when fed to fish is at least equivalent to maize in feed value.
Milling of wheat produces three major by-products, two of which are almost exclusively used as feed for livestock. These are: wheat bran and wheat middlings (or fine bran). The third, wheat germ, has higher commercial value as a food item for humans. Occasionally, damaged flour is also available as feed.
Wheat bran
Wheat bran is the primary coat of the wheat grain. It has a fairly high protein content. Because it is also high in fibre, it has a laxative effect when fed at excessive levels to animals. Such an effect, however, will be more difficult to determine in fish. Nevertheless, wheat bran has been successfully fed at fairly high levels to various species of fish without adverse effects on growth. Too much wheat bran in a formulation results in pellets with poor water stability due to the water absorption characteristics of fibre.
Wheat pollard
Wheat pollard is also known as fine bran. The material is less fibrous than wheat bran and has a higher feed value. Wheat pollard also contains a higher proportion of gluten which is a good natural binder for pelleted feed production.
F.11 Maize (Zea mays L.)
Maize is grown throughout the tropics and is the principal cereal grain employed in the feeding of livestock. Maize has also been fed successfully to fish. Whole grain has been used as a supplementary feed for tilapia and carp. However, maize is usually used in finely ground form as an energy component in compound feeds. While there is little published data on the digestibility of starchy components of cereal grains in general, studies on maize have indicated enhanced utilization after cooking. Normal pelleting processes only partially gelatinize the starch granules whereas total starch gelatinization occurs when the cereal is subject to high temperatures under moist conditions as in extrusion cooking. For channel catfish, such processing methods greatly increase the digestible energy value of maize, indicating the relatively low digestibility of raw starch for that species (Lovell, R.T., 1977).
Wet milling of maize is an industrial process for production of valuable components of the maize kernel. The main products of the process are: corn oil and starch (from which dextrins and glucose are obtained after further processing). The by-products include: maize gluten meal, maize bran and maize germ meal. Often all three are mixed together and sold as maize gluten feed. The protein content of maize gluten meal is comparable to that of soyabean meal. However, maize protein has a very low lysine content, and maize gluten meal or maize gluten feed should be used along with other lysine-rich protein sources (animal protein, or soyabean meal).
2.1.5 Oilcakes and oil meals
Oilcakes are by-products of the vegetable oil extraction industry. Although many varieties of seeds and fruits are cultivated primarily for their oil content, the protein-rich residues left after oil removal represent an immense resource upon which the world's production of animal protein for human consumption largely depends.
In the tropics and sub-tropics, soyabean, groundnut, and sesame (gingelly) are the principal oil seeds yielding protein-rich oilcake or meal after oil removal. Among oil-bearing fruits, the coconut and the oil palm nut are the most important sources.
Oil extraction from seed or fruit is carried out by two methods: by pressing, or with chemical solvents. The product obtained by pressing is termed oilcake and that by solvent extraction, oil meal.
Oilcake production is carried out by one of two mechanical processes. The first process involves the use of hydraulic presses that press out the oil from oil seed, or previously shredded dried fruit kernels (e.g., copra), wrapped in cloth. The resulting residue is in slab form. The presses used in this process are of relatively simple design and can be fabricated quite easily. They are, however, not very efficient. The second process involves the passage of seeds or fruit kernels along a screw auger confined in a steam-heated conically shaped jacket with the oilcake emerging at the smaller end. This process, known as the screw expeller process, is more efficient in removing oil. However, because of the high temperatures associated with the pressure applied, oilcakes produced by this method may come out burnt with subsequent lowering of feed value (especially with regard to protein digestibility in general and lysine availability in particular). Because of the high value of
edible oils relative to oilcake residues in developing countries, the screw expeller process is favoured over the less efficient hydraulic press process for mechanical expression of oil from seeds and fruit. However, in South Asia as well as in South East Asia, with the possible exception of Thailand, hydraulic-press extraction continues to be the principal method employed in the vegetable oil industry.
Oil extraction involving chemical solvents is of fairly recent origin. Solvent extraction plants are technically more sophisticated than the screw expeller mills and their operation is economical only for processing large quantities of oil seeds or fruits. These plants are found in most of the countries that came under this survey, although they are more prominent in some than in others. Where they are located, these plants are usually used for extraction of oil from soyabeans that are either grown domestically, or imported. The process is now extensively used for secondary recovery of oil in the palm oil industry in Malaysia as well.
The oil meal that is produced as a by-product of the solvent extraction process has a very low fat content; often less than 1 percent. Temperatures involved in the solvent extraction process are generally low compared to the expeller process. Because of this and because of the need to de-activate antinutritive factors generally present in some oil seeds, toasting of the extracted residues follows solvent recovery. Due to the relatively mild treatment given to oil meals, these products have a comparatively higher feed value than expeller cakes. The lower residual oil content in an oil meal also gives it a higher protein content compared to a similar product obtained by the screw expeller process.
G.3 Groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.)
Groundnut oilcake is a safe feed for fish. It has been demonstrated in India that diets consisting of 50 percent of the material as the principal protein source can be used in complete feeding of carps. Its high polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) content also makes further addition of fats to such diets unnecessary. Because groundnut protein is especially low in methionine, the oilcake should be used with methionine-rich protein supplements or with synthetic methionine to achieve a proper balance of essential amino acids in the diet.
Quality in groundnut oilcake depends on whether the material is made from decorticated nuts. Removal of the fibrous hulls yields a better quality product with higher protein content. This will also depend on the amount of residual oil in the cake. In a few countries there are two varieties of groundnut oilcake: the mill produced and the 'country' produced. The former is an industrial product with a generally lower residual oil content (less than 7 percent), whereas the latter is produced on often a very small scale in villages and may contain as much as 13 percent oil.
The principal (and often very serious) contaminant of groundnut cake is aflatoxin. Aflatoxin is a group of highly toxic substances produced by the mould Aspergillus flavus. The most prominent of these are Aflatoxins B[1], B[2] and G[1]. The toxins are produced only when the mould exists as a pure culture. Aflatoxin is a hepatotoxin and mortality among afflicted animals and fish invariably results from severe liver damage. Small doses over an extended period of time produces cancer of the liver in humans. The half lethal-dosage, or LD[50] ^1^/ for trout weighing 100 g is 0.5 ppm in the diet. Improper post-harvest handling of nuts is usually blamed for the presence of aflatoxin in groundnut although pre-harvest infestation has also been documented. Aflatoxin is not destroyed by heat.
^1^/ LD[50], the dosage at which mortality among animals consuming the contaminated feed is 50 percent
G.12 Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.)
Coconut oilcake is widely available as a feed for fish and livestock in countries such as Sri Lanka, Indonesia and the Philippines. On the average, 1 000 nuts yield 60 kg oilcake (called poonac in South India and Sri Lanka). Compared with residues of oil seed extraction, coconut oilcake is low in protein and high in fibre. It is difficult to make a water-stable pelleted feed if the formulation contains too much coconut oilcake, as the material tends to absorb large amounts of water, causing the pellet to disintegrate. Poonac is commonly used as a supplementary feed in the pond culture of carp in Sri Lanka. It has also been included in the diet of milkfish in Indonesia (Hastings, W., 1975).
One of the main problems in its use is the tendency of coconut fat to turn rancid in storage. The effects of feeding rancid coconut oilcak