<title>Wood for energy</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
For their daily energy needs more people depend on wood than on any other single energy source. In this respect, wood can still be counted the world's most important fuel. Unhappily, it is also in desperately short supply. While some 2000 million people still use wood for domestic heating and for cooking, the gap between what they need and what they can obtain easily is now large and grows larger every day.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is therefore devoting much attention to the question of obtaining energy from forests. For the first time in the history of organized forestry, providing people in the developing countries with the fuelwood they need has to be included as a major goal of the forestry institutions.
The emphasis on wood for energy need not detract from the other vital functions of forestry. Trees grown for energy can also help restore stability and fertility to the land, increase agricultural production, and improve the quality of rural life - thereby helping to reduce migration to the city. In fact, forests for energy should now be a major part of any rural development programme.
The role which trees can play in easing world energy problems is much broader than is generally realized. Fuelwood and charcoal have, until recently, been regarded simply as subsistence fuels, but it is now clear that they are also fuels of the future.
Fuelwood and charcoal are relatively cheap to produce, compared to fossil fuels, and are derived from a renewable source of energy which can be grown in most countries. Trees offer a range of ecological, agricultural, and social advantages which cannot be paralleled by any other energy source. It is not surprising that today many developed countries are reinvestigating the possibilities of mobilizing more of their forest biomass for energy. In the developing countries, energy plantations may well provide a novel and exciting springboard for development.
This booklet describes both the present problems and the promise which the future holds in the field of energy forestry. There are now more than 30 FAO projects in this field and others are planned. This publication records some of the achievements to date; but, more importantly, it is intended to encourage still greater use of FAO expertise in forestry for energy in the future.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
Problems and promises
The fuelwood problem
The human cost of fuelwood shortages
Forests and fuel: An overview
The role of FAO
The fuelwood problem
In 1980 nearly half the world population depended for its energy needs on one fuel: wood. Wood is thus the most commonly used source of energy in the world. For the inhabitants of the developing countries, it is much more than that: it is the staple energy resource of three-quarters of the population. In some of the poorest African nations it still accounts for more than 90 per cent of national energy consumption.
Although fuelwood and charcoal provided only 6.2 per cent of world energy supplies in 1981, most of the wood removed from forest was used for energy- 59 per cent of it in the world as a whole and 85 per cent of it in the developing countries. On average, every person in the developing countries consumed about 0.45m^3 of wood, as fuelwood or charcoal, a year. This is the energy equivalent of about 4.2 gigajoules* (GJ) or 1200 kilowatt-hours (kWh) a year.
* 1 GJ is 10^9 joules and is the energy equivalent of about 35kg of coal or 70kg of dry hardwood
In 1981, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) published a map of the fuelwood situation in developing countries. It revealed that of the 2000 million people who depended on wood, 96 million were already unable to satisfy their minimum energy needs for cooking and heating. A further 1052 million people were in a deficit situation' and could meet their needs only by depleting wood reserves. Out of this total of 1148 million people, more than 64 per cent lived in Asia. Shortages were most acute in the arid regions of Africa, in the mountainous areas of Asia, particularly the Himalayas, and on the Andean plateau in Latin America. Overall, a further 400 million m^3 of fuelwood were needed to make good the deficit.
These are the essential statistics of the current fuelwood crisis. However, the situation is worsening rapidly. Projections for the year 2000 suggest that, without immediate action to improve the situation, 2400 million people will by then either be unable to obtain their minimum energy requirements or will be forced to consume wood faster than it is being grown. By the year 2000 the world fuelwood deficit will have reached 960 million m^3 a year - the energy equivalent of 240 million tonnes of oil a year.
This figure provides a clue to the cost of failing to provide the developing countries with the fuelwood they require. Were the deficit in fuelwood in the year 2000 to be met by increased oil consumption, the cost would be - even at today's price of $30 a barrel for crude oil - about $50 000 million a year.
Obviously the deficit will not be made good in this way. The cost is too high and the developing countries - most of whom are net petroleum importers - cannot afford the foreign exchange which would be needed. In practice, the cost of the fuelwood crisis must be measured, less accurately but more painfully, in terms of human suffering.
The scale of the problem was assessed in a study carried out by FAO for the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Energy Sources held in Nairobi in August 1981. The Panel estimated the cost of meeting basic energy requirements in fuelwood, mainly by tree plantation schemes, at $1000 million a year (1980 prices) for 20 years in the developing countries. This estimate did not include the cost of building up the institutions needed to do the work which, it was thought, might double the cost for the first ten years. As the Panel reported, "There is no risk of over-estimating the magnitude of the necessary efforts."
The human cost of fuelwood shortages
The global statistics of the fuelwood crisis conceal what it means to run short of the energy needed for cooking and heating. Most rural homes in developing countries have no supply of gas or electricity, oil is virtually unobtainable and kerosene can provide a substitute only for the wealthy minority, mostly in urban areas.
As fuelwood becomes scarce, women and children - who are usually responsible for heating the home and cooking the food - are the first to suffer. Rural dwellers have to walk farther and farther to collect the bare minimum of wood needed for survival. And town dwellers must rely on supplies which come from farther and farther away. In Upper Volta's capital Ouagadougou, fuelwood now comes from sources which are on average 54 km away. Every day an average of 1563 fuelwood deliveries are made to the city, of which only 187 are motorized - the rest are made on foot or by bicycle, camel or donkey. In Bangladesh, the charcoal consumed in the city of Dhaka is manufactured more than 300 km away.
Map below shows the 'fuelwood deficit situation' in developing countries. By the year 2000, some 2400 million people will either be short of wood or will be using it faster than it is being regenerated China not included
In Zaire, families in Kinzono on the Bateke plateau require between one and two sacks of charcoal a month to meet their basic needs. The cost of charcoal has now reached $300 a tonne which means that a single sack will cost about one-third of a worker's monthly wage. In the poorer parts of the Andean Sierra and in the Sahel as much as 25 per cent of all household income must be spent on fuelwood and charcoal - a figure which rises to 40 per cent for some East African households.
Difficulties in acquiring sufficient fuel, whether because of distance or cost, lead to hygiene and nutrition problems. Few of the principal food crops in developing countries are palatable or even fully digestible unless cooked. If cooking is skimped because of lack of fuel, protein intake is often lowered. In many areas families can eat only one cooked meal a day instead of two simply because they lack fuel. Agricultural practices are changing because vegetables which can be eaten raw are often preferred to other, perhaps more nutritious, crops which need cooking.
The effects of fuelwood shortage extend far beyond the individual family. A lack of this basic fuel produces a chain of reactions affecting the nature of rural society, its agricultural base and the stability of its environment.
As fuelwood becomes scarcer, substitutes are eagerly sought. In a rural society, agricultural residues are virtually the only alternative and such materials as straw, dried dung, rice husks and even plant roots are burnt. Where these materials formerly provided a useful animal feed, there is a consequent loss to the food production system. Where they were formerly returned to the land, the latter becomes improverished, deprived both of the essential nutrients in the waste and of the humus it would otherwise provide. It has been estimated that in Nepal every tonne of dung which is burnt deprives the country of SO kg of grain.
A related effect occurs where, as in parts of Senegal, a tree cover of species which are naturally nitrogen-fixing, such as Acacia, is removed. Soil fertility declines and in the end the land must either be abandoned or brought back into production with expensive artificial fertilizer.
Land on which the tree cover has been drastically reduced soon suffers from a variety of other ill-effects. It becomes increasingly susceptible to soil erosion, both by wind and by heavy seasonal rainfall. This, in turn, encourages desertification. And soil which is eroded from one place usually ends up somewhere else where it is not wanted - on the bed of a new reservoir or the bottom of a fast-flowing river. Siltation and flooding can then become major problems.
Forests and fuel: An overview
It has been suggested that the solution to the fuelwood problem is to find an alternative energy source for the developing countries. Unfortunately, as the Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal pointed out in 1981, "There is no alternative source of energy that could provide a viable substitute for fuelwood... within the next quarter century."
In one sense, this is no bad thing. The best alternative to fuelwood is more fuelwood - and the reason is that providing energy in the form of renewable wood solves far more than a drastic energy shortage. Wood plantations can take many different forms and provide many different advantages. As well as yielding fuel, they can help provide timber for homes and village industries, restore fertility to the land, halt desertification, prevent soil erosion, reduce flooding, provide animal forage and improve the climate. No other alternative form of energy can offer such a broad prospectus.
Most of what has been published about forest energy stresses the magnitude of the fuelwood problem but this is only one aspect of the story. In the long run, the role of forest energy in world development is likely to be far more positive. Even today, there are many countries in which fuelwood supply is much higher than demand. In those countries, this important and renewable energy source will play, and already is playing, a key role in national development. Wood, after all, is a cheap and renewable form of solar energy. As one report has put it, "Despite much research, no one has yet invented a cheaper or more adaptable system for capturing and storing solar energy than leaves and wood."
Wood energy can provide a 'soft transition' from a traditional economy and technology to a more advanced one - a transition which, when made with the help of fossil fuels, is often abrupt and unsettling. Many countries are already using forest energy not only to meet the domestic needs of cooking and heating but to meet industrial ones as well. Fuelwood and charcoal have many positive features as sources of commercial energy. They are ideal, of course, for providing both process heat and shaft power for forest industries - sawmilling, chipping, panel production and pulp and paper making, for example. In most cases these industries can now be run more profitably off forest energy than they can off fossil fuel.
Secondly, there are many small-scale, predominantly rural industries where fuelwood or charcoal can provide a convenient source of heat. These include crop drying, brick making, pottery firing, lime production and even the manufacture of cement. Thirdly, forest energy is also used extensively in heavy industry, notably in mineral smelting where charcoal is in some countries the preferred fuel. Finally, the use of fuelwood and charcoal for electric power production is being intensively investigated - and, in fact, a handful of countries is already generating electricity in this way.
It is also significant that the uses of fuelwood are now being intensively investigated in the developed countries. In 1981, 53 million m^3 of fuelwood were harvested in Europe, 104 million m^3 in North America and 78 million m^3 in the Soviet Union. In Sweden about 8 per cent of primary energy consumption comes from wood, and a number of other European countries have intensive development programmes for wood energy.
In the long run, restoring and increasing the number of trees in rural areas is likely to provide more advantages for less expenditure than any other comparable technique for dealing with the fuelwood crisis. But solving the fuelwood problem cannot be conceived as an isolated issue, separate from related problems of rural development, agricultural production and environmental stabilization. The effective solutions will be those which include energy forestry as part of a more general development strategy, and which reap all the rewards which trees can offer, including the supply of fuel.
Villagers in Mali return from a long trek for fuelwood, using donkeys to pull their over-laden carts' Many town dwellers in the Sahel countries now rely on wood which is transported more than 50 km
Cattle browse discontentedly among the stumps of what was once an olive grove in Pakistan long since removed for fuelwood. Soil erosion soon follows the deforestation of steep slopes like these
The role of FAO
FAO, within its Regular Programme, is making determined efforts to improve the fuelwood situation and to help developing countries mobilize more of their forest biomass to provide energy and other goods and services for rural development. It disseminates the information thus produced very widely and acts as a clearing house for the exchange of information on wood energy topics. The development of suitable training material and programmes is also a major area of work.
As part of this work, FAO's Forestry Department is monitoring the changing patterns of fuelwood supply and demand in the developing countries. It is thus in a position to identify areas where there are critical shortages now and where they may occur in the future; and to recommend what kinds of projects are needed to correct them. It is also involved in evaluating the impact of fuelwood shortages and studying the cost of using agricultural waste and animal dung as substitutes for fuelwood. A particularly important area is the preparation of case studies of successful fuelwood production schemes. It is producing technical monographs on the use of different tree species for energy and studying the economics of different ways of growing fuelwood.
In addition, FAO now operates the Forestry and Rural Energy Programme - which is essentially a field programme financed through Trust Funds provided by donor nations. The object of this programme is to help developing countries improve their fuelwood supply by mobilizing additional resources with which to attack the problem. Special importance is attached to the 25 least developed countries which are now experiencing increasing fuelwood scarcities. The aim is to provide the kind of advice and technical expertise needed to develop sizeable programmes to improve fuelwood supply as part of rural development.
A successful programme of this type may well involve using a number of different techniques. Initially, more research may be needed - for example, into fuelwood demand patterns in certain areas or into the most appropriate tree species for use in replanting schemes. Secondly, demonstration projects may need to be arranged to ensure the full participation of local people. Thirdly, extension workers will need to be trained so that they can instruct villagers on plantation techniques and forest management. Fourthly, a country's forestry institutions may need reorganizing and upgrading. In many areas, organized forestry has totally ignored the fuelwood problem and has sometimes taken active steps to prevent local populations from using forests as a source of fuelwood. Consequently, many rural dwellers have become hostile to forestry institutions. Altering this situation must be a major goal in any fuelwood programme.
Finally, good progress can often be made by promoting technical cooperation within developing countries (TCDC). The key here is to establish links between the research and forestry institutions in countries which share similar problems in the same region. In this way, expensive duplication of effort can be avoided and important advances in technique can be rapidly disseminated. FAO has already taken the first steps in organizing a regional energy forestry network of this kind in Asia and others are planned in Africa and Latin America.
<section>3</section>
Energy for subsistence
A strategy for action
Increasing the productivity of existing resources
Creating new resources
Improving fuelwood distribution
Improving conversion technologies
Finding substitutes for fuelwood
Nepal: A case study
A strategy for action
Forests have an important role to play in human development. It is FAO's view that forests can do much more than provide energy for subsistence, and that their role in providing energy for development will ultimately be just as important. For the moment, however, the issue of energy for subsistence has priority because the current fuelwood problem is so acute.
One aspect of the fuelwood problem is encouraging: the solutions are largely known. The critical factor, however, is time the problem has already reached crisis proportions for millions of people and will get rapidly worse without swift action. This action, as has already been stressed, must be taken within the context of integrated rural development.
FAO's Forestry Department has identified five major tactics in the battle against fuelwood deficits. In most field programmes, these tactics will be combined to produce an action plan operating on several different fronts simultaneously. The tactics are:
1. Increasing the productivity of existing resources Putting existing woods and forests under management, particularly by local populations, can increase productivity by as much as 50 per cent. Resting over-worked areas can also be very beneficial and using all existing biomass - including non-forest areas, shrubs, bushes and what is normally regarded as 'waste' - can increase fuelwood supply substantially.
2. Creating new fuelwood resources Planting stands of fast-growing trees presents no serious technological problem. In many areas new plantations can start to yield fuelwood within a few years. The cost may appear high - one estimate shows that delivered fuelwood from new plantations costs $2-4/GJ, compared to about $5/GJ for crude oil. However, the former involves no foreign exchange costs, provides a multitude of other advantages and should eventually become financially self-supporting. Generally, plantations need not compete for land with other agricultural practices. If 2-5 per cent of available land is planted with trees, there need be no net loss of agricultural production - indeed, in some areas, tree planting actually increases food production.
3. Improving fuelwood distribution A key factor in the price of fuelwood and charcoal is the distance over which it must be transported to the user. FAO studies indicate that fuelwood cannot be transported economically over distances of more than 100 km but that the limit for charcoal is in the region of 800 1000 km. There is an urgent need to organize and increase the efficiency of the fuelwood industry by such means as establishing marketing cooperatives, price structures and improved storage facilities.
4. Improving conversion technologies There are three possible ways of improving the efficiency with which fuelwood and charcoal are used and made: pre-processing the fuel, by pressing it into bundles for example; increasing the efficiency of charcoal production (traditional methods waste up to 60 per cent of the energy value of the wood); and large-scale dissemination of efficient woodstoves, combined with efforts to improve cooking efficiency. An efficient wood stove can produce fuel savings of 30 per cent or more for a small cost. In some cases, changes in cooking habits can also produce similar savings.
5. Finding substitutes for fuelwood The impact of substitution over the next two decades is likely to be limited but, biogas and solar energy can usually make some contribution. Fossil fuels may have to be used, regardless of cost, in areas where appropriate forestry solutions cannot be implemented in time to avert a disastrous fuelwood shortage.
Before a programme combining these techniques can be devised, however, it is essential to assess the fuelwood situation in the country concerned. For example, an FAO study of this type in Upper Volta surveyed urban and rural fuelwood and charcoal consumption, the role which other fuels played in the domestic economy and the value of the fuelwood and charcoal industries. Data were also accumulated on the potential of existing resources. The survey showed that Upper Volta could, perhaps surprisingly, provide sufficient fuelwood and charcoal for its own needs - but that there were huge imbalances, creating acute scarcities in certain regions: some of the largest resources were virtually inaccessible. The government of Upper Volta is now preparing its national fuelwood plan on the basis of this information.
FAO's fuelwood strategy comprises five major tactics for combatting fuelwood shortages, each involving several techniques. Most fuelwood projects involve the integration of several or all the tactics to produce a scheme which is compatible with overall plans for rural development
A similar study in Bangladesh revealed a very different situation one where fuelwood use was, in fact, marginal simply because so little was available. Homestead forests, which supply most fuelwood, were being cut at about 10 per cent a year while their growth rate was only 5 per cent a year. Overall, the survey showed a forest products deficit of some 800 000 m^3 a year over and above what was sustainable. On the basis of this and other information, FAO was able to make recommendations to Bangladesh on how best to reduce future shortages.
Increasing the productivity of existing resources
There should, in theory, be no such thing as a fuelwood shortage. The theoretical potential annual growth of the world's forests is estimated at 110.10^9 terajoules (1 terajoule is 10^12 joules) - several hundred times total world energy consumption. One of the problems, however, is that severe local shortages can exist in spite of global abundance. Another is that best use is rarely made of what does exist. Improving the productivity of existing resources is obviously much cheaper than establishing new plantations. Active management is needed not only of the forests themselves, but also of all other types of tree cover - open scrub, small woodlots and even of trees grown for other purposes such as fruit, fodder or shelter. Even simple protection measures can sometimes increase yield by more than 50 per cent. Before the productivity of existing resources can be increased, a number of basic institutional problems has to be faced. Traditionally, forestry has rarely included
the production of fuelwood as one of its specific aims. On the contrary, many forestry services have been established to promote forest industries, such as paper and pulp, and to protect forests against the incursions of local people. In many countries, foresters and local populations have come into conflict. In the light of the current fuelwood crisis, this has to change. The provision of fuelwood must become one of the major goals of national forestry services, and every attempt must be made to win the support and help of local people. Only if they are actively involved in managing and controlling their fuelwood supplies is there any hope of averting worsening problems in the future. There are six basic preconditions to improving the productivity of existing resources:
· production of fuelwood will have to become a major goal of national forestry policy
· national policy must reconcile the conflicting demands of preserving forests for timber production and providing fuelwood for local people
· new legislation must be passed to provide local people with access to fuelwood resources and stimulate them to become involved in forest management and control
· forestry institutions must be strengthened so that they can help local people manage their own fuelwood resources sustained yield management practices must be adopted to stimulate forest biomass production
· the fuelwood potential of existing resources must be surveyed and publicized
One important reason for the low productivity of today's forests is past unplanned use, resulting in a low level of yield. Introducing scientific forestry practices can ensure high and sustainable yields. Out of 881 million ha of productive closed forests in the world, only about 41 million ha are now being managed on sustainable yield principles, providing a continuous supply of forest products, including timber and fuelwood.
An FAO project which took place in Ghana during the 1970s demonstrates the advantages of new practices (and the waste inherent in some old ones). In Ghana, the original forest has been extensively cut in the past for valuable hardwood species. Although the forest remains, it is not highly productive. Such forests are often simply felled and burnt, and then replanted for specific products such as paper and pulp.
This practice is not only wasteful but encourages the growth of weeds on the cleared land - so much so that as many as 12 separate weedings may be needed before the new trees become finally established. On 57 000 ha of the Subri River Forest Reserve in south-west Ghana, however, it was decided to adopt a new technique.
The forest was cleared for replanting with fast-growing species suitable for pulp and fuelwood. As much as possible of the felled timber was saved and sold as lumber, fuelwood or charcoal. The natural forest was left untouched on all steep slopes, stream banks and in swamps.
This technique had a number of advantages. Because the timber was not burnt on site, the weed problem was greatly reduced. Valuable local species were saved yet the open canopy that resulted for the first two or three years allowed crops of plantain and cassava to be grown between the rows of newly planted species. In essence, the technique substitutes the non-productive activities of burning and weeding for the productive ones of sawmilling and charcoal-making.
Charcoal burning on the Subri River Forest Reserve in Ghana. When the area was replanted for paper pulp fuelwood and charcoal were sold off, and agriculture encouraged between the rows of tree seedlings. Returns exceeded cost by several hundred dollars a hectare
The cost of this exercise, of course, was high. However, the returns from the sale of the felled wood exceeded the conversion cost by several hundred dollars a hectare, even without taking into account the benefits of the extra food production and the advantages to local entrepreneurs who made the charcoal.
The Subri Conversion Technique, as it is now called, could be adapted for many other countries. It is now a well-proven way of making better use of existing resources - resources which have a high potential. Recent FAO studies have shown that the wood available per hectare for fuel amounts to 100-200 m^3 in the tropical high forest of Suriname, 88 m^3 in the Cerrado region of Brazil, 75 m^3 in the Terai area of Nepal, 50 m^3 in the Ivory Coast and as much as 30 m^3 in the central southern part of Upper Volta.
However, big savings can also be made by making better use of forest wastes. Nearly half of what is cut in the forest is wasted and though much of it is in the form of small branches, twigs and leaves, techniques do exist for compressing such material into bundles and tying them with straw or wire. Bundles like this burn best if they contain a piece of wood in the middle and they provide steady burning suitable for cooking, unlike the material in its loose state which burns erratically and quickly. Simple hand presses for bundling can be made cheaply by local blacksmiths.
Similarly, small particles of wood, sawdust and charcoal waste normally virtually impossible to burn - can be compressed into briquettes. Although this can be done without a binder, the equipment involved is expensive and the drying process energy-intensive. Simple handpresses can be made to produce briquettes using any number of locally available binders - fish waste, resin, tar or animal manure. In Poland a production line process is used to make fuel briquettes from wood bark.
Many of these products have a surprisingly high calorific value. For example, a briquette containing 30 45 per cent charcoal dust, 30-45 per cent chopped twigs and 15-20 per cent manure burns comparably to a medium-quality hard coal. However, few of these techniques have yet been tried out in developing countries. They need to be developed in combined programmes aimed at improving the design and distribution of stoves, because fuel which has been compressed in some way cannot usually be burnt satisfactorily in an open fireplace.
Another way of increasing production is to incorporate fuelwood projects within other agricultural practices. Often the inclusion of fuelwood trees as part of a mixed economy can have important results. In Thailand, smallholders in a coastal area south of Bangkok have begun responding to that city's shortage of charcoal. Although most of the farmers own only 1-10 ha of land, they have evolved a system in which they use their land for mangroves, shrimp ponds and salt pans. The mangroves are converted to charcoal. In this way the smallholders benefit to the maximum extent possible by selling a mixture of energy, food and minerals.
Most of the tools needed for bundling and pelletizing fuels can be made by a local blacksmith. These and other techniques could increase the yield of existing fuelwood resources by up to 20 per cent (a)
Most of the tools needed for bundling and pelletizing fuels can be made by a local blacksmith. These and other techniques could increase the yield of existing fuelwood resources by up to 20 per cent (b)
In Bangladesh, the intensive use which is made of homestead land is somewhat similar. There, individual families plan multiple uses for the land which surrounds their houses in order to make the family more or less self-sufficient in both food and energy. Even individual trees are intensively managed and used.
An existing resource can also be rejuvenated just by leaving it alone for a period. An FAO project at N'Djamena in Chad has shown that simply fencing off areas of natural vegetation and controlling grazing and fuelwood collection for a time can be more effective than new plantation.
Using simple techniques to improve the fuelwood potential of existing resources, it seems possible that production could be increased by an average of 20 per cent. This figure can be used to check the economics of improving what already exists as against planting new areas for fuelwood. New plantations may well be essential but improving production from existing resources is normally the first thing worth looking at. Though implementation may be difficult, the gains can be particularly rewarding.
Creating new resources
The FAO study "Agriculture: Toward 2000" estimates that if all fuelwood shortfalls are to be mad