<title>Unasylva - No. 147 - IX World Forestry Congress Mexico 1985</title>
<section>1</section>
Editorial
Mexico 1985: The Ninth World Forestry Congress
A World Forestry Congress is a relatively rare event. The Congress hosted by Mexico City this year from 1 to 12 July will be only the ninth: the first Congress was held as long ago as 1926, in Rome. Ten years elapsed before the second, held in Budapest in 1936. The third Congress, delayed by the Second World War, took place in Helsinki in 1949. Since then. Congresses have occurred very nearly once every six years: in Dehra Dun in 1954, in Seattle in 1960, in Madrid in 1966, in Buenos Aires in 1972, in Jakarta in 1978 and now in Mexico City in 1985.
The long interlude between one World Forestry Congress and the next has given the event a character and an importance it would not have if it were held every year or every two years. It permits time for reflection and time to implement and evaluate the recommendations emanating from the previous Congress.
An interlude of six or seven years also brings, inevitably, significant changes in the outside world which affect the world forestry picture. The 2000 participants from 104 countries and 17 international organizations who assembled in Jakarta seven years ago held their discussions in a context of high oil prices, energy shortages and a major international banking crisis over how to recycle petrodollars. Now, only seven years later the situation has very nearly reversed itself. Oil prices have fallen, the energy supply picture - with the notable exception of fuelwood - has stabilized, and the successful recycling of petrodollars through international loans has brought a new banking crisis: the possibility that several heavily indebted nations may go bankrupt.
The theme of the Ninth World Forestry Congress - "Forest Resources in the Integral Development of Society" - emphasizes the need for foresters to look beyond their own resource base to consider how forest policies can be formulated in the light of such global events as an international banking crisis. The purpose of the Congress is to develop clear lines of action that can serve as guidelines for (a) formulating national policies; (b) providing incentives and guidance to the private and government sectors; and (c) promoting international cooperation in forestry.
Toward this end, the Government of Mexico has put together an impressive programme for the 2500 participants expected at the Congress. In addition to the general sessions, plenary sessions and meetings of the technical commissions, the Mexican Government will be sponsoring secondary meetings, expositions, demonstrations and contests. There will also be study tours to Central America, Cuba and the United States. The Government and the Organizing Committee deserve great thanks for literally years of work put into planning and preparation.
The present issue of Unasylva is intended as a preview to the Congress. It does not contain papers that will be presented in Mexico City. Instead, it includes an interview with FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma, and five articles which, it is hoped, will provide a backdrop for Congress activities. The subjects covered by these articles - forestry beyond 2000, shifting cultivation, agroforestry, community forestry and the social dimension of forest concession agreements - do not by any means represent all of the many topics that will be covered in Mexico City. Rather, they are intended to bring forward a body of objective, state-of-the-art information on certain critical topics.
The next issue of Unasylva (Vol. 37, No. 148) will feature FAO's fortieth anniversary and will include an interview with Mr Eduardo Pesqueira Olea, Mexico's Secretary of Agriculture and Hydrological Resources. Unasylva will also, in future issues, be reporting on what happened at the Congress.
In the preparation and planning for the World Forestry Congress, FAO has played an advisory role to the Government of Mexico. The event thus has great importance for FAO. It is the only truly international forestry event which brings together individuals, companies, NGOs and governments in one place to discuss and debate forestry questions of international significance. The impact of the Congress will be a long-lasting one.
<section>2</section>
Forestry: Essential for development
An interview with FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma
FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma
Unasylva: Mr Director-General, the year 1985 has been declared "International Year of the Forest" by the FAO Council. This year also marks FAO's fortieth anniversary, as well as the occasion of the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico City. In view of these important events, Unasylva would very much appreciate your thoughts on the world forestry situation in general and on FAO's forestry programmes in particular.
Mr Saouma: I wish to emphasize right away that I consider forests to be very important for the environmental stability of our planet and the quality of life on it. First, because of their very scale. Forests cover one-third of the world's land surface. Literally half of the world's population lives in areas directly affected by forested watersheds. Forest products account for US$55000 million in world trade, making them one of the world's most important commodities. Five hundred million people are practicing some form of shifting cultivation or long-fallow agriculture on what are, essentially, forest lands. Second, forests are important because they are a source of so many goods and services. Forests provide wood for construction timber, veneers, pulp and paper, plywood and many other products; they provide fuelwood for 2000 million People; they provide fodder for animals. But their most important contribution is to agricultural production, by protecting soils, conserving
water and ameliorating micro-climate. Forests are also a storehouse for a large number of the world's plant genetic resources, including wild relatives of our major crops. Forests also provide habitat for wildlife, and grounds for recreation.
Unasylva: You have said on many occasions that forestry has a major role to play in rural development. Would you like to elaborate on this?
Mr Saouma: The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, hosted by FAO in 1979, underscored the fact that without rural development, there can be no national development. Without rural development, the massive migrations of the rural poor to the cities would continue. This migratory process is abetted by population growth which, despite encouraging progress, is still proceeding much too rapidly in many countries. The cities alone, like the rural areas, offer far too few opportunities for employment and a better life. The migrating rural poor soon become part of the vast ocean of urban poor. The cities, when filled with hundreds of thousands of rural poor, become breeding grounds for social, economic and political chaos. So it is imperative that we speed of rural development. As a minimum, this means meeting the subsistence needs of rural people. More broadly, it means providing Increased employment, income, services and opportunities for economic growth. And
this is where forestry comes in, because forests and woodlands are in rural areas and could be utilized in such a way as to provide more benefits to the rural people. In this respect, I think we have already seen the beginnings of an important shift in forestry policy and practice. Foresters have, traditionally, been concerned with the productive and protective roles of the forest. Now they are also beginning to concentrate upon the social dimension of forestry, and particularly upon forestry's role in rural development. This is a policy shift of considerable importance. We can see it reflected in the fact that the theme of the Jakarta World Congress was "Forests for People" while the theme selected for the Mexico City World Congress is "Forestry in the Integral Development of Society". These themes demonstrate that foresters themselves are becoming more aware of forestry's social role and that they are ready to ensure that a greater share of the benefits from forestry
reaches the rural people.
Unasylva: But what are these benefits that forestry could bring to rural people?
Mr Saouma: To answer this question better, perhaps we should distinguish between those cases where natural forests already exist and those areas where reforestation or afforestation is needed. While it is true that existing tropical forests are being depleted at an alarming rate - 11 million hectares world wide every year - the fact remains that there still are large areas left. Some areas should be designated as natural areas or national parks. However, most of the existing forest land could, and should, be opened up to development and brought under rational management, to increase and diversify production and spur the creation of new industries or the expansion of existing ones to provide off-farm employment and incomes for rural communities. By "industries" here, I mean everything from the harvesting of raw materials to processing, and from fully integrated pulp and paper plants to small, local businesses making such products as furniture, charcoal or rattan baskets.
Benefits from natural forests also include the production, at the community level, of various non-industrial products such as food, fodder, fuelwood, rosin, poles and thatch. Thus, appropriate forest industries contribute to economic growth over and above traditional community benefits. The benefits of forestry are greater and more spectacular where tree planting is used as a means of halting the advance of desertification, which results in environmental disasters and human tragedy, and not just in the Sahel - where its devastating effects have been well publicized but also in other parts of the world. Tree-planting in these areas can restore soil fertility, protect against wind and erosion, enhance water supplies and pave the way for the reestablishment of sustainable crop and livestock production. The planting of multi-purpose, fast-growing trees in arid and semiarid areas can provide fuelwood and fodder, apart from shelter and protection. At the level of the individual
farm, the correct Integration of trees enhances agricultural production and food security. The late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, in her McDougall Lecture to the FAO Conference in 1981, said that the second Green Revolution would come when small farmers around the world systematically planted trees on their land.
Unasylva: You have referred to the role of forests and trees in food production. This is something not well understood by the general public. Could you elaborate?
Mr Saouma: Although precise statistics and records do not exist, we all know that forests provide habitat for wildlife and for fish, which are direct sources of food in both the developing and the Industrialized world. In many countries, meat from forest animals and fish comprises a major source of protein. Forests also supply such commodities as mushrooms, oils, nuts, fruits and honey, and many edible plants. But more important is the indirect role of forests in food production and food security. In fact, in many localities, agriculture simply could not exist without forests, woodlands and trees. Without good soils, adequate water supplies and climatic amelioration, agriculture would be impossible. And it is precisely these considerations that make watershed management in the upper catchment areas so important in order to prevent both flooding and drought in the lower elevations and the valleys below.
"Prime Minister Gandhi said that the second Green Revolution would come when small farmers around the world systematically planted trees on their land."
Unasylva: In the past, forestry and agriculture were regarded as separate, sometimes even antagonistic, disciplines. How true is this today?
Mr Saouma: Although forestry and agriculture have a common scientific basis, they are two separate disciplines. However, the era when foresters and agriculturalists regarded each other as potential threats is over. Both professions have realized that the two sectors are intimately and permanently interrelated. At FAO, the role of forestry in food security and in human nutrition, particularly through fuelwood, is fully recognized by the foresters. On the other hand, the agronomists now appreciate the role of trees both in increasing productivity and in diversifying incomes from the farm. Both sides fully recognize that efforts must now be directed toward achieving "vertical" rather than "horizontal" expansion in agricultural as well as forestry production; that is, to increase the per-hectare output of crops or wood, thereby lessening the competition for land between the two land users. If each hectare of agricultural land can produce more crops and can Yield more meat and
other products, then there is less need to convert more forest land to agricultural use. Similarly, if the yield of forest products per hectare of forest land is increased, then more of the fertile, lowland forest areas can be used for food production in response to the growing food needs of increasing populations.
Unasylva: Recently, grave concern was expressed by several governments and at various international forums about forest destruction and the need for international action in forest conservation and protection. What are the threats faced by the forests?
Mr Saouma: Forests are indeed facing a multitude of very serious threats, the magnitude of which should not be underestimated. However, we still have ample time to correct the situation and reverse the present trend. Naturally, this requires coordinated planning and a global outpouring of money and effort. It is precisely for this reason that the Fourteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe resolved that the forest be duly recognized during 1985 as a global concern and that the FAO Council, at its Eighty-sixth Session, declared the year 1985 the International Year of the Forest. A major forum for discussion of this topic will be the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico City. In tropical countries, FAO's own studies have conclusively shown that agricultural expansion, shifting cultivation and, to a lesser extent, excessive logging are removing ten times as much forest as is currently being put back through reforestation. To change this, we must step up the rate of
reforestation dramatically and at the same time reduce the rate of forest clearance. However, it is important to note that threats to the forest exist not only in tropical countries. Temperate forests in industrialized countries, which had remained relatively stable over the past several decades, are now being threatened by a combination of add rain and other environmental factors. Solving this problem will require more research and more international cooperation. In arid zones, a combination of overgrazing and excessive fuelwood cueing and gathering is endangering the survival of entire forest and woodland areas. Here, as I said earlier, we need to do everything possible to plant multipurpose, fast-growing trees.
"At FAO, the role of forestry in food security and in human nutrition is fully recognized."
"FAO's own studies have conclusively shown that agricultural expansion, shifting cultivation and excessive logging are removing ten times as much forest as is currently being put back through reforestation."
Unasylva: You mentioned the collecting and gathering of fuelwood. FAO has recently played a very significant role in making the world aware of the vast dimensions of the fuelwood crisis. Is this crisis getting better, or is it worsening?
Mr Saouma: The extent of the fuelwood crisis is truly staggering. According to FAO estimates, 1000 million people in developing countries are facing fuelwood shortages. This number could easily rise to 2000 million by the end of the century, if present trends continue. I have said on other occasions that it is of little value to provide food for the hungry of the world if they lack the means by which to cook it. Some three-quarters of the people in developing countries depend upon wood as their sole source of energy for cooking and heating. And this situation is unlikely to change markedly in the near future. Developing countries are generally lacking in the necessary facilities and infrastructure to use other forms of energy, such as coal, oil or gas, or solar, nuclear or hydro energy, even if these were available at low prices. The stories in the press of the industrialized world claiming that the recent drop In oil prices has ended the energy crisis are misleading. For at
least half of humankind, the energy crisis is not over. It is still very much alive. In terms of total money spent and total power generated, wood can seem like a very minor source of energy. But in terms of human beings - and It is they that matter moat - wood remains the world's most important energy source.
Unasylva: If fuelwood collection by individuals - usually women - In rural areas represents one end of the forestry spectrum, perhaps we can put forest industries at the other end. What policies and programmes is FAO following with regard to forest industries?
Mr Saouma: We are emphasizing the expansion and diversification of forest industries in the developing world, which possesses one-half of the planet's forest resources but produces only 20 percent of the total forest products. This situation needs to change. Eighty percent of the wood used in developing countries goes for fuelwood and charcoal. The remaining 20 percent accounts for all other domestic consumption and for exports. But half of the exports are still in the form of logs, which are converted in other countries. Developing countries import 20 percent more processed higher-value products such as sawnwood, plywood and veneer from industrialized countries than they export to them. This means a net loss in foreign exchange of more than $800 million per year. So, much of our effort is directed toward improving the capacities of industries in developing countries to produce higher-value wood products.
Unasylva: How is this being done? And what is me focus of FAO's programmes for forest industries?
Mr Saouma: In the past, FAO has worked with equipment manufacturers to develop a portfolio of plans and designs covering a wide range of small-scale forest: industries. In many countries, such small-scale enterprises were thought to represent the best way to utilize the forest resource. FAO has also assisted in feasibility studies and the installation of large-scale forest-industrial complexes, of pulp and paper mills costing hundreds of millions of dollars. In some cases, large-scale enterprises were considered to be the best solution for a country seeking to develop its forest industry. Now the emphasis is on appropriate industries. This concept implies that the industry is deliberately designed to match more closely the extent and nature of its forest resources to the available management and technical capabilities, as well as to the relative skill of its work-force and the financing it can bring to bear on new forestry projects. Above ail, we are trying to emphasize that
local people should be included in the decision-making process and that some of the benefits of whatever forest industries are developed should be returned to them.
Unasylva: A number of problems, such as rural poverty, the fuelwood shortage, shifting cultivation and tropical deforestation, acid rain, desertification and underdeveloped forest industries, have been mentioned as requiring urgent solutions. Are you optimistic or pessimistic that such problems can be solved?
Mr Saouma: I am optimistic, and I believe my optimism is fully justified. People throughout the world, in both developing and industrialized countries, as well as many governments and organizations, have expressed great concern over the fate of the forests. This is underscored by the amount of media attention given to the subject, which in itself is a hopeful sign for the future. Over the past two decades, we have witnessed the growth of literally hundreds of non-governmental organizations concerned with some aspect of forest development or the forest environment. There are groups concerned with wildlife, groups concerned with fuelwood, groups concerned with environmental protection, groups concerned with promoting rural development. We have today in the world a critical mass of energy - human energy ready to be converted into a chain reaction of concrete actions to protect our forests and to stimulate the whole process of development. There are also clear signs that
governments are ready to take separate or collective action. In fact, considerable progress has already been made in some regions. On the technical side, organizations like FAO stand ready to provide assistance. We in FAO are continuously striving to improve the quality of our field projects and to make them fully responsive to the pragmatic needs of our member countries. With the growing understanding of and support to forestry that are now evident worldwide, among people and their political leaders alike, I am confident we shall succeed in resolving these problems.
Unasylva: Thank you, Mr Director-General.
FAO, Rome
<section>3</section>
A world perspective: Forestry beyond 2000
This paper was prepared by staff of FAO's Forestry Department for the discussion of future perspectives in forestry at the Seventh Session of the FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO) in Rome, 7-11 May 1984. The work was coordinated by P.A. Wardle, Senior Officer (Economics) Policy and Planning Service.
FORESTRY IN ECUADOR, 1966 what changes are foreseen after 2000?
The forests of the world provide a renewable source of materials, energy and services for nations and communities, contributing to their social and economic well-being and forming a vital component of their environment. In all these functions they are of major importance.
Four thousand million hectares, one-third of the world's land area, are under forest, constituting a major proportion of the environment in many regions. The annual production of wood from the forests is some 3000 million m^3. Nearly half of this is raw material for mechanical wood products or for paper. These products are vital materials for housing, construction, furniture, packaging and communications. Somewhat more than half of the wood is used directly for energy. Other forest products include fruits, gums or resins, fodder and the meat of wild animals. These are of vital importance to rural communities in many parts of the world and also form the basis of significant industries.
The importance of forest products can also be measured by the involvement of people - the people employed in the harvesting, manufacture and delivery of the products, and those who depend on the products for a part of their material well-being. Some 1-2 percent of total economic activity in most countries is contributed by the forest and forest industries sector, while in countries with a heavy dependence on wood in production or energy supply this figure may rise to 5 percent or higher.
The number of people with direct dependence on forest products can be illustrated by the 2000 million rural people who depend on wood supplies for their domestic energy and the more than 200 million living in the forests. There are also the vast populations of agriculturists downstream whose lives are affected by flood and siltation of rivers and reservoirs as a result of treatment of mountain forests. Similarly, the lives of farmers in arid zones and their ability to produce are determined by the treatment of the fragile woodland ecology that prevents erosion and controls the advance of the desert.
A perspective In the short term, because of the extensive nature of forests, the impact of activities altering their condition is not immediately apparent. The forest is too often perceived as a stock resource, a free good, with the land as something freely available for conversion to other uses without recognition of the consequences for the production, service and environmental roles of the forest. Definitive action, particularly investment in forestry, has a long gestation period. For these reasons, perspectives of the contribution of forests to society and the economy have to be projected for long periods into the future to provide a basis for policy makers to formulate appropriate reaction to emerging trends.
In the 1950s and 1960s, identification of the trend to rapid growth in consumption of forest products in Europe, North America and Japan assisted the forest authorities in developing programmes of reinvestment and built up confidence in industry to invest. It required the oil shock of 1973 to force recognition of the importance of forests as a source of energy to rural communities. Even had low energy prices persisted, there would have been little possibility for these communities of substituting commercial energy alternatives. The world community is still in the process of recognizing institutional constraints in many regions that force the profligate destruction of forest without securing a compensatory, sound, productive use either of the wood or of the land.
The forests of the world constitute a vital source of material, of energy and of other goods. They form an essential component of the environment of people and their agriculture. Beyond the year 2000, the pressures of population and urbanization and a limited land resource present an immense challenge. To meet the increasing need for the products of the forest and to secure its service - in conserving soil and water and natural communities - require the utilization of people to pursue these objectives, the development of skills and the evolution of an appropriate institutional environment for the effective operation of forests and forest industries. This article deals with the global perspective in that light.
The setting
The world's population is expected to increase from 4400 million in 1980 to around 6100 million by the year 2000. UN projections indicate a range of possible levels of stabilization of population, with a low variant of 8000 million by 2040, a medium variant of 10500 million by 2110 and a high variant of 14200 million by 2130. A feature of projected population to the year 2000 is the higher rate of growth of urban than of rural population. Thus, up to the year 2000, half the increase of population in developing countries will occur in urban areas.
The economic scenarios put forward by international agencies indicate an annual economic growth of developing countries in the range of 5 to 6 percent over the period toward 2000, with growth in industrial countries ranging between 2.5 and 5 percent, and a central case of 3.5 percent. With these assumptions, one-fifth of the people of developing countries will be living below the poverty line in the year 2000, unless the pattern of growth is modified to place more emphasis on poverty alleviation. More ambitious scenarios are also put forward which would go further toward alleviating the deprivation of the least privileged communities.
In these scenarios, world consumption of commercial energy is projected to increase by some 2 percent per year, combined with a I long-run trend in real price increases of about 1.5 percent per annum. The proportion of petroleum in the total falls while natural gas, solid fuels and electricity all increase.
Studies of the population-supporting capacities of land indicate that pressures on land will increase in many areas. Though the world as a whole should have enough cultivable land to feed more than the maximum population it is ever likely to have to support with the application of present technology, the land resources are very unevenly distributed in relation to population. It also has to be borne in mind that the provision of land to grow wood for fuel is essential to meet the basic needs of the population in many regions of the world, since food must be cooked as well as grown. Achievement of the higher agricultural production needed will be attained through higher yields per unit of land in some areas, but it will also involve considerable expansion of arable land in others, at the expense of other land uses. This expansion will be greater with lower levels of technology and with associated losses of cropland and production through land degradation. At high levels of
technology, the additional land area required would be less and the losses through land degradation would be more contained. The achievement of high levels of technology would be associated with more ambitious scenarios of economic development and access to institutions, infrastructure, training and capital.
Products of the forest
The driving force behind the consumption of the products of the forest is provided by human needs, wants and desires for goods and services, and by people's preferences among those available under the constraints of the limited resources at their disposal. The products of the forest may be divided between those of the traditional sector - fuelwood, wood for charcoal, poles, posts, fodder, fruits and extractives used by local communities without industrial processing - and the modern sector manufactures such as sawnwood, panels, paper and energy for industry.
Demand from subsistence farmers and rural communities operating outside the traditional market economy for traditional subsistence products will continue and almost certainly grow. This consumption tends to be dependent on virtually free availability of the forest supply, involving only the cost of household labour in its collection and use. Maintenance of supplies for the future increasingly depends on the ability to maintain forest production locally within the context of the traditional economy of the community.
Demand for forest products has been predicted to increase proportionally with population growth, but, in practice, consumption will be limited by the availability of supplies, as these are exhausted if collection and exploitation occur without renewal of the tree resource. Thus, the annual minimum need for fuelwood by the year 2000 has been estimated at 2600 million m^3, while the supply capacity, taking account of population distribution, is put at 1500 million m^3. This will result either in lower levels of per caput consumption of energy or in energy needs being met with alternative fuels. A similar maldistribution of supply would apply to wood as a material and to the other products of the forest for local subsistence use.
The issue beyond 2000 is whether the best solution for these communities is the massive harnessing of their resources in order to renew local forest supplies, or whether the effort should be focused upon securing access to alternative sources of energy and materials. Present indicators of future prospects for international energy suggest that the renewal of forest supplies should be given urgent priority in many regions.
Diversity The diversity of products other than wood has a potential to enrich the lives of rural communities, by contributing to basic food supply and nutritional standards, and to supply materials for a wide range of local industries. The development and use of these products provide opportunities for useful employment and economic production with little dependence on external inputs, while the production of the raw material is largely complementary to agricultural production and the production of wood in the forest.
Considering modern sector products, the perspective of the FAO study Agriculture: toward 2000 indicates continued growth in world demand at rates of 1.5 percent for sawnwood and 4 to 5 percent for panels and paper. Growth is put at substantially higher rates for developing countries.
The main features of the development of technology have been increased use of wood in a reconstituted form - in panels, for example - as against simply processed sawnwood; expansion of the use of wood in paper manufacture; increased efficiency in the utilization of raw material through the use of residuals from one process as raw material for other products as well as for energy generation; and recycling of used products such as waste paper. An area with notable potential for improved utilization efficiency is the use of wood as domestic fuel. The indications are that wood is a very resilient source of raw material for a wide range of products. It has the advantage of relatively low energy requirements for the prod