<title>Unasylva - No. 148 - Forestry in FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
40 years of forestry at FAO: 1945-85
This issue of Unasylva focuses on the fortieth anniversary of FAO - -and, in particular, on 40 years of work by FAO's Forestry Department. The last issue (Vol. 37, No. 147) looked ahead to the World Forestry Congress, held in Mexico City from 1 to 12 July 1985 (and this issue carries that theme forward with an interview with the Mexican Secretary of Agriculture and Hydrologic Resources, Eduardo Pesqueira Olea). The next issue will highlight the International Year of the Forest, 1985, proclaimed by the FAO Council last November. It is clearly an important time for international forestry.
Here, and in the two issues that follow, we will, in addition to publishing articles on important forestry topics, be reprinting selected excerpts from early issues of Unasylva. This issue, for example, includes the major portion of an article from the very first Unasylva: "The disappearance of the tropical forests of Africa,'' by André Marie A. Aubréville, an article that, 38 years later, seems prophetic - especially during a year when FAO is making a major new effort to address the crisis in Africa.
Also included are a history of FAO's 40 years of forestry work by R.G. Fontaine, former Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division; excerpts from articles that trace the beginnings of international technical assistance in forestry, including a view from Brazil; a short statement on overall forestry policy from Marcel Leloup, the first Head of Forestry at FAO; and selections from an early paper prepared by FAO's forestry staff on an important issue for the future of forest policy: quality or quantity?
Looking back into the past can have various purposes: to provide an object lesson for the present and the future; to deepen our understanding and appreciation of our heritage; to show us, often to our great surprise, which things have changed and which things have not changed; or simply to provide entertainment.
It is hoped that this issue, and the two that follow, will do a little of all of these things.
<section>2</section>
One world - One forest
Sir John Boyd Orr
Unasylva's first issue appeared 38 years ago, in July 1947, two years after FAO's official birth. The organization then had 48 Member Nations, less than one-third of today's total. Decolonization and even the concept of a "Third World" were yet to come.
Some may find it difficult in 1985 to imagine how much the Second World War weighed then on the thinking of the new UN agencies. At UN headquarters in New York, and in every specialized agency! the question was the same: how to repair the damage suffered by nations involved in the war and how to avoid a third global conflict.
Not all of these preoccupations belong to the past. The same problems exist today, only on different scales, or in different parts of the world.
This is why the editorial in the first issue of Unasylva, written by FAO's first Director-General, Sir John Boyd Orr, is being reprinted in Unasylva 38 years later.
· The tie between forests and the good things of the earth runs back through history.
"The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree and the box together," wrote the prophet Isaiah. Solomon the King sang of "a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon". There are in the Bible more than a hundred references to the cedars of Lebanon and countless other references to the richness of the land lying near them.
Today those forests have gone, and the once fruitful countryside is an arid waste. There is a story of the shocked surprise of the late President Roosevelt, flying to Tehran, upon realizing that the bare waste of rocks below his plane was all that remained of Lebanon's cedars and the one-time heart of the biblical land of milk and honey. The impression bit deep and was an added reason for the United States firm belief that the projected Food and Agriculture Organization should have a strong forestry division.
In recent months my own experience has underscored the link between forests and human well-being. On my last two trips through Europe, I saw on almost every hand what war had done to the people's homes. I became convinced that next to the great crisis in food, the housing problem is the most widespread and pressing emergency for cities and towns on the Continent and in the British Isles. The crying need is for lumber.
The recent timber conference in Czechoslovakia was an effort to speed and stimulate the great task of reconstruction that lies ahead. I am glad the delegates at that conference were able to agree on constructive plans for cooperation among governments to alleviate the timber shortage and for attention at the same time to longer-range problems of maintaining and restoring forests.
There are many other examples, but these two instances show the place of forestry in the work of FAO. In the long march of civilization man has always looked to the forest for many of his necessities and comforts. In our complex modern world, wood continues to stand first as a building material, is indispensable as fuel, and supplies practically all of the world's paper and a host of other essential industrial materials. Recent discoveries in ways of treating and using forest products may be bringing us to the threshold of a great new era in the use of wood. Moreover, forests are now universally recognized as guardians of soil and water, exerting a tremendous influence for good or evil over field agriculture in all parts of the world.
ONE WORLD - ONE FOREST the birth of Unasylva
Thus, forestry and the use of forest products are inevitably and inseparably a part of the work of FAO. The fundamental aims of FAO are set forth clearly in the Preamble to the Organization's Constitution. These aims are - first, raising levels of nutrition and standards of living of people everywhere; second, bringing about more efficient production and distribution of all food and agriculture products; third, bettering the condition of rural populations; and fourth, as the end result of these three great lines of effort, contributing toward an expanding world economy. FAO could not make a well-rounded effort to reach any of its major objectives without full attention to the forests and their problems.
In the fields of forestry and forest products the 48 nations working together through FAO are following a world policy with three main objectives - the conservation of all forests that perform useful social or protective functions; wise use of the world's forest soils for continuing an adequate production of raw materials; and new and better ways of processing and using forest products as a means of raising standards of living.
In forestry as in its other fields, FAO is not interested solely in studying and solving technical problems for their own sake. Instead, our work in forestry is part of the broader stream of FAO's work as a whole. The FAO Mission to Poland, for instance, will give attention to that country's forest resources and possibilities.
On a worldwide basis, the problems of forestry and forest products offer a great challenge. One set of problems concerns the present emergency arising from the devastation and disruption of war. At the very time when the need for lumber to repair war damage and for the building of millions of new homes and other structures is reaching its height, the capacity of the currently accessible forests has become insufficient to meet these extra demands. During the next few years, the increased cuttings from present commercial forest areas must be made with as much attention to long-range conservation as possible, and meanwhile, new forest areas not hitherto exploited must be brought into production.
The second and long-range world forest problem is that of keeping pace with growing demand for lumber and other forest products, and at the same time seeing to it that forests are in a condition to continue to produce. The world already has experienced far too much of wasteful and heedless forest exploitation. The depressing cut-over areas of both hemispheres are only one indication of the physical and social ills that follow upon this course.
Both the short-range and the long-range problems call for worldwide efforts. The tasks are too large for any one man or group of men, or any one nation or small group of nations. Already, what happens in Europe makes its effects felt in the forests of Siberia and of North and South America. Just as it is becoming clear that the diverse lands and peoples of this troubled planet form one world, both literally and figuratively, so it becomes clear that the world's forest areas are in reality one forest. FAO's part in the task that lies ahead is that of coordinating, stimulating, and guiding the work of public and private institutions in many lands. FAO, in turn, will be only one of many agencies cooperating in the work.
The name of FAO's new magazine, Unasylva, is well chosen - one world, one forest. This new review will attempt to shed light on all manner of problems in the fields of forestry and forest products, to compare methods that are being used in different countries, and to present the opinions and suggestions of experts in the various fields. I hope and believe it will be a keen new blade in the worldwide battle for freedom from want.
<section>3</section>
Forty years of forestry at FAO: Some personal reflections
R.G. Fontaine
R.G. Fontaine, former Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division, worked for the organization for 27 years, retiring in 1974.
Seated, at centre, is Marcel Leloup, first Director of FAO's Forestry Division. On the tar left is Leslie J. Vernell, Editor of Unasylva born 1947 to 1972. At the far right Is R.G. Fontaine, the author of this article. The year is 1947.
· When I was asked to write an article for Unasylva on 40 years of forestry at FAO, I felt interested and yet hesitant. I was interested because I think I can consider myself the actor who has played the longest part in the period involved; but hesitant because a presentation of this international body 's 40 years of activity - and to a certain extent, its logic - did not appear to me an easy task to undertake. However, I eventually accepted, my mind running back to those who had borne the responsibility of giving life to the Forestry Division at its very beginning, Marcel Leloup and Egon Glesinger, and who had drawn me into the exciting adventure of the international civil service.
I shall not stress the specific and somewhat incidental reasons that brought about the creation of a Forestry Division in FAO. These have been explained in a number of other articles and publications. I would, rather, like to recount, without claiming to be totally unbiased, how those who took part in these last 40 years of international forestry have lived them and understood them. However, for the account to be complete, brief mention is needed of the international activities that preceded the Second World War and the "heritage" FAO received which led the organization to develop certain activities rapidly in order to ensure continuity. It will also be necessary to talk about FAO's role in the organization of World Forestry Congresses. Then I propose to conclude with some reflections on international forestry cooperation.
Taken from Unasylva's tenth anniversary issue In 1957 (Vol. 11, No. 2), the chart illustrates the development of forestry activities during the first ten years of FAO.
International forestry before the Second World War
Foresters have, in a way, been pioneers in the field of international cooperation. As early as 1890, the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) was founded, and later FAO was to help recommence its activities by assuming the responsibility for its secretariat from 1948 to 1955. At I the 1900 Universal Exposition in Paris, a report was presented highlighting the insufficiency of world timber supplies for industry. The report can be considered a first modest example of the kind of studies FAO was to carry out on wood production and consumption trends. In 1911, a forestry congress in Madrid adopted a resolution providing for the creation of a Mediterranean forest organization which, under the name of "Silva Mediterranea", came to be formally constituted in the early 1920s and remained active until 1935. It was reborn within FAO under the name of the Subcommittee for the Coordination of Mediterranean Forestry Activities, holding its first session in Rome
in 1949. In 1926, the First World Forestry Congress took place in Rome, at the International Institute for Agriculture (IIA), and proposed that forestry activities be developed within the Institute.
In 1936, the Second World Forestry Congress, which took place in Budapest, proposed the creation of an International Silviculture Centre (CIS). The Centre was set up in Berlin in 1939 and published an international forestry journal, Intersilva, a series of forestry studies, Sylvae Orbis, and forest bibliography studies. In 1946, the IIA and the CIS, together with their well-stocked libraries, were formally absorbed by FAO. Finally, in 1928, a non-governmental organization, the International Timber Committee (CIB), was founded in Vienna. Up until the Second World War, it published a number of statistics on international timber trade. Its experience was abundantly utilized by FAO, which recruited the Committee's secretary-general as soon as the Forestry Division was set up.
Forestry at FAO: Three periods
Three periods of forestry activity can, it seems to me, be distinguished, if it is kept in mind that the beginning and the end of each period are given here not in a strict sense but as a general indication, and that some overlapping may take place.
The first period (1945-59) was that of the return of peace, the re-gathering in many countries of foresters who had been separated by the war, and of great expectations. This period, rich in developments, was marked by the setting up of structures and institutions within FAO and, within them, the definition of important trends in world and regional forest policies, the attempt to achieve a fair distribution of resources according to needs, and the publication of inventories, statistics and studies.
The second period (1960-69) was the period of "decolonization", of FAO membership being extended to many developing countries, and of the expansion of field activities. It was also marked by the need to take stock of what was known in light of the information explosion and of the new awareness of environmental problems and of the limits of natural resources.
The third period (1970-85), which took in the founding of the Forestry Department - until then a Division - and its development, is rather harder to bring into focus since it is still in evolution and because of the lack of the necessary distance to identify its major trends. Besides traditional activities, this period has been characterized by the development of new, mostly inter-agency activities generated by the complexity of the problems involved and the diversity of the sources of finance. It has, however, also been marked by the crises affecting member countries (like oil shocks and rising unemployment), by somewhat arbitrary prophecies regarding the extinction of resources and the increase of pollution (Club of Rome, 1974-75), and by the "ageing" of organizations (Colloque de Lausanne, November 1984) that require reshaping and new structures. I will come back to this in my conclusions.
The period 1945 to 1959. The first task was to set up the Division with its two branches (Forests, and Forest Products), which became three in 1951 (Forest Policies, Forest Production, and Forest Economics). Advisory committees including well-known experts from outside FAO were established, notably in the fields of education, research and - jointly with IUFRO - bibliography. Finally, regional forestry offices were set up in Europe (Geneva), Latin America (Rio de Janeiro, then Santiago), the Far East (Bangkok) and the Near East (Cairo).
While the forestry problems and programmes of the Division were discussed globally in a forestry committee that was part of each FAO Conference, regional forestry conferences were also organized. These eventually led to the setting up of forestry commissions, which meet periodically and have established working groups according to the needs of each region. A sub-commission for the coordination of Mediterranean forestry matters, grouping the countries of the Mediterranean basin and working under the three regional forestry commissions (for Europe, the Near East and Africa), was founded. Finally, close relations were established in each region with the UN regional economic commissions to deal with problems relating to wood and wood products marketing. One of the major achievements of these activities during that period was "The principles of forest policy". On the basis of a document prepared by the secretariat and submitted to the regional commissions for discussion and
amendments, a final text was drawn up and approved by the 1951 FAO Conference. This declaration indicates the central themes of a forest policy in terms of administration, management, research and education, and it received wide circulation through Unasylva.
As far as regional activities are concerned, it is necessary to recall the importance attached to forestry activities in Europe by the Geneva office, which played a pioneering role for the other offices. First of all, the FAO European Forestry Commission created after the 1947 Mariánské Lázne (Marienbad) conference worked very actively toward the reconstruction of Europe. It established working groups to deal with, for example, forest work and the training of forestry workers (jointly with ILO and the EEC), flood control and landslide prevention, and forestry statistics (again jointly with the EEC). Furthermore, an FAO/ECE (Economic Commission for Europe) Timber Committee was constituted in 1948 which took over the activities of the timber committee of the European Economic Emergency Commission (EECE) of London. It greatly facilitated the exchange of information on available industrial timber resources and their equitable distribution. Finally, in close collaboration with
the Timber Committee and the European Forestry Commission, which met in Geneva in October 1952, the secretariats of FAO and the ECE published in 1953 a study entitled Timber consumption, production and trade in Europe-trends and prospects. The study was based upon assumptions concerning the rate of economic development during the next ten years, the ratio between the price of timber and the prices of other competitive materials, and the creation of a dynamic forest policy. Its methodology sewed as a model for other, similar studies carried out in the other regions, with the exception of Africa, where greater attention was paid to household-level consumption.
It was during this period that the Division put special emphasis on forest inventories. As early as 1948, it had published a survey involving 97 countries and covering 62 percent of their land area. With the help of questionnaires sent to national forestry services, world forest inventories were drawn up in 1953, 1958 and 1963. However, differences in the definition of the concepts utilized from one inventory, to another made it difficult to assess with sufficient accuracy the evolution of forestry, resources, so that these five-year investigations, which had served their main purpose, were eventually abandoned.
It was also during this period that the Division published a number of international studies that received wide circulation among Member Nations and universities. Among these were Forest policies, legislation and management; Tropical silviculture (in two volumes); Shifting agriculture in Africa; Hanunóo agriculture in the Philippines; Forest influences; Eucalypts for wood production; and The poplar in forestry and land use.
On the basis of Unesco's major project in arid zones and under the aegis of the Mediterranean forest subcommittee, four FAO/Unesco experts (Gaussen, Einberger, Kassas and de Philippis) drew up a dry-season map and a map of the vegetation of the Mediterranean region, and these were published by Unesco. A joint FAO/Unesco study on the definition of an arid-zone forestry policy was also attempted (by Montjauze, MacGuinnis, Pereira and de Philippis).
Finally, in order to be complete, this account should mention the many ties the Division was to establish with other international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental, to ensure coherence in the activities carried out by each body. Among these should be mentioned Unesco and its major project on arid zones; ILO and its activities connected with professional training; the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and its contributions in the field of national parks and species threatened with extinction; IUFRO and its forestry research activities; the Council of Europe and its commission on agriculture, which carried out a special study on Mediterranean forests; the European Confederation of Agriculture and its commission on private and farm forests; and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation and its interest in pesticides. Finally, in 1958, the Treaty of Rome was signed, and shortly afterwards a
forestry office was set up within the European Economic Community.
Technical assistance was chiefly granted outside of bilateral aid through the Expanded Technical Assistance Programme (ETAP), which started operating at the end of the 1950s and which consisted of sending out experts either on forest policy and legislation or on very specific subjects.
FAO has made regular, systematic, in-depth analyses of past and prospective trends in world supply and demand for wood products.
The period 1960 to 1969 At the onset of the 1960s, the FAO Conference approved a reorganization of FAO's structure, creating large Departments for Administration and Budget, Development, and General Affairs and Information, while the technical divisions (Plant Production, Animal Production, Nutrition, Land and Water, Fisheries, and Forestry) were regrouped in a Technical Department. Moreover, a decision taken by the FAO Council entrusted the Forestry Division with the organization and secretariat of World Forestry Congresses, in liaison with the host country: this is how the Sixth World Forestry Congress, held in Madrid in 1966, was organized. A study was presented at this Congress designed to make available the findings of a series of major national and regional appraisals of wood resources and requirements. The complete study was published in a special double issue of Unasylva (Vol. 20, Nos 80-81, 1966). Since then, FAO has made regular, systematic, in-depth analyses of
past and prospective trends in world supply and demand for wood products.
During this second period, most of the regional and international activities developed during the first period continued, with wildlife and national parks coming under the broad heading "conservation". A fourth branch set up to deal with forest exploitation took over activities relating to harvesting techniques, professional training, and forest road transport, and added shipping and forest ergonomics, primarily in the tropics. Several activities were initiated in Africa, and a regional office was opened in Accra and the African Forestry Commission was constituted. The latter studied the region's specific forestry problems, especially laws relating to forest ownership and the different degrees of forest protection. It established a working group on wildlife and national parks, areas that had been hitherto neglected. The working group was particularly active in the fields of animal population inventory and dynamics, wildlife management and game farming, the role of animal
proteins in human nutrition, and education and research. In response to the problems generated by the exploitation of humid and dry tropical areas, a Committee on Forestry Development in the Tropics was established in 1965. It studied matters specifically relating to the management of natural forests (the Catinot-Dawkins Protocol), forestation techniques in different areas, and species selection. Finally, under the aegis of the Advisory Committee on Forestry Education, activities in this field concentrated on determining the needs for skilled labour and setting up teaching structures in order to meet them.
This period was also highlighted by two important international conferences at which the FAO secretariat presented some background documents. The first was the UN Conference on Science and Technology for Developing Countries (Geneva, 1963), marking the first Development Decade. The number of delegates and documents presented was impressive. Forestry and resources conservation were discussed in two special commissions.
The second event was the Unesco Conference on Man and the Biosphere, the purpose of which was to turn the International Biology Programme into an intergovernmental programme under the aegis of Unesco and other international organizations. FAO took an active part in the organization and the secretariat of the conference as well as in discussions during the meetings. This conference helped Unesco to develop a programme on Man and the Biosphere (MAB), whose activities within FAO will be discussed later.
Nevertheless, what in my opinion really characterized this period was the development of field activities, the need for which had been strongly felt at the end of the previous period. The development of these activities, financed by ETAP and UNDP, but for which FAO was the executing agency, was such as to justify a reorganization of the responsible services at the end of the decade. Special services were set up in each Division to manage the projects, while branches merely retained the technical supervision of the projects and related experts. These field activities, the merits of which are unquestionable, as much for the countries assisted as for the Division itself, toward which information and ideas flowed, greatly influenced the traditional activities and the public service tasks of the organization.
Field activities during the decade from 1960 to 1969 were characterized by a gradual shift away from one-way advisory assignments to operational (or small group) and project activities. Interrelationships were established with ETAP, which was gradually phased out, and with other development programmes: UNDP, created in 1959; bilateral aid agencies and trust fund programmes; the FAO/IBRD (precursor of the World Bank) cooperative programme (1964); the FAO industry cooperative programme (1965); the Freedom from Hunger Campaign (since 1960); and the UN FAO World Food Programme (since 1963). In the forestry domain, this period saw the formulation and implementation of important projects creating or expanding educational and training facilities at all levels, including schools, faculties, and training and demonstration centres. Other important features of this expansionary period were the creation of administrative structures, including parks and wildlife management, and the
development of forest resources and industries (including pulp and paper); resources surveys; national forest inventories and utilization and marketing studies; and pre-investment surveys.
There is a group of projects relating to Mediterranean development that deserves to be mentioned and whose history would like to recount very briefly. In 1954, the Economic Commission for Europe drew public attention to the danger of an excessive gap in levels of income and living standards between southern Europe and the rest of the continent. Later, the sub-commission on Mediterranean forestry, meeting in Nice in 1956, adopted a resolution inviting the Director-General of FAO and the executive secretary of the EEC to organize "a background study for the definition of a stronger and more coherent forestry policy, as the most important factor in the economic and social development of the Mediterranean basin". A definitive study was published by FAO in 1959. The report, after analysing the physical, economic and social situation of the region, placed particular emphasis on how to hasten growth, alter certain institutions to give greater flexibility to the economic and social
system, utilize external financial support, and target international technical assistance.
The creation of the United Nations Special Fund just before the publication of the report permitted the planning and execution, during the 1960s, of many integrated rural development projects in Algeria, Greece, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia and Turkey. In areas large enough to be representative of the country and to have an impact on its development, yet small enough for investments to be compatible with the country's means, these projects involved a series of actions well balanced in both temporal and spatial terms. Other priorities, and perhaps changes in personnel, did not allow for a timely and comprehensive assessment of the projects. This is indeed regrettable, for the large quantity of information and the number of experts involved would be difficult to reassemble today.
The period 1970 to 1985. The third period extends from the creation of the Forestry Department (together with the Fisheries Department) to the holding of the Ninth World Forestry Congress, in Mexico. I have already attempted to define its general characteristics. It must be stressed that at the beginning of the decade, the specialized committees of FAO's Conference were discontinued and committees meeting outside the Conference and reporting directly to the Council were set up. The Committee on Forestry, which had met every two years in Rome since 1972, thus became the body within which the programme and budget of the Department for each biennium were discussed.
This period was marked by many events and conferences that took place outside FAO, in 1972, a UN conference was held in Stockholm on Man and the Environment, at which the Forestry Department played a key role by presenting two documents, one on forests and the environment and the other on wildlife and national parks. These were prepared in cooperation with the agencies concerned. After the conference, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), with which the Forestry Department would later cooperate on many projects, was founded. In 1973-74, an exceptional drought generated a food crisis in the African Sahel, and an FAO mission headed by a forester was sent to the region at the end of 1974. An inter-state committee with headquarters in Ouagadougou was set up and forestry activities were developed. In 1978, the Eighth World Forestry Congress, held in Jakarta, prepared the Jakarta Declaration. This was discussed and adopted in 1979 by the FAO Conference, which considered
it a turning-point in the history of forestry and in the evolution of the role of forestry, in economic and social development in general and the welfare of rural populations in particular.
In 1979, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) was held in Rome. Forestry problems were emphasized, and a declaration of principles and a plan of action were approved. The result was a much stronger emphasis within the Forestry Department upon the social role of forestry and the central role that forestry can play in the process of development.
The Forestry Department continued its international civil service activities and field operations. These activities are very accurately described in the Committee on Forestry (COFO) reports of this period. Before describing in detail some of the major activities, however, I would like to draw attention to certain decisions made by COFO itself. First, during its fifth session (Rome, 1980), the Committee underlined the need for a forest strategy for development that would integrate the protective, productive and social functions of forests according to countries' specific conditions, in order to meet their present and future needs. Then, at its latest session (May 1984), the Committee discussed forestry problems beyond the year 2000 in temperate regions, the humid tropics, and arid and Mediterranean areas, as well as at the global level.
At its third session, in 1976, COFO, on the basis of proposals made by the secretariat, identified six areas on which attention should be concentrated: forest