<title>Unasylva - No. 150 - Forestry and the crisis in Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Forestry and the crisis in Africa
Forestry and the crisis in Africa
This issue of Unasylva focuses on Africa. A large part of the continent has been overrun by drought in successive years, and millions of people are exposed to hunger and malnutrition. In many African countries, cultivation is because of hunger - rapidly expanding into forest land and areas of low rainfall. This process, coupled with necessarily unmanaged exploitation for fuelwood, fodder and other basic goods and services that forests and trees provide, has led to a progressively increasing rate of deforestation. That has brought about general environmental degradation and instability and, in their wake, depletion of the resource base and even desertification over vast areas of land.
Against this background, five thematic articles in this issue have been devoted to explaining the place of forestry, forests and trees in development, especially in the light of their contribution to environmental conservation and food security. They show that there is growing awareness of the fundamental role of forestry in providing humankind with some of the essentials for survival - fuel for cooking, building materials for shelter, fodder for livestock and protection for crops. The contribution of forestry to development can be fully realized, however, only if forests are effectively managed for development and the rural poor share fully in the benefits that can flow from forestry's potential.
One of FAO's main thrusts in assisting its member countries to alleviate and prevent such crises is action at the national level. Hence this issue of Unasylva features a review of the first 40 years of FAO's forestry field operations. This review illustrates the considerable increase in FAO's forestry field programme in recent years, its role in development, and its evolving philosophy. It shows that the programme has responded effectively to the diverse needs of the member countries.
This responsiveness has been demonstrated in the evolution of the content and modus operandi of the forestry field programme, with its new emphasis on the promotion of rural development and environmental management, and the changeover from the concept of technical assistance to one of technical cooperation. The forestry field projects in Africa in their diversity and impact stand as an example for the entire programme. However, as this issue of Unasylva also shows, there is need and scope for more to be done.
<section>2</section>
Desertification in the Sahelian and Sudanian zones of West Africa
Jean Gorse
Jean Gorse is head of a World Bank working group on desertification in West Africa. This article includes contributions by Yvon Dommergues, Robert Fishwick, Willem Floor, David Steeds and James Thomson.
Interactions between droughts and human abuse of the environment are the primary cause of the current crisis in the Sahel, Jean Gorse argues. Based on an extensive new study undertaken by the World Bank, the article offers a series of very specific prescriptions - many of them controversial - for alleviating the Sahelian crisis. Unasylva is devoting an unusual amount of space to this article because of the urgent need for action in the Sahel - a need underscored by FAO's own emergency programme for Africa; because forestry clearly has an important role to play; and because the recommendations contained here are likely to stimulate productive debate and discussion about the problem.
· The Sahel is often viewed as an area isolated from the surrounding region, and with its own special problems. But on ecological grounds, as well as for historical and contemporary political and economic reasons, the Sahel should instead be seen as the northern part of a larger regional whole which includes the more humid Sudanian zone. The focus of this article is, therefore, on the West African Sahelian and Sudanian zones (SSZ).
Within the SSZ, this article concentrates on seven countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal. These countries are grouped around the fourteenth parallel; all are members of the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS). While the northern areas of Benin, Ghana, the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, the Republic of Cameroon and Togo lie within the SSZ, they are not treated explicitly here for reasons of comparability of statistics. Cape Verde, the eighth member of CILSS, has been excluded from this analysis because its island situation gives it a quite different environmental character.
Physical features
The seven continental CILSS states cover 5.3 million km², of which two-thirds are north of the northern limit of rain-fed cultivation. Throughout the remaining area, too, evapo-transpiration exceeds rainfall during most months of the year. Only one rain-fed crop per year is possible without irrigation. The climate is harsh indeed: a short rainy season characterized by often violent and unpredictable showers, followed by a long dry season. The dry season is hot, but the first few months following the rains are perceptibly cooler. This "cool dry season" creates problems for irrigated crops: rice must be planted so that germination occurs before the temperature drops, but the season is not usually cool enough to guarantee a wheat crop.
Of the 530 million ha under discussion, soils are suitable for cultivation on only about 60 million ha, of which about 20 percent were being farmed in the 1970s. About 150 million ha are classified as range land.
Most SSZ soils are of low fertility, particularly poor in phosphates and nitrogen, and structurally fragile with low humus content and reduced water-retention capacity. Hydromorphy, hard clay pans, laterization, and wind and water erosion are all common problems. Research and experience over the past 20 years in SSZ agriculture and forestry tend to confirm that the low fertility and vulnerability to erosion of SSZ soils are as important a constraint on plant productivity as drought (Breman and de Wit, 1983).
Water for perennial or seasonal irrigation is available in abundance from major streams and rivers (the Senegal, the Niger and the Chari-Logone). Uncontrolled irrigation and flood recession cropping are widely practiced, but the area equipped for partially or fully controlled irrigation is still scarcely 100 000 ha. Bottomlands, small streams, lakes and shallow groundwater tables provide locally important sources for dry-season cropping. The shallow aquifers, which are also the principal source of village water supply, depend for recharge on both rainfall and sound resource management, particularly of the natural vegetative cover, in order to reduce surface water run-off and promote infiltration. No systematic work is known to have been conducted on the effects of the current dry period on groundwater reserves, but all recent indications, however sketchy, show that shallow aquifer levels are falling perceptibly.
West Africa - Climatic zones
The natural vegetative cover - forests, woodlands, tree/shrub/grass savannahs and steppes - is relatively drought-resistant and well adapted to the ecological conditions of the SSZ. In the context of traditional production systems, people have selected and developed multipurpose plant and tree species, and productive, anti-erosive vegetative associations such as bush fallows, forest parks and live fences. Much of the tree and shrub cover is composed of slow-growing species. These are often difficult to regenerate where mature stands now exist, because local conditions have deteriorated. Prolonged dry periods, combined with increasing human and livestock population pressure, further retard already slow natural regeneration and thus trigger new phases of the desertification process. The natural forest cover still provides the overwhelming source - 85 percent (CILSS, 1983c) - of domestic energy, in addition to building-poles, timber, and secondary forest products and foods, but
access to these products is fast becoming more difficult.
The anti-desertification effort should focus on the most threatened area, the narrow Sahelo-Sudanian heartland, and not, as sometimes suggested, on the desert fringe.
SSZ pasturelands are estimated at 150 million ha. Patchy, uncertain rainfall makes it difficult to predict locations of good pasture in a given year, although overall carrying capacity can be roughly estimated. In most of the rangeland in the Sahelian and Saharo-Sahelian zones, annual grasses now predominate, having replaced the more valuable but less resistant perennials. Annuals may not appear for years in an area for lack of adequate moisture, and then produce a flush of good forage when the rains strike again. Perennial grasses mixed with shrubs and trees, particularly in the better-watered bottomlands, are still to be found in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone in relative abundance. Overall, however, the situation of the pasturelands is one of deteriorating quality, quite apart from localized problems of acute overgrazing.
Drought, desertification and population
Drought will be defined here as a markedly below average amount of rainfall during a year or series of years. Precision in this regard - how much less rain - is difficult to provide for two reasons. First, averages are deceiving, particularly in the northern arid areas, where precipitation totals vary markedly from one year to the next. A few years of abundant precipitation often skew statistical averages well above realistic expectations of rainfall in a given place in, for instance, seven out of ten years. Second, gross amounts of rainfall only partly determine vegetative productivity. In addition to soil fertility and structure, the timing and distribution of precipitation play a crucial role. "Below average" rainfall, if well distributed temporally and spatially, will produce quite adequate crop yields.
Drought is a constant menace, a fact of life with which rural people must cope if they are to survive in the region. But drought alone does not, in the short run, produce resource degradation of the sort now found in the SSZ. Other factors are at work, including population growth, the spread of extensive agriculture and thus deforestation, and rapid urbanization (which concentrates demand for fuelwood). In addition, changes in national and local political, economic and social institutions have on balance reduced local autonomy and capacity to organize joint undertakings. Together, these factors are making it increasingly difficult to manage the natural resource base upon which the economy of the region rests.
Desertification can be defined as follows: "the continuous and sustained decline in the amount and quality of the biological productivity of arid and semi-arid land. Such stresses, if continued or unchecked over the long term, lead to ecological degradation and ultimately desert-like conditions. Biological productivity refers to the naturally occurring plant and animal life as well as to the agricultural productivity of a given area" (adapted from, Sabadell, 1982). Common indicators of desertification include a reduction in the amount and diversity of plant and animal species, loss of water-retention capacity, lessened soil fertility and increasing wind and water erosion. Eventually, plant and animal communities become so radically simplified that species formerly common in an area can no longer survive under the drastically altered circumstances, even if they are deliberately reintroduced.
Desertification takes two distinct forms: desert spread, and induced desertification in more humid areas. Saharan encroachment into Sahelian lands may occur gradually through growing aridity and resource abuse. Of more immediate concern here is human-induced, accelerated degradation of areas well south of the Saharan fringe. Deteriorated patches occur now with alarming regularity around centres of human activity, even well south into the Sudanian zone. In their struggle to survive, populations further overexploit resources in these focal points of desertification and gradually encourage their spread. The challenge is not "stopping the desert's advance from the north", but effectively managing renewable resources south of the desert.
SAND-DUNE FIXATION IN SENEGAL attempting to halt desertification
Is desertification caused by drought or by resource abuse? The answer to this fundamental question depends upon perceptions of drought and the destruction of resources with which it is often associated. Three general explanations are advanced:
· First position. Drought in the SSZ is an overwhelming, long-term phenomenon in which people play no part. Increasing aridity will inexorably destroy vegetative cover. Desertified areas will spread to engulf and obliterate what are already marginal environments of limited productivity. Resistance to desertification is futile.
· Second position. Drought in the SSZ is a short-term, recurrent phenomenon, again independent of human influence. Resources suffer in the short run, but when a drought of five years' duration or less ends, local production systems sooner or later recover. In any case, droughts of this sort can be endured, especially if food reserves exist in amounts adequate to tide people over periods of low output. Emergency food aid is a further recourse.
· Third position. Desertification is a complex process caused apparently by interactions between drought and human abuse of the environment. Better natural-resource management could mitigate the impact of even serious droughts, although decades-long droughts like the current one could alter the natural resource base profoundly.
This article takes the third position, for two reasons. First, while the available evidence indicates that drought has long played a role in SSZ ecology (National Academy Press, 1983a), past periods of short- to medium-term aridity have had little permanent effect. On the other hand, severe drying trends lasting a century or more unquestionably did modify the natural vegetative cover. During the modern era, however, when droughts of two decades or less have been the rule, much resource destruction has occurred at the hands of human users, whose numbers have increased far more rapidly than before.
Second, whereas climate is a given, human behaviour can be modified in response to changes in the environment. The desertification process is slow and insidious, and governments and rural communities have consequently been slow to react, despite the rapid growth in population. So long as there are unexploited techniques and more appropriate organizational arrangements and policies for encouraging better management of the environment, it would be shortsighted to ignore them by assuming, on uncertain evidence, that the principal cause of desertification is climate. The problem of desertification is nonetheless severe, since it is an example of conflict between public long-term resource use and private short-term resource abuse. If there is no effective reconciliation between these two interests, the process of desertification will continue; while the process can be arrested, the end-result is irreversible. Drought, if not prolonged, does not, by itself, pose an enormous threat
to the long-term viability of rural production systems in the SSZ. But it accelerates the negative consequences of resource abuse. Overuse of one renewable resource, in turn, often reduces the viability of others, and this negative dynamic intensifies when drought periodically strikes an area. This point can be easily illustrated. The spread of rain-fed, extensive agriculture into forest, bush and pasture areas reduces the total forage available to transhumant (seasonally grazed) livestock, particularly when, as now, farmers and breeders increasingly collect and stock crop residues to carry their own animals through the dry season. When drought strikes, transhumant pastoralists do what they can to save herds. Lacking alternative forms of forage, they try to increase their animals' intake of browse. They vigorously lop trees already weakened by lack of soil moisture. Many trees die as a result of this abuse. Pressure then intensifies on the remaining wood stock during the
next drought. Clearing fields for animal traction or machine cultivation may disrupt existing soil fertilization cycles based on nutrients that in-field trees return to the soil surface in the form of humus. If these organic nutrients are not replaced by organic or chemical fertilizers, crop yields decline. Stripping trees from fields also reduces the wind-break effect that even an open canopy can provide, and increases wind erosion. When fields are fallowed, in those systems where people/land ratios still permit it, natural regeneration occurs much more slowly. In the meantime, soils may suffer both wind and water erosion.
Whereas climate is a given, human behaviour can be modified in response to changes in the environment.
Population. Total population in the SSZ countries was estimated at 31 million in 1980. Overall densities remain low: 6 persons/km² for the entire area and roughly 15 persons/km² if the Saharan and Sahelo-Saharan zones are excluded. Densities can, however, reach 100 persons/km² in some areas, visibly overtaxing their carrying capacity. The average density in Senegal is now 20 persons/km² The lowest national density is found in Mauritania, with 1.5 persons/km² and the highest in the Gambia, with 60 persons/km² Population growth rates between 1980 and 2000 are expected to be about 3 percent annually. On this basis, the area will have 75 percent more people by the year 2000, or 54 million inhabitants. In 1961, by contrast, the population was 19 million.
It is clear, however, that people are increasingly moving away from the most densely populated areas to more promising areas in the Sudano-Guinean zone.
According to the ecological classification established by M. Keita, the SSZ population in 1980 was remarkably unevenly distributed (FAO, 1982). While 80 percent of the people lived in 25 percent of the total area south of the Sahelian zone, fully 40 percent lived in only 6 percent of the total area. Furthermore, in the subzone comprising the Senegalese groundnut basin, the Gambia and Burkina Faso's Mossi plateau, fully 24 percent of the total population lived in only 2 percent of the total area; population density there was 60 persons/km², with the rural population at 45 persons/km². Such concentrations of demand for arable land and fuelwood lie at the root of resource abuse. It is in these areas that patches of desertification are most clearly visible; they will spread rapidly if resource management measures are not implemented.
Urban population growth rates reveal an even more volatile situation. Urban populations averaged 22 percent of national populations in 1981 (lowest: Burkina Faso, 11 percent; highest: Senegal, 34 percent), but urban populations now grow at an average rate of 5 percent annually. Mauritania - arguably the country that has suffered most from the impact of drought over the past two decades - has experienced an 8.6 percent urban population growth rate in recent years. Senegal, with one-third of its population already urbanized, has the lowest urban growth rate at 3.3 percent. Migration within rural areas is also a growing phenomenon, although figures are scarce. It is clear, however, that people are increasingly moving away from the most densely populated areas, notably the Mossi plateau and the Senegalese groundnut basin, to more promising areas in the Sudano-Guinean zone.
Two important observations emerge from these figures. First, when population grows at 3 percent annually, total population doubles every 25 years. The ballooning demand for resources that this growth represents almost inevitably generates extensive resource abuse in the short run. Adjustments are not made quickly enough to these changing conditions: consumption accelerates, but at the cost of overexploitation or "mining" of the resource base rather than investment in its improvement or even sustenance. The desertification process takes hold. Second, the destruction of the rural environment will almost certainly result in further uncontrolled urbanization, compounding the problems of already strained municipal administrations.
Traditional production systems
Traditional production systems have been tailored very precisely over time to contend with particular circumstances. The following three basic systems, which can even coexist in the same area, illustrate the range of approaches rather than the richness of any one system. Traditional production systems merit attention because they permit fairly large populations to exploit marginal regions in a sustainable manner.
Agrosilvicultural. Variations on this system are practiced by the Hausa of Nigeria and the Mossi of Burkina Faso, among others. Production is based on rain-fed agriculture in association with trees and shrubs. The system involves the cultivation of several main plant species (such as millet and sorghum) as food crops, and cotton for cloth. Secondary products are obtained from the systematic exploitation of natural vegetation (trees for fruits and leaves as well as firewood and building-poles, bark for cord and medicine, thorn branches for fencing, grasses for thatching, fodder, green manure, etc.). Small ruminants, particularly goats, often play a major role. Production in the agrosilvicultural system is concentrated during the two- to four-month rainy season, individuals, particularly adult men, often travel during the long dry season in search of temporary work.
Traditional production systems were not just technical systems; perhaps more important, they were managed by local authorities.
Trees in this system meet not only consumption demands but also, in bush fallow and open field sites, other needs. If grown in sufficient numbers on fields, they protect exposed soils against wind and water erosion and also regenerate soil fertility by recycling subsoil nutrients as green manure in the form of leaves. Micro-organisms associated with root systems, such as nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and mycorrhizae which improve plant feeding, can also increase the growth of certain species.
CATTLE IN THE SAHEL overgrazing speeds destruction
Agrosilvipastoral. Variations include those practiced by the Senegalese Serer, the Nigerian Bugage and the Malian Soninke societies. This system relies on the sort of field crop/tree/shrub associations characteristic of the agrosilvicultural system but integrates livestock production to reinforce soil fertility, as well as for market sale. This system puts a premium on trees that produce browse or seed pods suitable for fodder. Trees may also be exploited commercially, for gum arabic (Acacia senegal), shea-butter (Butyrospermum paradoxum) and other marketable food products, as well as for firewood and building materials.
Livestock in such systems must be accommodated during the wet and dry seasons by carefully defined access to fields, as well as to surrounding bush and pasture areas. When people are cultivating field crops during the rainy season, animals must be stabled or herded elsewhere. During the dry season, after the harvest has been stored, herded or free-ranging animals can roam fields to forage on crop residues. In those systems based on systematic manuring, stock owners tether their animals (or the herder stables them) in fields at night: the concentration of droppings increases soil fertility. In the past,.however, these systems rarely undertook systematic composting of manure mixed with straw or stalks.
A DESPERATE NEED FOR TREES using every bit of an Acacia albida
Silvipastoral. SSZ silvipastoralists - the Fulani, Tuareg, Mauri and Teda peoples - keep cattle, camels, sheep and goats. Ethnic groups and individuals within them tend herds of different species, sex and age composition. The majority specialize to some extent in one species or another and occupy environmental niches that meet the needs of their particular herd. Most within this group are transhumant pastoralists. Herders operating under normal conditions move within clearly defined ranges; usually, a group has both wet- and dry-season "home" pastures.
The driving force behind these annual displacements is the need to find forage for the herd in all sea sons. Most forage - pasture grasses, shrub and tree browse, and crop residues - appears irregularly in time and space. Herders typically congregate during the wet season in the Sahelian and Saharo-Sahelian zones, when rains usually produce grasses and accumulations of surface water on the desert edge. The abundance of food and easily available water lasts only a few months, typically from July through September/October. Thereafter, until the next rains eight or nine months later, pastoralists depend on well-water for themselves and their stock. Some seasonal watercourses and a few perennial rivers provide water for longer periods for some groups.
In the silvipastoral system, trees are a critically important fodder source during the dry season. When the rains cease, grasses dry out and lose most of their nutrients. They still provide the bulk needed for ruminant diets, but vitamins, digestible proteins and minerals must come from other sources (National Academy Press, 1983b). Traditionally, tree and shrub browse has provided these elements.
Common features. In most traditional production systems, deliberate tree-planting never became a significant activity, since most areas enjoyed a surplus of natural forest cover. Selective cutting and management of the regeneration of natural forest cover, however, often produced stands of preferred tree/shrub species in the fields. Certain trees and shrubs were also preserved in bush stands and served as the basis for restoring soil fertility on fallow lands. Under these systems, humans protected trees, shrubs and bushes useful for many purposes, and not just for browse, building materials, fuelwood and nutrient recycling. The fruits, gum, honey and medicines they provided all justified the protection of certain woody species. This deliberate plant selection has resulted in a large number of specific and valuable associations throughout the SSZ. Farming under a selected forest park canopy is perhaps the most visible example of this sort of activity.
These were not just technical systems; perhaps more important, they were managed by local authorities. In this sense, they were participatory, although not necessarily democratic; at least there were no top-down prescriptions emanating from a distant agro-bureaucracy.
Carrying capacities. The carrying capacity of a natural system can be expressed as the amount of biological matter the system can yield (for consumption by animals, humans, etc.) over a given period of time without impairing its ability to continue producing, or the number of organisms it can support without being degraded (Webb and Jacobsen, 1982). Since carrying capacity will vary as a function of technology, the level of technology has to be specified.
The rural population of the SSZ that can be sustained by traditional agricultural and livestock systems is 36 million, or considerably more than the 1980 rural population of 27 million. By contrast, the total population sustainable on the basis of fuelwood from the natural forest cover is only 21 million, whereas the 1980 total population was 31 million. For all the imperfections in the data, these two broad findings are defensible. The orders of magnitude of sustainable and actual population densities are given in Table 1.
However imperfect the data base and the presentation by zones, which necessarily conceals differences within zones, three general observations are suggested by these figures:
· In all zones, the carrying capacity of the natural forest cover is lower than that of crops and livestock with traditional production techniques. The natural forest cover is therefore the most vulnerable part of the ecosystem; indeed, in five of the six zones, the actual population already exceeds the sustainable population. The natural forest cover is not just vulnerable; it is already being severely overexploited.
· The actual density greatly exceeds sustainable density in three cases: fuelwood, and crops and livestock in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone, and fuelwood in the Sahelian zone. These are clearly the zones most vulnerable to the desertification process.
· · The anti-desertification effort should focus on the most threatened area, the narrow Sahelo-Sudanian heartland, and not, as sometimes suggested, on the desert fringe. But in the heartland, the scope for intensive production is much more limited than in the southern Sudano-Guinean zone. The anti-desertification effort should therefore be twofold: first, in the heartland itself, specific anti-desertification measures as well as any intensive production techniques that may be profitable should be undertaken; and second, in the Sudano-Guinean zone, existing, spontaneous settlement by people from the heartland should be further encouraged despite difficulties encountered.
Table 1. Sustainable and actual population densities (People per km²)
Zone
Sustainable population:
Actual rural population
Sustainable population fuelwood
Actual total population
Crops
Live-stock
Sum
Saharan
Sahelo-Saharan
Sahelian
Sahelo-Sudanian
Sudanian
Sudano-Guinean
Note: Bold type indicates arena where actual population already greatly exceeds sustainable population.
Past development activities
Although development efforts have been organized along sectoral lines - agriculture, livestock or forestry - they nonetheless share certain weaknesses. In particular, planners have often misunderstood the logic of traditional production systems, and they have thereby overestimated the ease with which improvements could be introduced and underestimated the negative consequences of intended improvements. Planners seem to have neglected the fundamental significance of rainfall variability and risk-avoidance in all SSZ production systems.
One of the reasons for the failure to understand traditional production systems was that the practitioners of such systems were seldom consulted in a participatory fashion. Indeed, lack of participation on the part of the ostensible beneficiaries has been another common weakness of development activities. Supposed beneficiaries usually have little input in to the planning process, and project design suffers in consequence; nor are their views regularly solicited, and acted upon, during implementation. The old political adage that "those who can't say no, have no say" applies.
A third common weakness has been the underestimation of (a) the managerial weaknesses of existing institutions and the difficulty of setting up new institutions, and (b) the remaining strengths of local institutions. In fact, few attempts were made to investigate the organizational bases, capabilities and limits of local institutions, particularly where cooperatives existed, since they were often assumed to be synonymous. More recently, however, dissatisfaction with the agro-bureaucracies has spurred interest in local groups as retailers of inputs, managers of credit, and organizers of primary marketing. Supported by adult literacy campaigns, many promising initiatives are now under way.
Table 2. Relation between actual rural population (RP) and carrying capacity (CC), by zone
Relation
Zones
RP < CC
Sudano-Guinean, Sudanian, Saharan. And parts of Sahelo- Saharan and Sahelian
RP slightly > CC
Sahelian, Sahelo-Saharan, and parts of Sudanian
RP greatly > CC
Sahelo-Sudanian, and parts of Sudanian and Sahelian
Forestry. Forestry departments were first set up in the 1930s and, until recently, their main activity was the demarcation and policing of forest and fauna reserves. These reserves were set up primarily in the Sudano-Guinean zone, where land was relatively abundant, and particularly where diseases such as river blindness and sleeping sickness hampered settlement.
In the last decade, several pilot reforestation plantations have been initiated, mainly in the Sahelo-Sudanian zone, where the natural forest cover is being most rapidly depleted. Although no inventory has yet been made, it is already clear that the results are disappointing, not least because these operations were based on production techniques developed in the Sudano-Guinean zone. In fact, very little research has been done in the drier areas, and there are today no technical packages really adapted to