<title>Irrigation Water Management: Irrigation Water Needs</title>
<section>1</section>
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
All field crops need soil, water, air and light (sunshine) to grow. The soil gives stability to the plants; it also stores the water and nutrients which the plants can take up through their roots. The sunlight provides the energy which is necessary for plant growth (Fig. 1). The air allows the plants to "breath".
Fig. 1 Plants need soil, water, air and sunlight ......
Without water crops cannot grow. Too much water is not good for many crops either. Apart from paddy rice, there are only very few crops which like to grow "with their feet in the water". The most well-known source of water for plant growth is rain water. There are two important questions which come to mind: What to do if there is too much rain water? What to do if there is too little rain water?
If there is too much rain, the soil will be full of water and there will not be enough air. Excess water must be removed. The removal of excess water - either from the ground surface or from the root zone - is called drainage (see Volume 1, Chapter 6).
If there is too little rain, water must be supplied from other sources; irrigation is needed (Fig. 2). The amount of irrigation water which is needed depends not only on the amount of water already available from rainfall, but also on the total amount of water needed by the various crops.
Fig. 2 If there is only a little rain water, irrigation is needed .....
With respect to the need for irrigation water, a distinction can be made among three climatic situations:
1. Humid climates: more than 1200 mm of rain per year. The amount of rainfall is sufficient to cover the water needs of the various crops. Excess water may cause problems for plant growth and thus drainage is required.
2. Sub-humid and semi-arid climates: between 400 and 1200 mm of rain per year. The amount of rainfall is important but often not sufficient to cover the water needs of the crops. Crop production in the dry season is only possible with irrigation, while crop production in the rainy season may be possible but unreliable: yields will be less than optimal.
3. Semi-arid, arid and desert climates: less than 400 mm of rain per year. Reliable crop production based on rainfall is not possible; irrigation is thus essential.
The two major factors which determine the amount of irrigation water which is needed are:
the total water need of the various crops
the amount of rain water which is available to the crops
In other words: the irrigation water need is the difference between the total water need of the crops and the amount of rainfall which is available to the crops.
In Chapter 2 the crop water needs are discussed; Chapter 3 discusses the contribution from the rainfall while in Chapter 4 the determination of the irrigation water needs is explained (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3 Irrigation water need
In many countries it is already well known what the crop water needs and irrigation water needs are of the most commonly grown crops. Such data can usually be obtained from the Extension Service, the Irrigation Department or Ministry of Agriculture. It is then not necessary to determine the crop and irrigation water need. However, there may be situations where it is not possible to obtain these data and it would thus be necessary to determine them on the spot.
Part I of this manual allows the reader to make a rough estimation of the crop and irrigation water needs - without using any complicated calculations.
Part II of this manual allows the reader actually to calculate - be it in a fairly simple manner - the crop and irrigation water needs. These calculations obviously lead to a greater accuracy, but they also require more time and background knowledge.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 2: CROP WATER NEEDS
2.1 THE INFLUENCE OF THE CLIMATE ON CROP WATER NEEDS
2.2 INFLUENCE OF THE CROP TYPE ON THE CROP WATER NEEDS
2.3 INFLUENCE OF THE GROWTH STAGE OF THE CROP ON CROP WATER NEEDS
2.4 DETERMINATION OF CROP WATER NEEDS
Crops need water for transpiration and evaporation (see Volume 1, Section 4.2).
The plant roots suck or extract water from the soil to live and grow. The main part of this water does not remain in the plant, but escapes to the atmosphere as vapour through the plant's leaves and stem. This process is called transpiration. Transpiration happens mainly during the day time.
Water from an open water surface escapes as vapour to the atmosphere during the day. The same happens to water on the soil surface and to water on the leaves and stem of a plant. This process is called evaporation (Fig. 4).
The water need of a crop thus consists of transpiration plus evaporation. Therefore, the crop water need is also called "evapotranspiration".
The water need of a crop is usually expressed in mm/day, mm/month or mm/season.
Suppose the water need of a certain crop in a very hot, dry climate is 10 mm/day. This means that each day the crop needs a water layer of 10 mm over the whole area on which the crop is grown (Fig. 5). It does not mean that this 10 mm has to indeed be supplied by rain or irrigation every day.
It is, of course, still possible to supply, for example, 50 mm of irrigation water every 5 days. The irrigation water will then be stored in the root zone and gradually be used by the plants: every day 10 mm.
Fig. 4 Evapotranspiration
Fig. 5 A crop water need of 10 mm/day
The crop water need mainly depends on:
· the climate:
for example, in a sunny and hot climate crops need more water per day than in a cloudy and cool climate (see Section 2.1)
· the crop type:
crops like rice or sugarcane need more water than crops like beans and wheat (see Section 2.2)
· the growth stage:
grown crops need more water than crops that have just been planted (see Section 2.3).
2.1 THE INFLUENCE OF THE CLIMATE ON CROP WATER NEEDS
A certain crop grown in a sunny and hot climate needs per day more water than the same crop grown in a cloudy and cooler climate. There are, however - apart from sunshine and temperature - other climatic factors which influence the crop water need. These factors are the humidity and the windspeed (see Fig. 6). When it is dry, the crop water needs are higher than when it is humid. In windy climates the crops will use more water than in calm climates.
Fig. 6 Major climatic factors influencing crop water needs
The effect of these four climatic factors on the water need of the crop is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 EFFECT OF MAJOR CLIMATIC FACTORS ON CROP WATER NEEDS
Climatic Factor
Crop water need
High
Low
Sunshine
sunny (no clouds)
cloudy (no sun)
Temperature
hot
cool
Humidity
low (dry)
high (humid)
Windspeed
windy
little wind
The highest crop water needs are thus found in areas which are hot, dry, windy and sunny. The lowest values are found when it is cool, humid and cloudy with little or no wind.
From the above it is clear that one crop grown in different climatic zones will have different water needs. For example, a certain maize variety grown in a cool climate will need less water per day than the same maize variety grown in a hotter climate.
It is therefore useful to take a certain standard crop or reference crop and determine how much water this crop needs per day in the various climatic regions. As a standard crop or reference crop grass has been chosen.
Table 2 indicates the average daily water needs of this reference grass crop. The daily water needs of the grass depend on the climatic zone (rainfall regime) and daily temperatures.
Table 2 AVERAGE DAILY WATER NEED OF STANDARD GRASS DURING IRRIGATION SEASON
Climatic zone
Mean daily temperature
low
medium
high
(less than 15°C)
(15-25°C)
(more than 25°C)
Desert/arid
Semi arid
Sub-humid
Humid
For example, the standard grass crop grown in a semi-arid climate with a mean temperature of 20°C needs approximately 6.5 mm of water per day. The same grass crop grown in a sub-humid climate with a mean temperature of 30°C needs some 7.5 mm of water per day.
This daily water need of the standard grass crop is also called "reference crop evapotranspiration".
What will be discussed in the next section is "how do the water needs of the crops grown on, for an example, an irrigation scheme relate to the water need of the standard grass".
2.2 INFLUENCE OF THE CROP TYPE ON THE CROP WATER NEEDS
2.2.1 Influence of Crop Type on the Daily Crop Water Needs
2.2.2 Influence of Crop Type on the Seasonal Crop Water Needs
The influence of the crop type on the crop water need is important in two ways:
1. The crop type has an influence on the daily water needs of a fully grown crop; i.e. the peak daily water needs: a fully developed maize crop will need more water per day than a fully developed crop of onions.
2. The crop type has an influence on the duration of the total growing season of the crop. There are short duration crops, e.g. peas, with a duration of the total growing season of 90-100 days and longer duration crops, e.g. melons, with a duration of the total growing season of 120-160 days. And then there are, of course, the perennial crops that are in the field for many years, such as fruit trees.
While, for example, the daily water need of melons may be less than the daily water need of peas, the seasonal water need of melons will be higher than that of beans because the duration of the total growing season of melons is much longer.
The influences of the crop type on both the daily and seasonal crop water needs are discussed in the sections below.
2.2.1 Influence of Crop Type on the Daily Crop Water Needs
In the previous section it has been indicated how the daily water need of standard grass can be estimated. In this section it will be explained how the daily water needs of other crops can be estimated using as a basis the daily water need of the standard grass.
It will be easy to understand that a fully grown maize crop - with its large leaf area - will use more water per day than, for example, a fully grown crop of radishes or onions; that is when the two crops are grown in the same area.
When determining the influence of the crop type on the daily crop water needs, reference is always made to a fully grown crop; the plants have reached their maximum height; they optimally cover the ground; they possibly have started flowering or started grain setting. When the crops are fully grown their water need is the highest. It is the so-called "peak period" of their water needs.
For the various field crops it is possible to determine how much water they need compared to the standard grass (Fig. 7). A number of crops need less water than grass, a number of crops need more water than grass and a number of crops need more or less the same amount of water as grass.
Fig. 7 How much water does maize need, compared to the standard grass?
Table 3 indicates five groups of crops. The crops in column 1 need 30 percent less water than grass in their peak period. The crops in column 2 need 10 percent less water than grass. The crops in column 3 need the same amount of water as grass. The crops in columns 4 and 5 need respectively 10 and 20 percent more water than grass in their peak period.
Table 3 CROP WATER NEEDS IN PEAK PERIOD OF VARIOUS FIELD CROPS AS COMPARED TO STANDARD GRASS
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Column 4
Column 5
same as standard grass
citrus
cucumber
carrots
barley
paddy rice
olives
radishes
crucifers (cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, etc.)
beans
sugarcane
grapes
squash
lettuce
maize
banana
melons
flax
nuts & fruit trees with cover crop
onions
small grains
peanuts
cotton
peppers
tomato
spinach
eggplant
tea
lentils
grass
millet
cacao
oats
coffee
peas
clean cultivated nuts & fruit trees e.g. apples
potatoes
safflower
sorghum
soybeans
sugarbeet
sunflower
tobacco
wheat
EXAMPLE
Suppose in a certain area the standard grass crop needs 5.5 mm of water per day.
Then, in that same area, maize will need 10% more water. Ten percent of 5.5 mm = 10/100 × 5.5 = 0.55 mm. Thus maize would need 5.5 + 0.55 = 6.05 or rounded 6.1 mm of water per day.
QUESTION
Estimate the water needs of citrus, bananas, onions, cucumber, clean cultivated apple trees and millet for an area where the water need of standard grass is 6.0 mm/day.
ANSWER
Citrus:
-30% (compared to grass); thus the water need of citrus is 6.0 - 30% = 6.0 -1.8 = 4.2 mm/day
Bananas:
+20%; thus the water need of bananas is 6.0 + 20% = 6.0 + 1.2 = 7.2 mm/day
Onions:
same as grass; thus the water need of onions is 6.0 mm/day
Cucumber:
-10%; thus the water need of onions is 6.0 - 10% =6.0-0.6 =5.4 mm/day
Apples (clean):
same as grass; thus the water need of clean cultivated apples is 6.0 mm/day
If the apples have a cover crop in between the trees, the water need would be 20% higher than grass and thus: 6.0 + 20% = 6.0+1.2 = 7.2 mm/day.
Millet:
+10%; thus the water need of millet is 6.0 + 10% =6.0+0.6 = 6.6 mm/day
2.2.2 Influence of Crop Type on the Seasonal Crop Water Needs
The crop type not only has an influence on the daily water need of a fully grown crop, i.e. the daily peak water need, but the crop type also has an influence on the duration of the total growing season of the crop, and thus on the seasonal water need.
Data on the duration of the total growing season of the various crops grown in an area can best be obtained locally. These data may be obtained from, for example, the seed supplier, the Extension Service, the Irrigation Department or Ministry of Agriculture.
The duration of the total growing season has an enormous influence on the seasonal crop water need. There are, for example, many rice varieties, some with a short growing cycle (e.g. 90 days) and others with a long growing cycle (e.g. 150 days). This has a strong influence on the seasonal rice water needs: a rice crop which is in the field for 150 days will need in total much more water than a rice crop which is only in the field for 90 days. Of course, for the two rice crops the daily peak water need may still be the same, but the 150 day crop will need this daily amount for a longer period. The time of the year during which crops are grown is also very important. A certain crop variety grown during the cooler months will need substantially less water than the same crop variety grown during the hotter months.
Table 4 gives some Indicative values or approximate values for the duration of the total growing season for the various field crops. It should, however, be noted that these values are only rough approximations and it is much better to obtain the values locally.
Table 4 INDICATIVE VALUES OF THE TOTAL GROWING PERIOD
Crop
Total growing period (days)
Crop
Total growing period (days)
Alfalfa
Millet
Banana
Onion green
Barley/Oats/Wheat
Onion dry
Bean green
Peanut/Groundnut
Bean dry
Pea
Cabbage
Pepper
Carrot
Potato
Citrus
Radish
Cotton
Rice
Cucumber
Sorghum
Eggplant
Soybean
Flax
Spinach
Grain/small
Squash
Lentil
Sugarbeet
Lettuce
Sugarcane
Maize sweet
Sunflower
Maize grain
Tobacco
Melon
Tomato
As can be seen from Table 4 there is a large variation of values not only between crops, but also within one crop type. In general it can be assumed that the growing period for a certain crop is longer when the climate is cool and shorter when the climate is warm.
2.3 INFLUENCE OF THE GROWTH STAGE OF THE CROP ON CROP WATER NEEDS
A fully grown maize crop will need more water than a maize crop which has just been planted.
As has been discussed before, the crop water need or crop evapotranspiration consists of transpiration by the plant and evaporation from the soil and plant surface. When the plants are very small the evaporation will be more important than the transpiration. When the plants are fully grown the transpiration is more important than the evaporation.
Figure 8 shows in a schematic way the various development or growth stages of a crop.
Fig. 8 Growth stages of a crop
At planting and during the initial stage, the evaporation is more important than the transpiration and the evapotranspiration or crop water need during the initial stage is estimated at 50 percent of the crop water need during the mid - season stage, when the crop is fully developed.
During the so-called crop development stage the crop water need gradually Increases from 50 percent of the maximum crop water need to the maximum crop water need. The maximum crop water need is reached at the end of the crop development stage which is the beginning of the mid-season stage.
With respect to the late season stage, which is the period during which the crop ripens and is harvested, a distinction can be made between two groups of crops:
Fresh harvested crops: such as lettuce, cabbage, etc. With these crops the crop water need remains the same during the late season stage as it was during the mid-season stage. The crops are harvested fresh and thus need water up to the last moment.
Dry harvested crops: such as cotton, maize (for grain production), sunflower, etc. During the late season stage these crops are allowed to dry out and sometimes even die. Thus their water needs during the late season stage are minimal. If the crop is indeed allowed to die, the water needs are only some 25 percent of the crop water need during the mid-season or peak period. Of course, no irrigation is given to these crops during the late season stage.
2.4 DETERMINATION OF CROP WATER NEEDS
In the previous sections it has been explained on which factors - the climate, the crop type and the growth stage - the crop water need depends.
To calculate the water needs for the various months during which the crop is grown is fairly complicated and explained in Part II of this manual.
As stated before, it is often possible to obtain data on crop water needs locally and it is thus not necessary to calculate them. However, to give the reader some idea on values of seasonal water needs for the most important field crops. Table 5 can be used as a guide.
Table 5 APPROXIMATE VALUES OF SEASONAL CROP WATER NEEDS
Crop
Crop water need
(mm/total growing period)
Alfalfa
Banana
Barley/Oats/Wheat
Bean
Cabbage
Citrus
Cotton
Maize
Melon
Onion
Peanut
Pea
Pepper
Potato
Rice (paddy)
Sorghum/Millet
Soybean
Sugarbeet
Sugarcane
Sunflower
Tomato
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 3: EFFECTIVE RAINFALL
Apart from soil, air and sunlight, crops need water to grow. How much water the various crops need has been explained in Chapter 2.
This water can be supplied to the crops by rainfall (also called precipitation), by irrigation or by a combination of rainfall and irrigation.
If the rainfall is sufficient to cover the water needs of the crops, irrigation is not required.
If there is no rainfall, all the water that the crops need has to be supplied by irrigation.
If there is some rainfall, but not enough to cover the water needs of the crops, irrigation water has to supplement the rain water in such a way that the rain water and the irrigation water together cover the water needs of the crop. This is often called supplemental irrigation: the irrigation water supplements or adds to the rain water.
As has already been explained in Volume 1, section 4.1.4, not all rain water which falls on the soil surface can indeed by used by the plants.
Part of the rain water percolates below the root zone of the plants and part of the rain water flows away over the soil surface as run-off (Fig. 9). This deep percolation water and run-off water cannot be used by the plants. In other words, part of the rainfall is not effective. The remaining part is stored in the root zone and can be used by the plants. This remaining part is the so-called effective rainfall. The factors which influence which part is effective and which part is not effective include the climate, the soil texture, the soil structure and the depth of the root zone. These factors have been discussed in some detail in Volume 1, section 4.1.4.
Fig. 9 Part of the rain water is lost through deep percolation and run-off
If the rainfall is high, a relatively large part of the water is lost through deep percolation and run-off.
Deep percolation: If the soil is still wet when the next rain occurs, the soil will simply not be able to store more water, and the rain water will thus percolate below the root zone and eventually reach the groundwater. Heavy rainfall may cause the groundwater table to rise temporarily.
Run-off: Especially in sloping areas, heavy rainfall will result in a large percentage of the rainwater being lost by surface run-off.
Another factor which needs to be taken into account when estimating the effective rainfall is the variation of the rainfall over the years. Especially in low rainfall climates, the little rain that falls is often unreliable; one year may be relatively dry and another year may be relatively wet.
In many countries, formulae have been developed locally to determine the effective precipitation. Such formulae take into account factors like rainfall reliability, topography, prevailing soil type etc. If such formulae or other local data are available, they should be used.
If such data are not available. Table 6 could be used to obtain a rough estimate of the effective rainfall.
Table 6 RAINFALL OR PRECIPITATION (P) AND EFFECTIVE RAINFALL OR EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION (Pe) in mm/month
P
(mm/month)
Pe
(mm/month)
P
(mm/month)
Pe
(mm/month)
EXAMPLE
Estimate the effective rainfall in mm/month if the rainfall is 60 mm/month. From Table 6 it can be seen that the effective rainfall is 26 mm/month. This means that out of 60 mm/month, some 26 mm can be used by the plants; and it is estimated that the remaining (60 - 26 =) 34 mm is lost through deep percolation and run-off.
QUESTION
Determine the effective rainfall for the following monthly rainfall figures: 65, 210, 175 and 5 mm.
ANSWER (see Table 6)
P (mm/month)
Pe (mm/month)
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 4: IRRIGATION WATER NEEDS
The irrigation water need of a certain crop is the difference between the crop water need and that part of the rainfall which can be used by the crop (the effective rainfall).
For each of the crops grown on an irrigation scheme the crop water need is determined, usually on a monthly basis; the crop water need is expressed in mm water layer per time unit, in this case mm/month.
The effective precipitation is estimated on a monthly basis, using measured rainfall data and Table 6 (or local information, if available).
For all crops and for each month of the growing season, the irrigation water need is calculated by subtracting the effective rainfall from the crop water need.
EXAMPLE
Suppose a tomato crop grown in a certain area has a total growing season of 150 days and the following monthly crop water needs:
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
Total
Crop water need (mm/month)
This means that in February the tomatoes need 69 mm of water, in March 123 mm of water, etc. The water need of tomatoes over the total growing season (February-June: 150 days) is 786 mm.
Suppose the following rainfall data for the area where the tomatoes are grown have been obtained from the Meteorological Service or Ministry of Agriculture.
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
Total
Rainfall: P (mm/month)
This means that the average rainfall for February is 20 mm, for March 38 mm, etc. The rainfall over the total growing season of tomatoes (February-June: 150 days) is 194 mm.
Only part of this rainfall is effective, and the effective rainfall is estimated using Table 6.
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
Total
Rainfall: P (mm/month)
Effective rainfall: Pe (mm/month)
This means that the effective rainfall during February is only 2 mm, during April 13 mm, etc. The effective rainfall during the total growing season of tomatoes (February-June: 150 days) is 68 mm.
Now the Irrigation water need for the tomatoes can be calculated on a monthly basis, as follows:
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
Total
Crop water need (mm/month)
Effective rainfall: Pe (mm/month)
Irrigation water need (mm/month)
Looking at the example for the month March, it can be seen that tomatoes need 123 mm during March. Of this 123 mm, 13 mm is supplied by the rainfall. The remaining (123 -13 =) 110 mm have to be supplied by irrigation. The total water need of tomatoes over the entire growing season is 786 mm of which 68 mm is supplied by rainfall. The remaining quantity (786 - 68 = 718 mm) has to be supplied by irrigation.
When looking at the calculations above, it is obvious that the month May is the month of peak irrigation water need (195 mm Irrigation water in May). If the tomatoes would be the only crop grown on the Irrigation scheme, the canals would have to be designed in such a way that they allow a flow large enough to supply indeed a net water layer of 195 mm to the whole area covered by tomatoes during the month May. In other words, for designing an irrigation scheme, the month of peak water supply is the critical month.
How to go about determining the scheme irrigation water supply and how to divide the irrigation water between the various crops and fields will be dealt with in Volume 4 of the Irrigation Water Management Training Manuals.
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
Part II of this manual describes how the water needs of the various crops, grown on an irrigation scheme, can be calculated.
The crop water need, or in other words the amount of water needed by a certain crop to grow optimally, mainly depends on:
· the climate: in a sunny and hot climate crops need more water per day than in a clouded and cool climate
· the crop type: crops like rice or sugarcane need more water than crops like beans or wheat
· the growth stage of the crop: fully grown crops need more water than crops that have just been planted.
The amount of water needed can be supplied to the crops by rainfall, by irrigation, or by a combination of both. Usually the irrigation water supplements or adds to the rainwater. Only in desert or arid areas - or in the dry season - will all the water needed by the crops have to be supplied by irrigation.
The irrigation water need is the difference between the crop water need and that part of the rainfall which can be used by the plants (effective rainfall). The irrigation water need calculation provides the basis for the determination of the irrigation schedule (usually by agronomists) and the design of the irrigation scheme, e.g. canal dimensions (usually by engineers). An overview of all the subjects that are dealt with in this manual is given.
Fig. 1 Irrigating maize
Overview of the determination of the reference crop evapotranspiration (ETo), the crop water need (ET crop) and the irrigation water need
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 2: CLIMATE AND CROP GROWTH
2.1 MAJOR CLIMATIC ZONES
2.2 MAJOR CROP ZONES
2.1 MAJOR CLIMATIC ZONES
The major climatic factor which influences crop growth is rainfall. In areas with little rainfall the natural vegetation is limited, while in areas with high annual rainfall dense tropical rain forests are found.
Based on the annual rainfall, a distinction can be made between 6 major climatic zones as is shown in Table 1. Figure 2 indicates, as an example, the major climatic zones of Africa.
Table 1 MAJOR CLIMATIC ZONES
Climatic Zone
Annual Rainfall (mm)
Wet period (months)
Vegetation
Desert
less than 100
Little or no vegetation
Arid
Some scrubs, some grassland
Semi-arid
Scrubs & bushes, grassland
Sub - humid
Bushes to woodland, grassland
Moist sub-humid
Forest and woodland
Humid
more than 1500
Tropical rain forest
The wet period (see Table 1) refers to the period during which the rainfall is higher than the evapotranspiration. Evapotranspiration is the sum of the evaporation from the soil surface and the transpiration by the plants (see Volume 1, Chapter 4).
Fig. 2 Major climatic zones of Africa
Desert and arid areas
In desert and arid areas irrigation is absolutely essential for crop growth. In these areas the wet period is maximum 3 months. Even when some water is stored in the root zone during the wet period and used later by the plants, it is still not enough to obtain a good harvest. In addition the rainfall is unreliable in desert and arid regions: one year there is a lot of rainfall, the next year there may be only a little. On top of that, the rainfall usually comes in heavy showers resulting in high water losses due to runoff.
Fig. 3a Rainfall and irrigation in desert and arid areas
Semi arid areas
Even in the semi-arid areas irrigation is indispensable for a reliable and good harvest. Some drought resistant crops such as sorghum and millet may give reasonable yields, but also here is a risk of unreliable rainfall and subsequent crop failure.
Fig. 3b Rainfall and irrigation in semi-arid areas
Sub-humid and moist sub-humid areas
In the sub-humid and moist sub-humid areas, irrigation is required only during the dry season. In principle, on a yearly basis there is a rainfall excess: the yearly rainfall is higher than the yearly evapotranspiration. During the rainy season it may even be too wet for crops like sorghum and millet.
Fig. 3c Rainfall and irrigation in sub-humid and moist sub-humid areas
Humid areas
In the humid areas irrigation is usually not required, except maybe for paddy rice (see section 4.4). During more than 9 months per year there is excess rainfall and even in the remaining drier months the plants may use water which has been stored in the root zone during the rainy season.
Fig. 3d Rainfall In humid areas
2.2 MAJOR CROP ZONES
Crop growth depends not only on rainfall, but also on other climatic factors (most notably sunshine and temperature) and non-climatic factors such as the availability of suitable soils.
During some periods of the year (the cool season) or at high altitudes (i.e. in mountainous areas) crop growth may be prohibited by the low temperature. Other areas may not be suitable for certain crops due to high temperatures.
Table 2 provides, as an example, data on land use, i.e. the most important crops grown in the 6 major climatic zones of Africa.
Table 2 MAJOR CLIMATIC ZONES AND LAND USE IN AFRICA
Climatic Zone
Land Use (Major Crops)
Desert
Hunters and gatherers, nomadic pastoralists, sedentary irrigators around oases, no rainfed agriculture.
Arid
Extensive grazing (nomadic pastoralists), some millet and sorghum under flood irrigation in moist depressions.
Semi-arid
Both nomadic pastoralists and cultivators. Mainly millet and sorghum, also short cycle cowpea, phaseolus beans and groundnuts. No fodder or sown pasture. In cooler parts maize.
Sub-humid
Traditional nomadic pastoralists in dry season and drought years. Crops grown by settlers: millet, sorghum, maize, groundnuts; also cassava, cowpeas, cotton, sweet potatoes, tobacco, rainfed rice, soybean, mango, cashewnuts. Fodder and sown pasture possible.
Moist sub-humid
Transition zone for agriculture: too wet for seasonal crops, too dry for tree crops. Tropics: maize, cassava; also yams, bananas, pineapple, sugarcane and rice. Winter rainfall areas and East African highlands: wheat and barley.
Humid
Tree crops: oilpalm, rubber, cacao; shifting cultivation based on root crops (yams, cassava, etc.). Also some sorghum, maize, banana, sugarcane, rice. Some tropical hard woods.
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 3: CROP WATER NEEDS
3.1 INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE ON CROP WATER NEEDS (ETo)
3.2 INFLUENCE OF CROP TYPE ON CROP WATER NEEDS (Kc)
3.3 CALCULATION OF THE CROP WATER NEED
The crop water need (ET crop) is defined as the depth (or amount) of water needed to meet the water loss through evapotranspiration. In other words, it is the amount of water needed by the various crops to grow optimally.
The crop water need always refers to a crop grown under optimal conditions, i.e. a uniform crop, actively growing, completely shading the ground, free of diseases, and favourable soil conditions (including fertility and water). The crop thus reaches its full production potential under the given environment.
The crop water need mainly depends on:
· the climate: in a sunny and hot climate crops need more water per day than in a cloudy and cool climate
· the crop type: crops like maize or sugarcane need more water than crops like millet or sorghum
· the growth stage of the crop; fully grown crops need more water than crops that have just been planted.
Section 3.1 indicates the influence of the climate on crop water needs: this influence is given by the reference crop evapotranspiration (ETo). Section 3.2 indicates the influence of the crop type and growth stage on crop water needs: the influence of the crop is expressed in the crop factor (Kc).
3.1 INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE ON CROP WATER NEEDS (ETo)
3.1.1 Introduction
3.1.2 Pan Evaporation Method
3.1.3 Blaney-Criddle Method
3.1.4 Calculation Example Blaney-Criddle
3.1.5 Indicative Values of ETo
3.1.1 Introduction
The major climatic factors (see Fig. 4) which influence