<title>ADCP/REP/86/23 - Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 The Purpose of Aquaculture
1.2 The Role of Aquaculture in National Policies
1.3 The Options of Aquaculture and their Constraints
1.1 The Purpose of Aquaculture
The rationale for the culture and management of aquatic animals and plants has remained unchanged for centuries. Fish farming has been a traditional means of producing food intended for immediate consumption at the village level. This requirement for locally-produced animal protein still persists in landlocked countries, or rural areas which do not have ready access to fish supplies, and there is still considerable scope for further development of simple non-industrial fish farming. Several countries (particularly in Africa and Latin America) have policies which give high priority to the promotion of improved food supplies for the poorest segment of the rural population.
The reasons for the recent and rapid development of aquaculture as a modern technology in the last 40 years are numerous. Fish and other aquatic animals remain the cheapest sources of animal protein. They do not necessarily provide the calories of meats but their high protein content and nutritional efficiency make them in popular demand for general health. They are widely recommended for basic nutrition, preventative medicine, and recuperative diets. Fish in particular have the highest feed conversion rates of the animal groups. Weight for weight, fish require fewer units of energy, demand less gross space, and have a higher productivity than all domestic farm animals, including poultry. However, that being said, comparisons of aquaculture with agriculture are not particularly relevant as these ecological, biological and technical efficiencies are not closely related to economic efficiencies or advantages.
Modern aquaculture practices are now more advanced and have been progressively developed to produce cash-crop surpluses for sale in nearby villages or accessible urban areas. Others have been integrated with agricultural activities. In recent years, through the attention of specific biological research and development, some technologically involved operations have been developed in response to the increasing demand for high-value species in both domestic and international markets. Many of these enterprises are highly engineered and sophisticated. Thus, parts of modern aquaculture - like modern terrestrial farming - have become very industrial requiring substantial capital investment and risk management; but other parts remain little evolved from their traditional simple origins.
1.2 The Role of Aquaculture in National Policies
1.2.1 Food security and nutritional improvements
1.2.2 Increase trade and foreign exchange
1.2.3 Increase producers' incomes
1.2.4 Increase employment objectives
The activities of aquaculture production usefully fulfill many governmental development policies (which frequently embrace capture fisheries as well as agriculture). Most policies embody the diverse objectives of securing supplies of fish for domestic consumption; increasing foreign exchange earnings; increase producers' incomes; and providing employment opportunities. These development objectives do not necessarily compete, but the options for different aquaculture systems of production and product are many and the inherent nature of each favours the realization of some objectives more than others.
1.2.1 Food security and nutritional improvements
Most governments give priority to aquaculture for food products for domestic consumption in their development plans for food security and improved nutrition. This is equally important for land-locked countries with little or no access to fish, and countries with productive marine and inland fisheries which are perhaps already exploited at a high level. Countries which may not (or need not) give priority to aquaculture are generally those with natural fish resources which are as yet relatively underexploited.
1.2.2 Increase trade and foreign exchange
Governments of some developing countries do not have nutrition or food security problems, and do not anticipate them arising as populations increase. Many give priority in their policy objectives to the export of cultured fish and fish products for the purpose of earning foreign exchange. Others which do experience animal protein shortages also give priority (albeit at the same level as that given to domestic food supplies) to export earnings. This is not necessarily incongruous motivation as the products of certain aquaculture systems (e.g., intensive shrimp farming) could not, with odd exceptions, provide a solution to domestic food security problems to any extent, and markets are more lucrative abroad.
1.2.3 Increase producers' incomes
Many countries give a measure of priority in their policies to increasing or maximizing fishermen's and fish farmers' incomes. This is an eminently sensible objective because the more profitable a particular aquaculture system is, the more likely it is to develop and establish itself on a sustainable basis. For this reason it is perhaps the most important objective. All worthwhile aquaculture systems are based on practices which are profitable to the producer (i.e., they provide a real rate of return, whether in kind or in cash), and therefore not only provide but hopefully increase incomes.
1.2.4 Increase employment objectives
Many governments make reference in their policy statements to increasing employment opportunities. This is the most difficult goal of aquaculture and cannot be considered a very realizable objective. In general terms, fish farming is not labour-intensive.
In summary, aquaculture does not play an individual or independent role in the achievement of national socio-economic goals but is an important component of broader sectors which do, such as fisheries and agriculture. As a producer of animal protein food and an earner of foreign exchange, its contribution is small in many countries when compared with those from capture fisheries. As it is not labour-intensive it provides few employment opportunities. However, it has the vital attribute of being able to produce fresh animal protein within communities where it is greatly in demand. Furthermore, it must be recognized that aquaculture is a relatively new and growing sector, the importance of which will undoubtedly increase as production from the capture fisheries sector decelerates or declines. Such importance may, indeed, already be apparent in the inland and rural regions of Africa, Latin America and Asia, where perhaps aquaculture represents the only means whereby people may
obtain fish.
1.3 The Options of Aquaculture and their Constraints
Notwithstanding its present relatively minor political role, most governments frequently refer to one or more of these four objectives in their development policies. However, in executing their policies to achieve or give priority to one objective more than another, they do not always focus their institutional development capacity and support services on the most appropriate aquaculture activities which will achieve the desired goals. The range of options for aquaculture development are complex and inter-related, being dependent on the economic and social settings for the systems of production and the biological environments for the species to be produced.
Aquaculture is defined as the husbandry of aquatic animals and plants at numbers which are greater than those found under natural conditions. This distinguishes the practice from capture fishing operations. Whilst the reference to aquatic animals relates almost exclusively to fish (including finfish, molluscs and crustaceans), it includes amphibians (frogs) and reptiles (turtles, alligators and crocodiles) farmed for meat and other animal products, and also includes aquatic plants.
Present-day aquaculture methods can be broadly categorized into three basic systems based on the intensity of production. In accordance with the following interpretations, these are:
- extensive aquaculture, for organisms cultured in low densities, dependent on natural productivity for food but possibly assisted by fertilization of the substrate;
- semi-intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms at higher densities (than would be the case in extensive culture), and dependent on both increased productivity, using fertilizers or other waste resources, and receiving supplementary artificial feed;
- intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms in high densities, and dependent on artificial feed for their nutritional requirements.
The principles of the three basic methods for aquaculture production can be simply defined, but the biological and engineering techniques which can be used to apply them are manifold. Furthermore, the techniques can overlap each other creating a vast matrix of options and alternatives, and all acted out within a three-dimensional medium (water) which can be freshwater, saltwater, or something in between (brackishwater).
One main purpose of aquaculture in the developed world is to make a financial profit by the production of a marketable commodity. The emphasis has therefore been on the technologically-advanced intensive systems, requiring large yields per volume of water in terms of either space or flow, or multi-species production in well-managed natural environments.
Because of the economic advantages of these intensive systems, specifically the large volumes of product from small areas of land, silos, raceways, cages, and net pens are appropriate technology in the developed countries and similar urban areas of Asia, etc. In the densely populated developed countries there is strong competition for land between several industrial sectors, and there is always a shortage of suitable sites for aquaculture, particularly around the coasts. There is also the need to protect the high investment from the many man-made problems in industrial regions, especially water-borne and air-borne pollution. On the other hand, the investment and operational costs are high and so is the risk, and therefore management and operational efficiencies must be constantly monitored. Such farms are ideal for the business acumen of owners/non-operators, and best restricted to the purview of corporations to invest in such large profit/high risk ventures.
The alternative for avoiding some of the high risks and high investments of the intensive system is the semi-intensive system. The evolution into semi-intensive farming has been both by orderly advanced progression based on trial and error, but also by the retreat of intensive operators who have preferred to spread the many risks which still exist. Semi-intensive systems have the advantage in that artificial feed is only a supplement to a diet of natural food organisms encouraged to grow in the systems, and these live foods can supply the stock with missing amino acids, vitamins, and trace elements.
Semi-intensive systems are typically based on the use of large regularly-shaped ponds, or pen structures which enclose a body of water. There are also few restrictions on size.
Many farmers endeavour to increase the yields from these semi-intensive ponds by increasing the natural productivity through the addition of nutrients. These may be in the form of inorganic fertilizers, organic composts, dry and wet human sewage, or the waste products from other animal and poultry production units. Integrated aquaculture/agriculture farming has proved to be advantageous for both the large- and the small-scale investor. Because of the need for close management of highly inter-dependent operations, the fish ponds are usually small, often 0.5 ha or less. The most advanced integrated systems can be found in China and Thailand. Such integrated farms are now in many African counties, including Zambia, Central African Republic, Ivory Coast and Egypt.
A primitive practice of integration is fish with culture of rice. Although this type of farming is very seasonal, it is well suited to the smaller fish species which are prolific breeders. Fish-cum-rice farming, as it is called, remains one of the most useful farming systems for remote rural areas.
The same advantages of enclosures also apply to another semi-intensive production system, namely that of farming fish in permanent or temporary barrages. Use of these barrages for the farming of tilapia is being made in many African countries such as the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, and Cameroon. Not all such barrages are inland, and several coastal barrages have been created as parts of irrigation and water conservation projects, as in India and China (used for carps). Barrages have proved to be useful communal farms requiring minimal attention other than stocking of fingerlings and regulated harvesting.
All semi-intensive systems require varying amounts of investment capital for construction, the annual supply of seed for stocking, and the purchase of quantities of suitable feed to supplement the productivity induced by compounded fertilizers. As many farmers are unable to purchase all or even one of these important inputs, there is still a significant place in aquaculture for the simple extensive system. Simple owner/operator practices, which may be one man with one pond no more than 1 are in size, exist throughout most African countries, Latin America, Central America and the Caribbean. They have changed little through the centuries and are exposed to all the vagaries of floods and drought, or predation and theft. It is fortunate that they are ideally suited to the African tilapia species which require little attention, and survive a wide range of natural conditions and breed prolifically. The continuous demands on these rural fish ponds and the harvesting of undersized
individuals makes typical yields hardly enough for a single-pond owner and his family. Fortunately, the cost is little more than his time to dig the pond and to seed it with some breeding adults. There are, however, good possibilities for moderate improvement, especially with extension assistance, both through composting and similar means of increasing productivity, and by more careful attention to culling and harvesting techniques.
It is evident that there has been a large number of technical and biological options for aquaculture development, each with its constraints. However, the growth of aquaculture has not been dependent on the correct selection of a specific permutation with the least number of constraints but rather on the two main beneficiaries. These are: (a) the consumers of aquatic products, and (b) the individuals who farm. More than anything else, these two groups continue to determine the future of aquaculture in any country, yet their interests and involvement in aquaculture development activities have been widely overlooked.
<section>2</section>
2. THE BENEFICIARIES OF INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE TO AQUACULTURE
2.1 The Consumers as Beneficiaries
2.2 The Producers as Beneficiaries
2.3 The Communities as Beneficiaries
The benefits of international assistance of aquaculture development accrue directly to two prime groups of individuals. These are:
(1) CONSUMERS, who gain directly from the increased availability of (more) aquatic products for food, and to a small extent from increased opportunities for employment;
(2) PRODUCERS or FARMERS, who benefit in terms of increased or maximized incomes, and to a small extent by auto-consumption of products and family employment.
Benefits are also obtained directly and indirectly by:
(3) COMMUNITIES AS A WHOLE, including governments, which fulfill commitments in plans and policies, and institutions which participate to achieve goals and objectives.
For the most part, the prime target groups, the consumers and producers, have not been participants in the planning or the execution of international assistance projects in aquaculture. The success or failure of assistance is influenced more by the strength of the commitments within the sector, and the organization and management abilities of the government and institutions concerned which should provide the links to the producers and consumers.
2.1 The Consumers as Beneficiaries
Intended beneficiaries of international assistance for aquaculture development within the public sector are the consumers, particularly among the rural poor. Fresh aquaculture products, especially the native freshwater and brackishwater fishes, continue to be a prime source of fresh animal protein for this main target group as they are farmed and marketed (sold or bartered) within the village communities. The quantifiable evidence of this traditional market is difficult to confirm, specifically because rural village markets are not organized and structured and no records are maintained of their volumes or values; also because there is considerable barter between farmers as well as auto-consumption and theft. It is difficult to differentiate between farm produced and wild-caught fish. The main evidence of the nutritional benefits of aquaculture in rural areas is that fish farming is widely practised and that there is production. Quantifying the nutritional benefits of
aquaculture production among the rural poor remains a priority for assistance organizations to determine.
So far, true marine farming of high-value fish and crustaceans contributes little or nothing to the nutrition of the rural poor, with the exception of the organized collection and consumption of molluscs from natural stocks.
Larger volumes of animal protein, including fish and shellfish (molluscs), are consumed by the urban poor, but there is no consumer or market distinction between captured or cultured aquatic products. Urban markets are supplied more by products from capture fisheries because of the larger volumes required and the cheap prices demanded by the limited spending power of the people. The products are usually frozen and from marine or imported resources. Markets of the urban poor have limited potential for fresh cultured fish and are poor targets for assistance projects in aquaculture because of their inability to absorb the quantities and regularity of delivered products at prices demanded by production costs. On the other hand, markets of the wealthier urban groups and centres of population have greater ability to absorb and pay for fresh high-value cultured products, including marine fish, crustaceans, and molluscs, in addition to poultry, pigs and vegetables which are often
grown in systems integrated with aquaculture production. The international markets can only accommodate high-value or specialist products, and these are limited in potential because of exporting costs and the demands on quality control and hygiene standards.
The recognition that aquaculture produce, even among the communities of the rural poor, has to be marketed in some way has been largely neglected in UNDP/FAO technical assistance projects to date. This is unfortunate, since the viability and scale of projects and selected systems cannot be realistically assessed unless use is made of information relating to market demand and price limitations. The marketability of certain aquaculture products and consumer resistance are realities of all markets and may constrain the development and growth of the industry. It is therefore in the interest of projects to carry out in-depth marketing investigations at any level, and also to investigate the value of alternate product forms, for example, refining the derivates of seaweed before exporting the raw product. This is an appropriate area for UNDP/FAO technical assistance, preferably during or prior to the implementation of pilot-scale projects, as well as assisting projects with
post-harvest and processing procedures; for example, products which need to be treated if cultured in contaminated or polluted waters, such as the depuration of shellfish or extending the 'shelf life' of certain products to enter more distant markets, both domestic and export.
The public does not derive much benefit from aquaculture as an industry for employment. Extensive farming practices are predominantly owner-operated, usually one man and his immediate family. Furthermore, not every man in a village community has the desire to farm fish in addition to his other agricultural pursuits. Semi-intensive farming systems have potential for employment, but the evidence is that such owner/non-operators prefer to co-opt their immediate family members so that the farms, particularly farms integrated with animal and plant husbandry, receive continuous attention. The intensive farming systems, with the possible exception of individual owner/operators of cages and net pen enclosures, have the greatest potential for employment. However, as intensive farms are profit-oriented, labour costs are kept minimal and many farms prefer again to employ families or to use incentive schemes based on production, or provide alternative compensation such as housing and
food. There is little information on labour utilization by the many aquaculture systems from region to region, and this is a priority for assistance organizations to determine. Similarly, the employment of women in the sector requires identification.
The sub-sector of the aquaculture industry which provides the greatest opportunity for employment is the handling and processing of the products which, as in the capture fisheries industry, can and is using women. For the most part, the opportunities for such labour are with semi-intensive systems producing high-priced or specialist products.
2.2 The Producers as Beneficiaries
The main targets of international assistance in aquaculture continue to be the producers, particularly the existing or potential 'small farmers' in the rural poor areas of the world. The purpose is to increase the incomes (in cash or In kind) of such individuals. This is not often clearly stated in UNDP/FAO projects and the assumption appears to be chat the industry of farming itself is the benefit rather than the income it must generate, or the products for barter, or for feeding the farmer and his family.
Increasing a farmer's real income through extensive aquaculture practices is difficult to achieve. The evidence is that among these poor communities, and even among those where fishing is traditional, only certain individuals accept the financial burdens of constructing and operating a fish pond in addition to their other pursuits for survival. The reasons are several. Managing a fish pond usefully demands the daily attention and commitment which are often not part of the social behaviour and cultural backgrounds of the people; and inputs can be costly. Poor management practices result, such as over-harvesting, and thefts reduce production and profit for the farmer and his family. Furthermore, the social structure may limit the extent to which increased productivity of the farmer can result in personal gains.
At the other end of the scale for maximizing income, certain intensive and semi-intensive systems with high-value species are assumed to be so financially rewarding that they will produce export earnings or reduce costly imports.
Such projects have been supported by international assistance, and the target producers in these cases have been the governments themselves, or government-selected entrepreneurs. The evidence is that governments and government-nominees for the appropriate development loan, which are part of assistance projects to prepare sites and to purchase costly inputs, prove to be poor producers. Few benefits, if any, in terms of export earnings or food accrue to the country. For the most part, governments are owner/non-operators with little commitment to the continuous management and operational needs of the projects, and do not perform within the right business environment which compels them to maximize or increase income.
Not all governments make poor producers or production managers. The exceptions have been countries with a centrally planned economy, such as Hungary, Cuba and Yugoslavia, which have been able to establish an aquaculture sector and increase marketable production annually through directed research and development, and cooperatives and independent government organizations. However, most of these organizations use bonuses and 'profit-sharing' schemes to provide incentives for motivation, and compensate for the lack of increased financial incomes.
Between governments and the rural poor as producers are the semi-intensive farm operators who are exemplified by the systems which they pursue - namely, the maximizing of efficiencies of inputs and resources. This group offers the best opportunity for achieving the objectives of increasing or maximizing real incomes for themselves, and for producing marketable quantities of products which will feed more than their immediate families. As a specific target group, the small semi-intensive farmer has largely been overlooked by international assistance, although this is now being rectified with the deserved interest in integrated farming, producing fish and shellfish with animal and plant husbandry.
UNDP/FAO have assumed too much in the generalization and massing of target groups. This is due to the mistaken belief that aquaculture is simple and appealing work, and therefore ideal for the poor rural communities to undertake en masse. This is not true.
To succeed, projects have to be selective and to use those individuals who are prepared to commit themselves to farming. The composition of the target group, in terms of which individuals have the desire to farm fish and shellfish, is of prime consideration for future assistance, especially within communities without much tradition in fish culture or fishing. Quantifying the potential farmers within a community is an important socio-anthropological task, as well as analyses of projects to determine the success/attrition rates of typical target communities being introduced to new technologies such as aquaculture. These are priorities to assist UNDP/FAO project planning for the sector.
Careful identification of the potential producers is important for all three aquaculture systems, namely, extensive, semi-intensive and intensive farming, and each system has its own demands. For example, although the managerial and technical capabilities are fewer for extensive systems, the number of individuals required for one man/one pond farms, who are needed to make up a significant development project, is very large. The demands on the owner/operators and owner/non-operators of semi-intensive systems, particularly when integrated with animal and crop husbandry, are high on both managerial and technical ability, but the number of such individuals for any large project will be relatively few. For the intensive systems, where few or even only one individual is required for a project, the demand is for managerial ability and wealth to hire the necessary technical competence.
Certain communities have greater potential for adaptation to fish farming. The incidence of successful and established farmers is higher in communities with some tradition in fishing than in purely rural agricultural and pastoral living. For example, a number of lake fishermen have adapted readily to fish cage farming, and coastal small-scale fishermen have become shrimp farmers. But there is always a natural selection of good farmers, and an attrition of disinterested individuals.
Auto-consumption amongst the producer and his immediate family for extensive farming practices is high, together with other relations in the community who share or steal his fish. This high auto-consumption and total utilization of the production from rural fish ponds is the alternative rationale to increasing real incomes for most international assistance in the aquaculture sector, namely producing benefits in kind. Because of the simplicity of the extensive system, that is, one man with perhaps only one pond demanding few inputs, and the potential for large numbers of such units, fish farming will continue to be an important rural practice for producing animal protein within many rural communities for immediate consumption. Auto-consumption among producers who adopt semi-intensive systems is also high among their immediate families who, for the most part, provide their labour in exchange. Similarly, certain intensive farms provide the product in exchange for wages or
benefits. However, on the whole, semi-intensive and intensive fanning practices offer little for alleviating the nutritional requirements of large numbers of individuals as producers, as the labour requirement of such operations is small.
Unfortunately, the producers of farmed fish and shellfish for either increased income or for the nutritional benefit of their immediate families do not operate their appropriate systems in isolation. They are competitors among their neighbours for land and water. They compete not only with other culturists but also with terrestrial farmers. Together they may also compete for the same resources as other industries including recreation and urban development, and consequently for energy, labour, and all necessary equipment and materials. According to the levels and pressures from the components of this dynamic milieu, the would-be producer must assess his overall risk and react accordingly.
2.3 The Communities as Beneficiaries
2.3.1 Local infrastructure level
2.3.2 National infrastructure level
2.3.3 National sector management
2.3.4 Global and regional management
The communities as a whole benefit from inputs at four different levels, namely:
- Local infrastructure level
- National infrastructure level
- National sector management
- Global and regional management
2.3.1 Local infrastructure level
This level is the recipient of much of development assistance to aquaculture, primarily because it concerns the supply of inputs to the producers. These are biotechnical inputs, such as the supply of seed, feeds, and fertilizers, but also the associated inputs of credit at the local level, transportation, energy, information through an extension service - all of which are directed at producers to enable them to increase production.
Direct assistance to produce or maintain inputs readily realizes effects. At the biotechnical level, aquaculture systems do not function without attention to regular and reliable supplies of seed, feeds, and fertilizers. However, different aquaculture systems require these inputs to varying degrees. For farmers who produce extensively, these inputs must cost little or nothing and such resources must be available locally. Extensive farming practices cannot be sustained by the costly inputs from hatcheries or feed/fertilizer plants. On the other hand, farmers who produce semi-intensively or intensively will not survive without such reliable inputs, but at the right prices.
Assistance at the biotechnical level for these and other inputs remains a priority, but with careful attention to the real needs of the target groups. Too many projects have developed the resources for such inputs, that is, constructed hatcheries or supplied feed mills, without concern for the economic and social constraints of the farmers. The same problem is reflected in projects which supply non-technical inputs, such as credit and extension services. Local credit has been made available calculated on the projected costs of inputs from such industrialized facilities. The collateral for such credit has been beyond the ability of the small farmer and the economics of his particular system. Fortunately, few small farmers take advantage of such credit, either because it is beyond their means, or the procedures are complicated, or the terms of the agreement poor. Local credit does not appear to be in short supply and, while the terms may appear less favourable, it is better
adapted to the local social circumstances.
Extension services are essential for aquaculture projects working at the farmer level. Many extension projects, responding to the increasing demands of governments, have undertaken too much and became over-stretched. Monitoring of extension activities is important to maintain a cost efficiency of the service. This is necessary for the governments to know as the service is absorbed into the appropriate agency. The appropriateness of the agency is important for an efficient and permanent extension service, specifically avoiding those agencies which have other regulatory functions such as game wardens.
Different extension service systems respond to different 