<title>ADCP/REP/87/28 - Women in Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
WELCOMING ADDRESS by Dr. A. Lindquist
Armin Lindquist
Assistant Director-General, a.i., Fisheries Department, FAO
On behalf of the Director-General of FAO, the two hosts - the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme and the Norwegian Agency for International Development - and the Fisheries Department and myself, may I extend a warm welcome to you all, the participants of this first workshop on Women in Aquaculture.
I address you, primarily the principal participants, as you are all women who are active contributors to the development of aquaculture worldwide. You therefore have specific knowledge on the current status of women's participation in the sector. As you all ably demonstrate, aquaculture is proving to be a very appropriate sector for the employment of women, much to their economic and social benefits. No doubt this workshop will be the first of many on the subject.
Women are proving to be admirably suited to all the many new activities of the sector, beyond their well-established and traditional roles in fisheries in marketing and administration. Notable contributions have been made for some time in research and development, but now there is increasing evidence of the growing numbers of women in extension services, in the administration of credit and, most significantly, in farming itself. Women are also proving to be excellent production technologists in hatcheries and field stations which supply other farmers with fingerlings.
Aquaculture is a growth sector in the food industry. The projection for global production by ADCP is some 22 million metric tonnes by the year 2000. Technically this is feasible, but it will require much investment in capital and in training human resources. If this total is to be reached, there have to be innumerable opportunities for women to demonstrate their skills and to find employment. The immediate need is for women to be prepared to take advantage of these opportunities as they arise. This workshop is therefore the first step in coordinating these preparations by establishing the current baseline and identifying programme directions.
I hope that you will fulfill the many tasks you have ahead of you during these next four days, and have a productive workshop. Also, I hope that you all enjoy your visit to Rome, many of you for the first time, and to the Fisheries Department in FAO. It gives me great pleasure to declare the workshop on Women in Aquaculture open.
<section>2</section>
OPENING ADDRESS by Dr. C. E. Nash
Colin E. Nash
Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to WOMEN IN AQUACULTURE. This workshop has been instigated jointly by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) and the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD). Together, ADCP and NORAD have conceived this event to try to quantify the present participation of women in this emerging technology of aquaculture.
Women are already very active in aquaculture, but we have never been able to answer accurately the question which is repeatedly asked of us, 'How many women work in the sector?'. But documenting the evidence of their activity is only a small part of the task we have set for ourselves. As with all information, it is only of value if it is put to good use. In our case, we need to analyse the information to show where there are opportunities to improve their participation, and where we can exploit new or further opportunities to get more women involved.
Consequently, may I quote once again the objectives of the ADCP/NORAD workshop, and the purposes of your presence and the parameters of your contributions during these next three days. The first objective is to identify where there are needs and opportunities to:
(i) reinforce the participation of women in the sector, and
(ii) advance their skills so that women can participate in the sector.
The second objective is to recommend approaches and outline development projects which can train and/or utilize the participation of women for both public and private investment in aquaculture.
I do not have to remind you Chat the more you can get into the second objective, the greater will be your contribution to the speed with which your colleagues have opportunities to participate in the future.
It has been a very difficult task to select the participants in the workshop. Once it was known that such a session was planned, many of your equally deserving friends and associates wanted to come. However, selection has been based on a number of criteria, which merit some explanation.
(i) At this stage it was important to get the baseline information of the present level of participation of women in the sector. It was necessary to have individuals who had spent time actively in the sector and who had quantifiable data at hand. Consequently, I requested eight of you to prepare working papers, and the rest to bring one page of factual data which could possibly be added to the working papers.
(ii) It was important to get broad representation of the sector, and to have individuals from every sub-sectoral component, such as management and administration, as well as education and research; I also needed producers from both the public and the private sectors, as well as individuals involved in consumption and marketing. Consequently, I divided the sector into its six accepted components and invited about five or six of you to represent each one, each with some different background or experience.
(iii) It was also important that the industries in the geographic regions of the world were represented. Aquaculture production differs widely from region to region and, although the principles of aquaculture are common, the resources and therefore the applications are at times very different; I needed individuals who could provide information over a broad background of the aquaculture industries worldwide, so that between you any country, any aquaculture system, and any species technology were known. Consequently, I tried to obtain representatives from all regions with diverse backgrounds.
(iv) Finally, and not least, the participants were all women active in the sector.
I would like to explain the background of the structure of the workshop, as several of you may not understand my motivation fully.
I believe that too much attention in the past has been given to the biotechnical problems of aquaculture, to the neglect of the non-biotechnical problems (such as economics, sociology, marketing, planning, management, etc.). The need for the future is to make certain that attention is given equally to all these components simultaneously. I believe that the best assistance we can give to aquaculture development at the present time, and that is for all countries, is assistance which builds the capacity of each country to enable it to advance and maintain aquaculture as a food-producing industry. Gone are the days for aquaculture to be considered as a popular pastime and an interesting technology dominated by biological researchers.
Capacity building for a sector requires attention at six levels. The first two are concerned with the primary beneficiaries of the industry, namely (1) the Consumers of the Product, and (2) the Producers of the Product. The remaining four levels are concerned with the support services behind the primary beneficiaries and the infrastructure of the sector; these are called (3) Local Infrastructure, (4) National Infrastructure, (5) National Sector Management, and (6) Global and Regional Management.
Each level of the sector has three dimensions. These are socio-economic, technical and managerial, with managerial dimensions having nine activites covering information, planning, marketing, financial, personnel, etc. The resulting matrix therefore describes all the building-blocks of a sector, and also acts as a check-list. Obviously at each level the individual building blocks will merit different emphases, but at least each one will receive some attention.
I will not burden you with more of this capacity building theory now, but I can assure you that efforts towards capacity building will influence development projects more and more in the next decade. Consequently, by structuring the workshop on these six levels I am anticipating the framework into which your final results and recommendations will be most readily placed, and subsequently used to the greatest benefit.
Thus, I look forward to your very professional participation in this workshop, giving due consideration to all the levels of the sector for women to participate in, and not just those levels which are relatively easy to discuss and to think about. You will have to concentrate on the approach, and conscientiously avoid prolonged attention to one or two levels.
If you are successful in abiding by this framework (and I am certain that you shall), the workshop will be a landmark event on this basis alone, and it will enable the ADCP to focus more attention on capacity building as the right framework for planning effective development. I also think that the framework will help the final results and recommendations to be phrased in language suitable for the findings of professional managers, administrators, and representatives of a viable and economic industry, and not merely part-time players.
I am contributing to the workshop two papers of my own which are being published under the auspices of the ADCP. They have some purpose.
The first is 'Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture' (ADCP/REP/86/23). You will notice immediately that the structure of the paper follows the framework behind capacity building. I would draw your attention to a number of facts relevant to your thoughts over these next three days.
(i) Although one of the roles of aquaculture often stated in national policies is to increase employment opportunities, aquaculture itself is not a labour intensive industry. There are good opportunities for employment, but aquaculture is not a panacea for countries with large numbers of unemployed.
(ii) The mainstay of the aquaculture sector, the producers or farmers, are individuals who are entrepreneurs who have a desire to farm. In planned development projects, the farmers have therefore to be carefully selected. It is a mistake to generalize and mass target groups - such as the unemployed, or displaced fishermen, or women - as primary beneficiaries without considerable socio-cultural research and analysis.
(iii) Governments, on the whole, make poor producers. Consequently, recommending more government production projects supported by technical assistance is not going to help the sector get established, or women more opportunities.
My second paper is 'Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs' (ADCP/REP/87/25). Again, I draw your attention to the following points which are relevant to your thoughts for the future of women in the industry.
(i) Although the future of aquaculture is very promising and is clearly a growth sector of the food industry, there has to be realism on the part of investors - using the word in its broadest meaning. Aquaculture products must compete on the marketplace with those of the capture fisheries, and with the cheap white meats, poultry and pork. Furthermore, the aquaculture industry must compete with other industries for resources, especially agriculture for water and the tourist industry for space. Consequently, not every country has aquaculture as a high economic priority or needs aquaculture at all, no matter how interesting it may be to a few individuals.
(ii) The ADCP is currently trying to work on labour analyses of the aquaculture industry to help guide national investment in capital facilities, and in training and education, but as yet we have little data. However, it is clear that some countries are investing substantially in infrastructure and training, and the potential value of the industry does not merit it. In this paper you will find the most recent production data of over 175 countries. If you approximated a value to these figures, and estimated the future potential for some countries, then you will determine quickly that large scale national investment in infrastructure and training, no matter how worthy, is not justified.
I have one thing more to say before I close. This workshop deals with Women in Aquaculture. I have invited only women to manage and be the principal participants in the workshop. The aquaculture staff of the ADCP, and that includes myself, and the FAO Regular Programme, are welcome to attend the sessions as contributors, but they are not principal participants.
I have been criticized for the organization of this workshop on two counts. First, I have been criticized (and only by women, no less) for not inviting men as principal participants. But I have no good reason to do so. Frankly, even in this small workshop of thirty carefully selected participants, there is probably not one question I can ask about aquaculture which cannot be answered by one of you. Thus, if during the next three days you need to know the typical labour force of a shrimp hatchery, or the organization for a credit programme in Africa, or the requirements of a project development document for UNDP, someone here among you will have the answer.
Second, I have been criticized for not holding this workshop in the field where production is going on. This, I feel, is the traditional thinking which has constrained aquaculture development. Production is obviously important, but no more than the other five levels of the sector as I have already explained. I believe that a wealth of field experience is gathered in this room to enable us to modernize our approach to development and achieve the objectives in the proper framework. Furthermore, but depending on the outcome of this workshop, the ADCP will seek financial support for regional conferences on the subject.
Consequently, I hope that you will prove me right in confining the participation only to women and holding the event here in Rome, and you prove my critics and your colleagues wrong.
With that I close. Both NORAD and the ADCP look forward to your results and recommendations on Thursday with considerable anticipation. Again, on behalf of the ADCP and NORAD, my thanks to you all for coming, and our good wishes for a most successful meeting.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The participants in the Workshop recognize that aquaculture is itself an emerging technology. In many developing countries there is no aquaculture sector as yet, or the sector is no more than the extent of an international technical assistance project which is trying to establish its foundations. Consequently, the opportunities for both women and men to participate in aquaculture at all have been restricted.
In those countries where an aquaculture sector has been established, women have rapidly become involved in aquaculture at every level. Not only have they expanded their traditional fisheries roles in marketing, processing, and credit, but they have become active in farming itself (production), and are well established in technological research and education. The degree of participation, however, decreases down the sector towards management, and in many countries women are noticably absent from national management, particularly in aquaculture policy-making and planning - although national management as a whole is a sub-sector of weakness.
The status of aquaculture development varies from country to country. In many countries, particularly in Africa, the aquaculture sector is based almost entirely on extensive farming practices primarily for subsistence and barter, with any surplus being sold in rural markets; in others, notably Asia, Latin America, and most developed countries, it is based on semi-intensive and intensive systems for profit and trade, including exports. The participation of women throughout the industry of aquaculture worldwide therefore covers a broad spectrum, as diverse as the many levels of sophistication attained in each country. Unfortunately, the quantitative data to measure the degree of participation is lacking. This ADCP/NORAD Workshop is the first effort to collect this important information in one place, and structure it in an understandable framework.
The level of support required to enhance the participation of women in the aquaculture sector is clearly determined by the status of national aquaculture development in each country, and particularly by the respective government policy towards the sector. The government, after all, is responsible for the development of all economic sectors in the country, including the emergent sector of aquaculture. However, an economic sector cannot be developed in isolation, and aquaculture is proving to be a sector of far-reaching consequence. It continues to be tied closely to both agriculture and fisheries. It is therefore important that all national policies and plans for economic development include consideration of an aquaculture component, and identify women as key participants among the human resources required.
The Workshop has made a number of recommendations which will benefit the participation of women in the sector indirectly, as they are relevant to the development of the sector as a whole; and certain recommendations which have direct benefits as they concern projects which are specific to women.
1. The Workshop recognizes that the groundwork it has prepared is still far from complete. The present recommendations require continuous refinement, and more constructive proposals can be made as more data become available. As an initial step towards the attainment of these and subsequent recommendations, the Workshop recommends the preparation of a number of country case studies on aquaculture development in which various levels of participation of women are highlighted. These will serve as models for other developing countries in supporting aquaculture as a sector in national economic development programmes. These studies should be an adjunct of the Workshop and led by ADCP (FAO) and NORAD, and with the assistance of other donors.
2. The Workshop believes that there is a substantial need to communicate its findings to the women in aquaculture at large, and continue the momentum initiated by ADCP (FAO) and NORAD. Communication at present is most timely as the information can influence policy formulation; most developed and developing countries are only now recognizing the increasing importance of aquaculture and are structuring policy and formulating national plans. The Workshop recommends a number of regional conferences on the subject of Women in Aquaculture (possibly in association with proposed regional conferences on aquaculture development as a whole, or other similar events), which would in turn assist in the promotion of national workshops.
3. The Workshop recognizes that there is a need to continue the collection of statistics on the participation and contributions of women to the human resources of the aquaculture sector. A databank, similar to or in association with FARMAP (the Agricultural Farming System) should be established. Such a system would collect and code the activities performed by women in the sector to quantify and identify their labour inputs. In addition, it is a source of information necessary for directing both public and private investment in the sector.
4. The Workshop recommends a significant increase in the number of aquaculture projects which are both specific to women and to women's participation. This recommendation is relevent to all projects, and not only those requiring technical assistance.
However, greater attention is required in the overall identification, execution, and evaluation of all projects in terms of both positive and negative impacts on women. This is especially important for non-aquaculture projects which may impact existing women's enterprises in aquaculture.
In particular, the Workshop notes:
(i) The vital importance of professional market research at base level for production projects cannot be overstated to ensure total viability of each project regardless of size. In particular, handling and marketing are proven fields of acceptable employment of women, and projects aimed at reinforcing and building on these roles should be given priority if there is an existing basis for success.
(ii) Production projects invariably require a credit component. As access to credit and lack of credit management skills are constraints to the participation of women as producers, projects must have the facility to provide resources to meet these needs.
(iii) All projects at all levels (not only those for women) need more prolonged preparation, in particular to develop the baseline on which the project is appropriately planned and executed, and against which the impact can subsequently be assessed. The baseline should be established in the proper framework (that is, on site in the case of production projects, and in the right institutional location in the case of other projects), and involve qualified women.
(iv) Training and education of women are required at all levels to increase their opportunities for participation in the sector. Although no one area merits higher priority, particular attention should be given to training for women in extension especially in locations where women are active as producers. Promotion of careers for women in aquaculture can begin in the schools. Time is a major constraint for women to receive training, and consequently training should be scheduled with this in mind.
(v) Information prepared and distributed for aquaculture projects (or by projects) should reflect the existing participation of women at all levels. This is common for consumer education, but is equally appropriate for extension materials and training manuals.
IN SUMMARY, the Workshop recognizes a strong economic relationship between the growth of the aquaculture sector worldwide and the growth of employment opportunities for women. Both can profit and benefit mutually. The need is for more well-directed efforts to involve women, and to confirm their impact on the industry.
<section>4</section>
CONCLUSIONS OF THE WORKING GROUPS
Level 1. Consumption and Marketing of Aquaculture Products
Improved nutrition and food self-sufficiency are two of the main priorities quoted in the policies of the governments of developing countries. Aquaculture is being recognized increasingly as a sector which can provide nutritious products of quality and contribute either directly or indirectly to the food resources of the country. Based on this premise, government support should be directed towards those production systems which can be operated within the confines of the purchasing power of the communities as a whole, and at locations close to the markets.
Handling and marketing of fish are activities in which women traditionally predominate. However, support facilities for promotion and marketing aquaculture products, particularly in remote rural areas unaccustomed to fish, are not adequately provided to lessen the constraints on women engaged in local distribution and marketing.
Full recognition should be given to these traditional and existing roles of women, and increased attention should be paid to chose local commercial and social factors which can either limit or enhance their expansion into aquaculture, for example, storage facilities, transportation systems, trading procedures, distribution networks, etc. The need for transportation systems and distribution networks, particularly the former, must be recognized as constraints in all fields of development for women. Until overcome, this constraint often negates the efforts of assistance.
Existing and successful women's groups should be enhanced by the creation of marketing-based trade associations structured on mutual cooperation and codependency. The sharing and distribution of essential market information, for example, production figures and cycles, price structures, consumer preferences, etc., must be encouraged to the benefit of all concerned in the buying chain. Such associations can effectively provide self-financed market support services for their members to the greater benefit of the community as a whole. These benefits may be in the form of credit availability, stable food supplies and price structures, consumer education, market facilities, etc. In addition, successful trade associations can expand into other complimentary commodity areas or development activities, and serve as valuable and effective liaison with outside contacts or as a producer lobby tool.
Motivation towards aquaculture marketing at all levels is vitally important. Based on current government policies for aquaculture development, such as increased employment, optimal exploitation of natural resources, food self-sufficiency, etc., governments should support and encourage processing, marketing, and distribution networks for the benefit of both producers and consumers.
The success of women's participation in trade associations should be furthered by free access to formal management and marketing skills, encouraged by available training.
Level 2. Aquaculture Production
The active participation of governments in the infrastructure of the sector is necessary but, with certain exceptions, governments should not themselves be involved in commercial production.
Women are eminently capable, both physically and technically, of participating in all three basic systems of aquaculture production and their many adaptations. Their participation is evident in family groups, in communal or rural groups, in specific women's groups, and in commercial concerns. Particularly evident is their work in intensive production systems in hatcheries. All of these enterprises can therefore be encouraged.
A number of specific social, economic, and cultural constraints limit the opportunities for women to participate in aquaculture as producers. The extent of these constraints are location-specific and therefore special provisions are often required to overcome them. Women's economic activities must be integrated with their domestic activities, and their financial resources are generally limited. Associative forms of aquaculture production are therefore more suited to these general constraints.
Time is a major constraint for women in rural areas. This is relevant to aquaculture production as certain production practices are demanding on time. Production enterprises have therefore to be selected carefully, and again associative enterprises are more appropriate for women in rural areas.
Many opportunities exist for women to participate in aquaculture production but more specific identification of opportunities to upgrade and expand their activities is needed. For example, support activities of production, both upstream and downstream, are generally neglected but provide important opportunities for women's employment and income. These activities include production of fry and fingerlings (juveniles) in hatcheries, networking, processing, etc., and should be considered in addition to end production.
Greater attention is required in the identification, planning, and execution of all aquaculture production enterprises, but particularly those which involve women. Better preparation can be achieved through studies of the baseline, which should be carried out on site and involve qualified women. The baseline should take into account the components of marketing as well as production and local infrastructure. The time for the baseline study should be adequate for the magnitude of the proposed development. Follow-up systems are also required to monitor the impact of development activities on women, and to publicize the data.
Level 3. Local Infrastructure
The infrastructure necessary to support the primary beneficiaries of aquaculture as a whole is constrained by many common problems. Among the most important are the ownership rights of land, and legal access to water. In this regard, the local administrative structure is often an added constraint. These constraints are more acute for women than for men, and unfortunately these problems in many countries will not be easily resolved for some time.
Technical problems, such as the need for basic resources of seed, feed, fertilizer, and equipment are constrained more by access to capital or credit than by anything else. Again this constraint affects women more than men. Access to credit and training in credit management skills are important requirements for women investing effort in aquaculture. Credit should be readily provided to women, especially those who have demonstrated the financial viability of their enterprises and a market for the increased production. Where necessary, assistance should be provided to undertake such analyses as it is imperative that the enterprise is viable.
Training of women in extension work, equipment maintenance, hatchery and farm management and operations, and skills for dealing with local administration, have been almost totally neglected and are of prime importance. As time is a major constraint for women, training must be scheduled appropriately. Relatively few obstacles exist to women's participation in aquaculture at this sectoral level with the exception of training. In many activities, such as in hatcheries, women are preferred. The presence of women in the sector at this level is important as it sets examples for others. As a certain level of education is often required (especially to be employed as a government extension agent), women should be included in mid-level training and scholarship programmes.
There is a great priority for women in extension services. Women extension agents respond to the needs of women producers and also create awareness about possibilities for women. Constraints for women in extension are the lack of training and basic education, time, the requirement and the means to travel, and the poor pay. Most government extension services, particularly in the new field of aquaculture, suffer from a lack of funds and facilities. Compensation can be assisted through incentives.
Extension services must be geared towards the needs of rural women. As many women share the responsibilities of production they need to have the information, and there are also good socio-cultural reasons; for example, there are often prohibitions for women to speak to foreign men. For women, training and visit systems by a few women extension agents combined with local demonstration farms owned and run by women may be preferable to the traditional cadre of uniformed government extension agents.
More attention to the components of this level are required in the planning and execution of development projects for women. In particular:
(i) Preparation must take into account the existing local infrastructure and the ownership and utilization of land and water. Access to these fundamental resources must exist in the area before the creation of the infrastructure becomes meaningful.
(ii) Extension activities must be brought to where the women are, and women should be included in planning extension services.
(iii) Pilot or model farms, including some operated primarily by women, should be established and given exposure to other farmers in the area, both male and female. Demonstration farms (possibly also staffed by women) are useful to reflect actual farm conditions, and can be readily accessible to women.
(iv) Training and visit extension systems should be implemented and utilized.
(v) Women extension workers should be recruited and have access to means of transportation; female link workers should be trained, and both link workers and extension agents should conduct on-the-farm training.
(vi) Information materials should be deployed by extension services which are responsive to and indicative of women's presence in the sector.
At this level there is a continuous need for updating training to keep pace with an advancing sector. In addition to the need for short-courses and workshops on technology, there is a continuous requirement for workshops on financial management for women, on business, credit, and credit management. These should be held in areas where women operate viable aquaculture businesses.
Level 4. National Infrastructure
At this level of the sector, there are in general few differences in male and female performance. However, many regional constraints exist fo