<title>Preserving tomatoes</title>
<section>1</section>
Three home-processing and preservation techniques
1. Preserving tomatoes. Three home-processing and preservation techniques.
2. With red tomatoes, it is easy to make preserves. We shall explain how. How to prepare jars of peeled tomatoes, bottles of tomato pulp and dried tomatoes. With the help of these techniques, we shall be able to make red sauces and other preparations all year round, even when there are no more fresh tomatoes on the market.
3. Sunrise is the best time to pick tomatoes.They are still cool from the last hours of the night.
4. Red, really red, completely red, these are the right tomatoes for us! They are the richest in vitamins.
<section>2</section>
5. Very red, ripe but fairly firm with no black spots or blemishes, these tomatoes will make firstrate preserves.
6. To transport these fine fruits, we use basins or crates. But be careful not to put in too many at a time.
7. Did you notice that the boxes are not completely full? So, when we put one on top of the other, the tomatoes underneath will not be squashed. Remember that we can't make good preserves out of damaged tomatoes.
8. We've got to quickly get our tomatoes to the house. Our team is waiting to start work.
<section>3</section>
9. Hey, we said "quick!" This is not the moment to stop for a chat! You may be in the shade, but your tomatoes are in the sun. They are going to go bad, man! And you can't make good preserves out of tomatoes that have been lying in the sun.
10. At last! Now, let's get moving!
11. Let's start by washing our hands, without using scented soap: the scent clinging to the skin will give the tomatoes a bad taste.
12. And then let's wash our tomatoes.
<section>4</section>
13. Let's take the best ones to make peeled tomato preserves. So that they look nice, we choose tomatoes all more or less the same size.
14. The others will be kept to make pulp or dried. Later on we will see how.
15. To begin with, we are going to explain how to prepare peeled tomato preserves.
16. A small quantity of washed tomatoes are put into a bowl.
<section>5</section>
17. They are dipped gently into boiling water for thirty seconds.
18. After thirty seconds, they are taken out of the cooking pot as quickly as possible with a sieve.
19. They are plunged immediately into cold water for a few minutes. Immersion in cold water after the boiling water helps to loosen the skin.
20. We peel tomatoes completely
<section>6</section>
21. ... without leaving any skin on them. Without leaving even the tiniest bit of skin.
22. The jars and the lids must also be clean. Let's wash them with hot water. If they are very dirty, we can rub them clean with sand or small pebbles.
23. Everything is clean, so now the jars can be filled with the peeled tomatoes.
24. The tomatoes are packed in by tapping the bottom of the jar with one hand' so the tomatoes are shaken down and fit snugly against each other.
<section>7</section>
25. This is the moment to add to each jar a little lemon juice without pips. Watch for the pips!
26. The lemon juice is necessary for preservation. One coffee-spoonful per half-litre jar is enough.
27. We also add some hot pulp to fill up the jar. The jar must not be filled right to the top! Leave about one centimetre of air underneath the lid.
28. Be sure to screw the lid on tightly.
<section>8</section>
29. The jars are closed and must now be sterilized.
30. The bottom of a pot is covered with straw. The jars are placed on it, and then more straw put in between the jars to prevent them from knocking against each other.
31. A flat lid and a big stone on top of it will keep the jars steady and in place.
32. The pot is filled with water. The top jars must be at least two centimetres under the water.
<section>9</section>
33. This is the moment to light a fire. The water will soon start boiling. It should boil for 45 minutes. 45 minutes for half-litre jars. There's no point in boiling them any longer, it's a waste of wood.
34. After 45 minutes, the preserves are sterilized. The fire is put out while the jars are left to cool.
35. Next morning the jars are rinsed and dried.
36. A label is stuck on every jar
<section>a</section>
37. ... with the name of the product, the name of the group or cooperative and the expiry date.
38. Preferably, these jars should be kept in a cool, dark place. These preserves should be consumed within the year. They can be used to make sauces and other preparations when there are no fresh tomatoes on the market.
39. What are you up to? You're dipping your finger in the jar to find out if it's good? Of course it's good! But once the lid has been unscrewed, the tomatoes won't keep long: they must be used the same day or kept in the fridge.
40. So open the jar only when you are ready to use the peeled tomatoes.
<section>b</section>
41. Peeled tomatoes are hygienic and rich in vitamins. They are therefore very good for children's health.
42. We are now going to see how to prepare tomato pulp.
43. First we wash our hands.
44. Let's take the tomatoes of different shapes and sizes that we put aside just now. Your remember they were picked in the morning. They were not squashed during trasport, they were not left in the sun and they have been carefully washed.
<section>c</section>
45. They must also be well drained.
46. The bottles are washed with hot water and sand or small pebbles. Soap is not necessary and it could leave a bad taste.
47. The tomatoes are cut in half
48. ... and checked inside for any that might be rotten.
<section>d</section>
49. The opened tomatoes go into a device called an extractor. It extracts the pulp. It separates the pulp from the seeds and the skin.
50. The tomatoes are pressed down with a wooden spoon from time to time.
51. The seeds and and the skin are put back into the extractor several times, to help crush the pulp and increase the yield.
52. When all the pulp is collected, we pour it into a cooking pot.
<section>e</section>
53. The pot is placed on the fire for what is called the pre-heating. It must simmer without ever boiling.
54. A small spoonful of lemon juice without pips goes into each clean, empty bottle.
55. The bottles are filled, but not completely.
56. A space of two or three must be left, otherwise the bottles will burst during steriIization.
<section>f</section>
57. This is the device to close the bottle. It's called a bottle-capper.
58. And here is a cap.
59. The bottle is closed with the capper.
<section>g</section>
61. Once the bottles are capped, they are sterilized in a pot, just as with the jars of peeled tomatoes, with straw, a big stone to hold them down, and water which will be boiled for 45 minutes.
62. Bottles can be sterilized at the same time as the half-litre jars if there is enough room in the pot.
63. Next morning, when the bottles are cold, they are rinsed and dried.
64. They are labelled with the name of the product, the name of the group or cooperative and expiry date.
<section>h</section>
65. They can be stored for up to a year and used whenever needed, particularly when there are no more fresh tomatoes on the market. But, as with the peeled tomatoes, an open bottle of pulp must be consumed the same day.
66. We will now see how to prepare dried tomatoes.
67. Whatever their shape, all red tomatoes are good for drying.
68. That said, now and every time we handle food, don't let's forget to wash our hands first.
<section>i</section>
69. We wash the tomatoes,...
70. ... cut them in half, lengthwise
71. ... and pick out the pips using our thumbs, without crushing the pulp.
72. These pips are left to dry in the sun. They will provide us with new tomato plants.
<section>j</section>
73. We cut each half-tomato into slices one centimetre thick, as evenly as possible. Slices of the same thickness will take the same time to dry.
74. Just drying these tomatoes means that they can be kept for at least three months.
75. But additional processing is necessary if we want to keep them longer.
76. To do that, first add to the water in the pot a soupspoonful of salt ...
<section>k</section>
77. ... and a soup-spoonful of preservative per litre of water.
78. Then we boil it, stirring with a wooden spoon.
79. We put the tomato slices in a piece of cloth or in a very clean basket, and plunge the whole thing into this boiling water for three minutes. This is called "blanching".
80. Then we drain them.
<section>l</section>
81. The tomato slices are ready to be put in the dryer.
82. There are several types of modern dryers, of varying sizes. This one is a fixed solar drier.
83. This one is simpler, cheaper to build and mobile. But the drying system is the same. First of all, the plastic retains the heat of the sun and, secondly, the air circulates inside, coming in at the bottom and going out at the top.
84. Inside the dryers, the tomato slices will be placed on trays made of slatted plastic and mosquito netting.
<section>m</section>
85. The tomato slices are spread out on the tray.
86. . as evenly as possible .
87. ... over the whole surface of the tray.
88. The dryer is shut immediately to protect the tomatoes from dust and flies.
<section>n</section>
89. Two and a half days later, the tomatoes are dry.
90. They are gathered up
91. ... and are cooled off for half an hour in a shady place.
92. They can then be put in polythene bags.
<section>o</section>
93. A label is stuck on each bag indicating the name of the produce, the name of the group or cooperative and the expiry date.
94. The bags of dried tomatoes are kept in cardboard boxes with straw to protect them from damp.
95. In this way they will keep for a year.
96. When we want to use the dried tomatoes, we soak them in cold water for two hours before preparing a sauce.
<section>p</section>
97. They can also be ground into tomato powder.
98. A soup-spoonful of this powder is enough for a sauce for six to eight people.
99. Peeled tomatoes, tomato pulp and dried tomatoes: three preservation techniques to be used when there is a glut of tomatoes, thus saving food which would otherwise go to waste.
100. Yes, it is easy to preserve tomatoes! And these wholesome and nourishing preserves improve the quality of our meals, which will be rich in vitamins throughout the year.
<section>q</section>
Production diagram for the three preservation techniques
Production diagram for the three preservation techniques
storage time
Jars of peeled tomatoes and bottles of pulp for making sauces and other preparations can be used for twelve months, and dried tomatoes for three or twelve months depending on the processing (see the expiry date on the label).
<section>r</section>
Recommendations
1. Wash your hands before every operation. This rule is particularly important in preparing dried tomatoes.
2. Remove the damaged parts of fresh tomatoes.
3. Wash utensils, equipment and trays after use in clean water.
4. Addition of the preservative, potassium metabisulphite, protects the tomatoes froms bacteria, yeast and moulds. However, this solution cannot prevent the multiplication of germs if the preparation and drying are done in unsanitary conditions.
5. For each finished product jar, bottle, bag) the label must show:
- the nature of the product (peeled tomatoes, tomato pulp, dried tomatoes)
- the net weight
- the origin (name of the group or cooperative)
- the expiry date
<section>s</section>
Sterilization time
Size of container
in litres Temperature
of the contents Sterilization time
0,33 60 ºC 40 minutes
0,50 60 ºC 45 minutes
0,66 60 ºC 55 minutes
0,75 60 ºC 60 minuses
1 litre 60 ºC 70 minutes
<section>t</section>
Processing materials and equipment
PROCESSING MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT
· Aluminium or plastic 20-litre buckets · Stainless-steel or plastic strainers
· Plastic 40 litre basin · Stainless-steel or plastic funnels
. Stainless-steel or aluminium 30-litre cooking pots · Lemon squeezer
· Small spoons
· Aluminium 25-litre pots · Chemical products: potassium metabisulphite
· Half-litre jars and lids 
· Half-litre bottles and caps
· Polythene bags and bands to close them
· Labels
· Knives
. Wooden spoons
· Stainless-steel or aluminium skimmers
· Stainless-steel or aluminium ladles
EQUIPMENT
· Improved stove
· Extractor
· Bottle-capper
· Solar dryer
N.B. Never use copper utensils, because this metal destroys some of the vitamin C
<section>u</section>
Recommendations for using the filmstrip
The filmstrip, "Preserving tomatoes", is an audiovisual teaching aid. Its purpose is to show, during a training course, three preservation techniques. It is intended for extension workers, women's groups, farmers and anyone likely to be making tomato preserves.
To ensure the active participation of trainees and to use this audio-visual in the most effective way, the following recommendations should be borne in mind before a showing is organized.
The discussion leader
The discussion leader must have assimilated the content of the material he is going to present and must have thought out, in advance, the difficulties that could be encountered by the trainees so that he can, without hesitation, provide them with the necessary clarifications. The discussion leader must be familiar in projection equipment, audio-visual presentation techniques and in handling and maintaining projection equipment.
The discussion leader using the filmstrip must have been trained in the three preservation techniques and know how to make tomato preserves.
Projection
Two projections may be envisaged during one training course, one at the beginning and one at the end, so as to recapitulate what has been learned and reformulate the principles and rules to be applied in making good tomato preserves.
It is a good idea to combine the showing with an exhibition of relevant materials such as:
- posters, photos, press cuttings, sketches, etc...;
- materials used in making preserves;
- some finished products. These could be set out for trainees to taste.
The filmstrip is accompanied by a brochure and a commentary recorded on cassette. Signals are also recorded on the tape. These are reference points to ensure that the projection of the images is synchronized with the commentary. But the discussion leader can, if he prefers, read the text himself, dwell on certain parts of it, add comments or control the presentation and make sure that the group is taking it all in.
To obtain the full attention of the trainees, the discussion leader must prepare the projection well by:
- briefing the trainees with a short introduction before the projection starts;
- ensuring that nobody comes into the room during the projection, so that the trainees' attention will not be distracted or the message garbled;
- ensuring that no material difficulties will spring up to interrupt the projection. We shall see later the precautions to be taken;
- allowing time for questions during or at the end of the projection.
The projection may well attract uninvited spectators whose presence will render it virtully useless. The filmstrip should be shown to a small group of trainees, possibly with an additional performance for people who are interested or just curious.
Materials
To avoid the many practical difficulties that could arise, the discussion leader should make a list of accessories not to be forgotten and checks to be made, such as:
- make sure that the projector is working before the session;
- if the projection is done with a 12-volt battery, check the charge of the battery before setting out for the field;
- remember to check the voltage of the projector lamp: 110 or 220 volts with alternative current, 12 volts with the battery;
- remember to bring a spare lamp; know how to change it quickly if necessary;
- make sure there are several cables, all long enough, and a 3-way plug;
- remember to bring the right filmstrip adaptor for the filmstrip to be projected - orizontal or vertical;
- before the session, check that the filmstrip is put in the projector properly and will run smoothIy;
- if the filmstrip is accompanied by a soundtrack recorded on cassette, check the recorder for sound and for the state of the batteries;
- etc....
Each discussion leader must draw up his own list depending on the material he has and the conditions of use.
The role of discussion leader is of paramount importance. The discussion leader must make sure that the knowledge transmitted by the audio-visual has been understood. The filmstrip can in no case replace the discussion leader. On the contrary, the filmstrip must be considered as a teaching aid, an instrument that the presenter uses to reinforce, facilitate and improve his work.
