<title>Food loss prevention in perishable crops</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This study deals with the Post-harvest losses occurring in perishable crops and how they can be reduced or prevented. It is the combined result of study tours, literature search, and discussions during an Expert Consultation jointly organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme in May 1980. More than 30 specialists from the different disciplines of the post-harvest system and representing a wide geographical area were at one stage or another involved in this study.
This publication is primarily intended for policy-makers, planners, development corporations and potential investors in the developing countries, although it could conveniently be used as background material for training courses in post-harvest technology. With its mixture of technical background information and recommendations for curative action it is hoped that the document will create sufficient awareness for initiating steps to recover a food availability which is now lost.
The publication is divided into two main parts, preceded by a Summary in which the Recommendations for post-harvest loss prevention measures in perishable crops are incorporated.
In Part I the concept of post-harvest loss prevention and its increasing importance to provide more food is introduced followed by the Conclusions reached by the Expert Consultation. Part II describes the technical aspects of post-harvest losses and the factors that influence their magnitude and opportunities for their reduction.
Correspondence concerning this publication should be directed to:
Director
Agricultural Services Division
FAO Headquarters
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma, Italia
<section>2</section>
Summary
Forecasts as to the extent to which the increasing demand for food in the world can be fulfilled over the next decades range from very cautious to optimistic. More concrete is the expectation that the necessary food supplies will have to be derived increasingly from the intensification of agricultural production rather than from additional land use. This will require a more judicious use of limited production inputs and may have repercussions on costs.
The reduction of post-harvest food losses is a complementary means for increasing food production. This draws its importance not only from a moral obligation to avoid waste, but also because the cost of preventing food losses in general is less than producing a similar additional amount of food of the same quality. Therefore, the concept of food loss prevention, to which attention was drawn by the World Food Conference in 1974, will afford mankind increasingly significant opportunities to meet its food requirements. The programmes that have been initiated so far at the international level, amongst which is FAO's Food Loss Prevention Programme, have focused mainly an the durable food grains because of their prominence in the daily diet. The perishable crops, because of their high moisture content, are inherently more liable to deteriorate, especially under tropical conditions. Fruits and vegetables provide basic food and nutritionally essential vitamins and trace elements
and, moreover, have an important role in improving food flavour and acceptability.
This study, therefore, is concentrated on the perishables of plant origin and endeavours have been made to review the magnitude of losses, the places where they occur and the measures that can be taken to reduce them in the developing countries.
The findings and course of action to improve the situation are reflected in the Recommendations proposed by the Expert Consultation on Food loss Prevention in Perishable Crops, held at FAO, Rome, in May 1980, and are listed below:
<section>3</section>
Recommendations
1. An international action programme of post-harvest food loss prevention in perishables of plant origin should be initiated. A proper balance should be maintained between postharvest scientists and economists, engineers and food technologists in project formulation and implementation.
2. All projects designed to increase food production or improve food marketing should give consideration to the post-harvest implications of the project including both project development and project monitoring phases,.
3. All post-harvest food loss reduction activities should consider the environmental impact of that activity. Environmental and health issues should be part of the documentation of project proposals and the planning process.
4. Each country should attempt to identify the principal problem areas affecting losses in perishables of plant origin occurring in its own postharvest system with a view to establishing appropriate priority areas for action. Since the value of the product may be doubled in the post-harvest period, these value changes need to be assessed for specific crops. The scale of priorities should be compiled on the basis of the magnitude of the losses, their economic and nutritional importance and the feasibility of applying effective remedial action that is operationally and economically reasonable. A systems approach should be used in this process taking into account biological, physical, economic and social factors with reference to the various economic groups including the rural poor. There should be full participation of the expected beneficiaries in the planning of food loss reduction activities. Traditional technologies should not be ignored.
5. The use of proper temperature management procedures should be promoted This includes simple cooling systems such as shading from direct sunlight and use of evaporative cooling. Where appropriate, more cool stores and better utilization of existing cool stores should be promoted. The International Institute of Refrigeration should co-operate with national and international organizations to organize training in refrigeration management, design, operation and maintenance suitable for conditions experienced in developing countries.
6. The search for low cost cooling systems should be intensified. This should include the application of solar energy and other renewable sources of energy to power cooling systems. Practical research programmes should be drawn up by national and international agencies and institutes to adapt refrigeration techniques to the needs of developing countries.
7. There should be development and promotion of gentle handling of horticultural produce at all steps in the harvesting and marketing system when it is technically feasible and economically viable. This includes the development and use of improved market and field containers that are used to harvest, transport and store horticultural produce. All training manuals should emphasize that mechanical damage is the major factor in providing pathways for infection of produce by microorganisms. The avoidance of mechanical injury should be an essential criterion in the design of harvesting and handling machinery. The importance of efficient marketing systems as a factor in the prevention of post-harvest losses particularly the less durable fruits and vegetables has also to be recognized' and such systems adapted to suit the requirements of efficient perishables' marketing.
8. There should be active encouragement of rigid sanitation and public health procedures of all produce handling and operation areas, sanitary operation of equipment, containers and stores, and sorting out and proper disposal of diseased and damaged units from the produce.
9. The relevant International Agricultural Research centres of the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research in collaboration with national and other international institutes should be encouraged to initiate or expand a co-ordinated programme of research to resolve outstanding problems related to post-harvest factors and storage behaviour of horticultural crops, e.g., root crops. Plant breeders in these institutions should consider long inherent storage life as an important criterion of selection in the breeding of fruits, vegetables, roots and tubers.
10. Research to develop small scale drying technology or other suitable appropriate technologies for transforming horticultural crops should be promoted. The use of these technologies should be promoted where their benefits have been clearly demonstrated.
11. Every country should be cautioned against the use of hazardous protective agricultural chemicals until the following actions have been accomplished:
a. analytical laboratories and inspection services have been established to monitor the proper use of pre- and post-harvest agricultural chemicals;
b. guidelines have been developed and are being applied to educate farmers and food handlers in the proper and safe use of hazardous compounds and safe disposal of empty containers;
Information should be available in each country as to which national and regional laboratories have the facilities to identify decay organisms.
12. A variety of types of training programmes in prevention of losses in horticultural crops should be initiated. These should be designed to suit the differing needs of the people in different parts of the harvesting and marketing chain. While most training should be provided within their own country exchanges with other countries may be beneficial in some cases. The transfer of existing good storage technology from national and international institutes to potential users should-receive priority in the programmes of these institutions.
13. The following publications should be prepared:
a. technical loss prevention manuals for commodities or groups of commodities;
b. a world-wide directory of institutions and training programmes involved with prevention of losses in perishable crops;
c. guidelines for loss assessment.
14. An international information network on food losses in horticultural crops should be established making as much use as possible of existing national and international programmes to facilitate technical go-operation between similarly oriented institutions. The information to be collated in a World Directory (13 b) should form the basis for establishing International and Regional co-operation in improvement of training at all levels.
<section>4</section>
I. Rationale and directions for reducing food losses in perishable crops
Securing an adequate food supply has been the fundamental concern of mankind over the millenia, and even in today's mode m world of great scientific and technological achievements, diets are inadequate for about five hundred million people. In the community of nations concern is increasingly focused on fulfilling the basic needs of all people, and the need for food is a dominant one. Without ensuring satisfactory diets, people cannot lead healthy and productive lives.
Agriculture, including fisheries, is the main if not the sole provider of food and the crucial question can be raised if and how far agriculture can respond to the rising demand for food in the gaming decennia.
A recent study (FAO) referring to 90 developing countries representing 98% of the population in the developing world (excluding China) reveals that the most striking share of increases in food demand will be caused by expanding world population. By the year 2000 fifty per cent more food will have to be available to meet present intake levels; yet additional food supplies will be needed by the end of the century to conquer famine and malnutrition. With respect to the material production inputs, which include land, water, minerals, organic substances, and energy, to meet these production targets, the availability of land will be the most limiting factor. Consequently, between 1980 and 2000 only twenty-eight per cent of the required additional crop production will be derived from area expansion and seventy-two will have to come from yield increases and more intensive cropping. This, in turn, will put more than proportional demands on water, fertilizer, pesticides, energy and
managerial skills.
These figures and trends may illustrate that the case to reduce postharvest losses, or preserving what has been produced with increasing efforts and costs, has became much stranger and will became more so in the future.
Attention to the concept of post-harvest food loss reduction as a significant means to increase food availability was drawn by the World Food Conference held in Rome in 1974. The 7th Special Session of the U.N. General Assembly in 1975 passed a Resolution calling for a 50 per cent reduction of post-harvest losses by 1985. This recognition of the potential value of post-harvest loss reduction has found practical expression in the continuing debate among a number of International Organizations and Institutions. As a result several initiatives at the international level have been taken with the special aim of making a concerted effort to reduce unnecessary losses at all the post-harvest stages of the food production process. In FAO, after consultation with its Governing bodies, food foes prevention became a priority area and an Action Programme became operational in early 1978. The United Nations Environment Programme supports and promotes ecologically sound and sustainable
development. Food loss reduction is an important activity in which UNEP has an interest, because this will increase the resource base as well as enhance the environment.
The FAO Action Programme so far has focused only on staple foods with particular emphasis on food grains, in order to make the greatest possible impact with limited resources. This should, however, not detract from other important foods where losses are known to exist in the post-harvest system. It was felt that a stage had been reached where a second large group of commodities, the perishable crops, which for reasons of their importance to human nutrition, their magnitude of production and their vulnerability to oilage have common characteristics and problems, should be investigated further.
To this end the United Nations Environment Programme and FAO organized an Expert Consultation on the subject. Preceding this meeting three Consultants with different background and geographical expertise visited major Centres of activities in this field and prepared three working documents.
For the Consultation itself another 15 Specialists from the various post-harvest disciplines and with a broad geographical coverage were invited. me 4-day meeting took place in May 1980 at FAO Headquarters in Rome. m e complete list of people attending, or having assisted in the preparation of this Consultation, is given on Pages xvii-xix. m e major task of the
Meeting was to discuss and complement the information prepared by the Consultants on the present status of the post-harvest food losses occurring in perishable crops and the opportunities and means to reduce these losses.
The conclusions reached by the meeting were:
1. Post-harvest loss in perishable crops constitutes an important issue that needs increased and continuing attention at national, regional and international levels by FAO, Governments and other concerned organizations because it requires fewer resources and applies less pressure to the environment in maintaining the quantity and quality of food than through increased production to offset post-harvest losses.
2. Traditional effective methods for preventing and reducing Postharvest losses need to be identified and exploited; this includes maintenance of continuous supply, storage for restricted periods, and transformation to durable products.
Some valuable traditional technologies for food Preservation are in danger of becoming lost because they are being superseded by more sophisticated methods of doubtful long-term value. Modern and technology-intensive methods should be applied appropriately according to prevailing conditions including cultural factors. Efficient and proper management of such technologies is as important as the types of equipment and facilities selected.
3. The entire food production and supply system needs to be addressed as a whole, because of the interrelationship between and amongst the different components of the system. A substantial amount of post-harvest losses have their origin in the pre-harvest stage, for example, genetic factors, infections, pest infestations, environmental factors and cultural practices during the production stage.
4. Most post-harvest losses in horticultural produce result from infection by fungi and bacteria (pre- or post-harvest), and from inherent physiological activity although insects, rodents, nematodes, and occasionally birds may cause significant losses under certain conditions Insects can disseminate some plant pathogens and also provide wounds as points of entry for microorganisms. In general, pre-harvest application of fungicides is more important in the control of post-harvest problems of fruit and vegetable crops than in root crops. Infections established prior to harvest are extremely difficult to control after harvest. Sanitation in all post-harvest operations is a key factor in eliminating sources of infection and reducing levels of contamination.
5. A distinction needs to be made between post-harvest losses incurred as a result of inadequate production planning (surpluses), speculation or excessive quality grading (mostly occurring in developed countries) and losses incurred due to lack of know-how, technology, or infrastructure (mostly occurring in developing countries) because the reduction of the different types of losses requires different approaches.
6. All food losses occur a particular socio-cultural and economic environment. Techniques to reduce food losses require cultural and economic adaptations. While physical aspects are clearly mast important, the subject must be considered within the wider framework of an approach whereby human as well as physical factors are taken into account.
7. Since losses are commodity and location specific, there is a need for specific activities, e.g., workshops, pilot projects, training courses, marketing studies, etc., in each country or region to address the priority problems of that area. Particular attention needs to be given to locally important commodities in each area. International assistance to developing countries in the field of post-harvest loss prevention needs to be geared to improve capability of the developing country to handle these programmes.
8. There is a need for an international information network to promote exchange of information on prevention of losses in perishable crops. Links between existing national and international institutions need to be strengthened. There is a need for a periodically annotated bibliography covering studies on post-harvest food losses in perishable commodities and for a world-wide directory of post-harvest technology centres and personnel.
9. There is a need to establish exchange programmes (technical co-operation between developing countries) between countries of similar needs and interests but which have an apparent difference in advancement in post-harvest handling systems.
10. Proper management of temperature and humidity of root crops and certain other perishables in the initial post-harvest period is essential to good curing which improves wound healing and minimizes infection by microorganisms.
11. Refrigeration is an important tool in the temperature management of perishables. It is desirable to remove field heat as soon as possible after harvest and to store at that temperature which will give the longest shelf-life. However, refrigeration technology should not be adopted as a panacea for all problems connected with deterioration associated with high temperature. Its introduction needs careful study, due consideration of its appropriateness and of the supporting infrastructure available within the post-harvest system, as well as the relation of refrigerated storage capacity to the collection, pre-cooling, transportation, marketing and distribution system. Special care may be needed when a complete "cold chain" cannot be maintained within this system, and where refrigerated storage would form an additional operation in post-harvest handling.
12. A key factor influencing the magnitude of post-harvest losses is the severity of mechanical damage to the crop during harvest and subsequent handling because it provides pathways for invasion by fungi and bacteria.
13. Intervention activities need to be particularly directed to those individuals involved in handling the commodity throughout the post-harvest system and consideration needs to be given to their level of understanding.
Any innovation to reduce post-harvest losses introduced to the private sector should be accompanied by a clear financial incentive.
In exploring new technologies, due attention needs to be paid to ensuring their acceptance by producers and market operatives, particularly if the adoption of a new technology would mean the displacement of labour or a particular class of labour (e.g., women).
14. In view of the very short post-harvest storage life of cassava, research work on fresh cassava should continue but priority should be placed on research related to its transformation into stable products. Gari and cassava flour are examples of such transformed products.
In the case of yam, parallel work is necessary on the fresh product as well as on the transformed forms but with major emphasis on storage of the fresh product.
Processing or transformation of perishable crops could form a rural agro-industrial operation and assist in retaining the added value of processing in rural areas.
15. Additional research effort is needed in some areas where basic knowledge is inadequate, for example, chilling damage to tropical fruits and vegetables, the causes of deterioration of cassava, dormancy of yams, post-harvest physiology and pathology of roots and tubers, genetic improvement techniques, biological nest control, the effect on storability of chemicals and cultural practices used during the growing period. This will require the training and employment of specialized post-harvest technologists concerned with perishable crops.
16. Based on presently available information, the use of post-harvest chemicals has not shown toxicological problems. But when they are used there is need to ensure that the dosages and residues conform with internationally recommended maximum levels, e.g., of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission.
17. The preparation of outlines on when, where and why losses occur in selected perishable food crops is desirable but it is recognized that preparing a full methodology for loss assessment on perishables of plant origin is a complicated and time-consuming task. Diagnostic studies using an interdisciplinary approach are needed to properly identify the area where losses occur within the post-harvest system of perishable food crops.
18. There are some important issues that lie outside the immediate scope of this Expert Consultation that warrant further attention, for example, preventing the possible carryover of excessive field pesticides into the postharvest system, agricultural chemicals that have been banned in the country of origin but nevertheless still exported, grades and quality standards for horticultural products, reduction of losses in household food preparation, and increased consideration of environmental aspects in post-harvest intervention activities related to cereals and other foods.
<section>5</section>
List of participants
of the FAO/UNEP Expert Consultation on the Reduction of Food Losses in Perishables of Plant Origin
FAO Headquarters, Rome
6-9 May 1980
CONSULTANTS
Professor Dr. Malcolm C. Bourne (Environmental Aspects)
Department of Food Science and Technology
New York State Agricultural Experiment Station
Cornell University
Geneva, New York 14456
U.S.A.
Mr. Patrick Haynes (Roots and Tubers)
48A Woodside
Wimbledon
London, S.W.19
U.K.
Er. B. Pantastico (Fruits and Vegetables)
Post-Harvest Training Research Centre
University of Philippines
Las Baños
College, Laguna
Philippines
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. M. Anquez (Refrigerated Storage)
Director
International Institute of Refrigeration
177 Boulevard Malesherbes
F 75017 Paris
France
Professor A. Kelman (Pests)
Department of Plant Pathology
University of Wisconsin
1630 Linden Drive
Madison
Wisconsin 53756
U.S.A.
Roots and Tubers
Dr. R.H. Booth
Centro Internaciónal de la Papa
Apartado 5969
Lima
Peru
Mr. D.G. Coursey
Assistant Director
Plant Food Commodities Department
Tropical Products Institute
56/62 Gray's Inn Road
London, WC1X 8LU
U.K.
Mr. Guillermo Gomez
Centro Internaciónal de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT)
Apartado Aereo
Cali
Colombia
Dr. O. Onayemi
Department of Food Sciences and Technology
University of IFE
ILE-IFE
Nigeria
Dr. O.T. Page
Centro Internaciónal de la Papa
Apartado 5969
Lima
Peru
Ir. A. Rastovsky
Research Officer
Institute for Storage and Processing of Agricultural Produce (IBVL)
P.O. Box 18
Wageningen
Netherlands
Mr. M.R. Villaneuva
Director
Philippine Root Crop Research & Training Centre
8 Lourdes Street
Pasay City
Philippines
Fruits and Vegetables
Mr. Jerry La Gra
Instituto Inter-Americano de Ciencias Agricolas
Calle Primera esq Fray Cipriano de Utrera
Centro de los Héroes
Santo Domingo
Dominican Republic
Dr. Adel A. Kader
Assoc. Prof. of Pomology
University of California
College of Agriculture
Davis
California 95616
U.S.A.
Dr. Suraphong Koslyachinda
Department of Horticulture
Kasetsart University
Bangkok 9
Thailand
Mr. M.F. Patwardhan
Project Coordinator, Fruits & Vegetable Technology
Central Food Technical Research Institute
Mysore 570013
India
Ms. Felicity Proctor
Tropical Products Institute
56/62 Gray's Inn Road
London, WC1X 8LU
U.K.
Dr. Nkere J. Usorch
Principal Research Officer
National Horticultural Research Institute
Idi-Ishin, Jericho Reservation
Area P.M.B. 5432
Ibadan
Nigeria
UNEP Staff
Mr. M. Nay Htun
Senior Programme Officer
Industry and Environment Office
UNEP
17 rue Margueritte
75017 Paris
France
FAO Staff
* Mr. E.J. Barker, AGSM (Marketing)
* Mr. W.H. Barreveld, AGSI (Technical Secretary)
* Mr. L. grader, AGP (Pests)
* Mr. J. Bunnell, AGSI (Fruits and Vegetables)
* Dr. T. Contado, ESH (Socio-econamic Aspects)
* Mr. F. Dévé, AGS/PFL (FAO Food Loss Prevention Programme)
* Mr. J.C. Faure, AGSI (Roots and Tubers)
* Mr. Willem L. de Haea, ESN (ACC Sub-Committee on Nutrition)
* Mr. H. Hajje, Project Manager (Near East Marketing Project)
* Mr. T.E. Jakubczyk, RAFR (Regional Agro-Industries Officer, Africa)
* Mr. M.F.S. Jamieson, RLAT (Regional PFL Officer, Santiago, Latin America)
* Mr. K.O. Herz, ESN (Food Control)
* Mr. A.A.C. Huysmans, AGS/PFL (Coordinator, FAO Food Loss Prevention Programme)
* Mr. R.K. Malik, ESN (Food Control)
* Mr. J.H. Manyo, AGDR (Research)
* Mr. F.J. Mouttapa, AGD (Environmental Aspects)
* Mr. M.S.O. Nicholas, AGSD (Director, Agricultural Services Division)
* Mr. H.A.B. Parpia, AGD (Research)
* Ms. B.M. Purvis, ESH (Socio-economic Aspects)
* Mr. J. Rawnsley, RAFR (Regional PFL Officer, Africa)
* Mr. H.R. Shuyler, AGP (Pests)
* Mr. H.M. Steppe, Field Officer (Marketing)
* Mr. Thet Zin, RAPA (Regional PFL Officer, Asia and Pacific)
<section>6</section>
II. Post-harvest losses in perishable crops
1. Introduction
1.1 The problem
"There is a war going on that began millions of years ago. Although the many generations of soldiers have not changed a great deal in appearance during this time, the tactics and weapons have grown more sophisticated. Each army has won a share of the battles, but the consummate victory has eluded both. Neither side can afford to give up' for nothing less than the sustenance of life is at stake. The war I refer to is, of course, the war between humankind and certain species of insects, weeds, pathogens, nematodes, rodents, and other peats that daily compete for our crops, gnaw at our dwellings, infest our domestic animals, or destroy our health" (Kuhr, 1979).
The above statement vividly describes the problem mankind has always had to preserve 0a food supply after he has produced it. The loss of foods in the post-harvest system is not new; it has always boon a problem for mankind. In these days of rapidly enlarging populations in the poorest countries whore food is already short, there is an increasing urgency to do a better job of conserving mankind 'e food supply in order to alleviate hunger and malnutrition. Some far-sighted individuals have been drawing attention to the problem of post-harvest losses for many years.
The United Nations General Assembly resolution of September 1975 focused world-wide attention on the problem of post-harvest food losses and called for concerted action to reduce these losses in the following words: "The further reduction of post-harvest food losses in developing countries should be undertaken as a matter of priority' with a view to reaching at least a 50% reduction by 1985. All countries and competent international organizations should co-operate financially and technically in the effort to achieve this objective".
As a result of this resolution a number of national and international donor agencies expanded existing programmes and initiated new programmes that were directed to the problem of reducing post-harvest losses. Most of those activities have been directed toward reducing losses in cereal grains, oilseeds and grain legumes.
A report prepared by the United States National Academy of Science in 1978 on the problem of post-harvest food loaves in developing countries pointed out the need for giving consideration to losses in food products other then the cereals, particularly roots and tubers, fruits and vegetables. Largely as a result of this report, the donor organizations are beginning to consider intervention programmes that can reduce losses in horticultural crops.
Post-harvest losses of fruit a and vegetables are more serious in devoloping oountries then those in well developed oountries. An additional constraint to improving this situation is that in moat developing countries the number of scientists concerned with post-harvest food losses is significantly lower than those involved in production research. In the early days of horticulture in wolf developed countries, heavy losses occurred in much the same manner as they do today in developing countries. Increasing industrialization in technologically advanced nations gradually brought about improvements in crop handling. Elaborate harvesting equipment replaced the crude harvesting tools. Collection centres were strategically established in major producing areas. Containers were remodelled to add more protection to the produce. Commercial storage plants were installed and grade standards adopted. Engineers and economists became more and more aware of raw material behaviour.
Concomitant advances in Refrigeration Technology in the developed countries have made possible establishment of cold chains for the entire post-harvest and handling operations. At the institutional level post-harvest research was initiated. Pilot packing houses were installed, coupled with the development of intensive training programmes. the improvement of product quality and reduction in post-harvest losses became the main concern of producers, middlemen, marketing specialists and consumers. Today, enormous volumes of quality horticultural crops produced in technologically advanced countries are made available to millions of people through improved post-harvest handling. Thus, historically and by necessity, post-harvest technology is part of the normal development processes in agriculture.
These handling procedures are not fully recognized in less developed countries. Here agriculture may be characterized as disjointed. Production is not linked with marketing. With perishable crops like fruits and vegetables, storage, packaging, transport and handling technologies are practically non-oxiatant, Hence, considerable amount a of, produce are loaf. Thus, as more fresh fruits and vegatables are needed to supply the growing population in less developed countries, as more produce is transported to non-producing areas, and as more commodities are stored longer to obtain a year-round supply, post-harvest lose prevention technology measures become paramount. It is distressing to note that so much time is being devoted to the culture of the plant, so much money spent on irrigation, fertilization and crop protection measures only to be wasted about a week after harvest. It is, therefore, important that post-harvest procedures be given as much attention as production
practices the stages from planting until the produ