<title>ADCP/REP/88/30 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
The regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in a group of eleven Middle East countries, namely Bahrain, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic, and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Each country has been selected as part of the survey because (i) it is active in the aquaculture sector, and (ii) it shares common aquaculture systems and practices with other countries in the group because of geography and environment.
Other Member Nations of the Near East Region of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), namely Afghanistan, Algeria, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey, either have no aquaculture activities at the present time, or they are linked better for aquaculture purposes to other regions and included in other surveys. For example, Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Syria, Turkey and Tunisia are included in the survey for the Mediterranean region. Pakistan is included in the West Asia survey, and Djibouti, Mauritania, Somalia, and Sudan in the Africa survey.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Patrick G. White in a relatively brief desk study. For many countries detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the first of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1988
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
This report covers a Middle East region which includes eleven countries bordering the Red Sea and the Gulf, but excluding those countries which border the Mediterranean and the African continent. The countries described by the survey are:
Bahrain
Iraq
Islamic Republic of Iran
Jordan
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates (UAE)
Yemen Arab Republic (YAR)
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic (PDRY)
Eight of the countries are grouped together on the Peninsula (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, YAR, and PDRY), and three on the Asian continent (Jordan, Iran, and Iraq).
Some countries are linked as members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) - Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE, and some as members of The Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) - Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.
The World Bank classifies Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE in the group of high-income oil exporting countries; Iran and Iraq as middle-income oil exporters; and Jordan, YAR, and PDRY as middle-income oil importers.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
One prime reason for aquaculture is to supply and offer a choice of low-cost animal protein to meet consumer demand. Within the Middle East region as described there is no real shortage of protein, with all countries having a combined feed supply of fish and meat of over 20 kg per caput/annum. Iraq and Iran with the largest populations in the area have the most pressing need to provide additional low cost protein.
A diet containing sufficient protein to maintain health is of primary importance. However, an increased per caput consumption of fish and shellfish in any region will benefit health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%), with an amino-acid profile similar to that of meat from land animals. The flesh of fish is therefore readily digestible and immediately utilizable by the human body. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a far higher percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage.
The flesh of aquatic animals is a source of minerals, such as calcium, iron and phosphorus, as well as trace elements and vitamins. Marine species are particularly rich in iodine. The fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates, and particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
Fish consumption in the region has some distinct characteristics. These are mainly due to the fishery resource and demography of the countries. The region can be defined as follows:
- coastal countries where fish is comparatively abundant and populations are mainly coastal (Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE, and PDRY) but whose populations are relatively small;
- countries with relatively large coastal and inland populations (Iran and Saudi Arabia);
- countries with larger inland populations and comparatively small fish resources (Iraq, Jordan, and YAR).
The supply of food products from livestock and fish is generally sufficient for the whole region. According to FAO Food Balance Sheets for 1985, the total annual food supply of meat and fish for human consumption per caput is:
- below 30 kg in 2 countries (Iran and YAR),
- over 30 kg and below 60 kg in 3 countries (Iran, Jordan, and PDRY),
- over 60 kg in 3 countries (Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE),
- data are insufficient for Bahrain, Oman, and Qatar.
The countries of Oman and PDRY have rich coastal marine fisheries resources and have populations living predominantly along the coast; on the other hand the countries of Jordan, Iraq, and Iran have the majority of their populations living inland and with relatively well developed agriculture.
Only in PDRY does consumption of fish exceed consumption of meat. In all other countries the consumption of fish is between 4 and 30% of the total food supply of meat and fish.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
Although the total fisheries catch for the region during 1982 to 1984 (average 444 333 t) was sufficient to cover the fish consumption (424 682 t), 28% of the fisheries catch was not utilized for human consumption and the majority was sun-dried for animal feed or fertilizer, or converted into fish meal. During the same period 138 240 t of fishery products were imported and only 33 513 t exported.
The annual consumption of fish and shellfish for the region averages 5.11 kg per caput per annum, which is less than half the average figure of 12.1 kg for world consumption.
The demographic characteristics of the countries are reflected in the annual fish consumption figures which vary considerably within the region. The data on the yearly supply of fish for human consumption per caput (from the FAO Provisional Food Balance Sheet of Fish and Fishery Products) during the years 1982-1984 are summarized in Table 1.
Fish consumption patterns changed significantly between 1980 and 1983 with an overall increase in annual fish consumption per caput and with over 3 kg increase registered in Oman, UAE, and PDRY. However, a decrease in consumption was registered in Bahrain, Iran, Kuwait, and YAR.
1.4 Gross market data
The total population of the region described was 83 184 000 in 1985. The individual populations of the countries range from Iran with over 40 million to Qatar with only 275 000. The UAE is a union of small independent states. The populations of the various countries are given in Table 1.
Due to the oil resources of the region some of the countries are comparatively rich. This wealth increased rapidly throughout the 1950s and 1960s as the price of oil and quantity of oil pumped increased; however, oil prices dropped during the 1970s which reduced GNPs. Since then many oil-producing countries have diversified into industrial production (Saudi Arabia) and investment (Kuwait).
The cumulated Gross National Product of the region in 1985 amounted to approximately US$ 281.31 billion (see Table 2).
Due to the comparatively low population of these countries they include some of the wealthiest in the world in terms of GNP per caput (see Table 2). In world ranking the UAE is the richest, with Kuwait fourth, Saudi Arabia sixteenth and Oman twenty-second among the wealthiest populations.
The relative wealth of some countries, together with a national commitment to build infrastructure (roads, airports, etc.) within the country and to diversify out of oil-based industries, has led to the immigration of large populations of temporary expatriate workers. This has influenced the statistics for population growth within the region, giving UAE, Saudi Arabia and Oman, for example, the highest population growth rates in the world.
The population growth rates for the countries during the years 1973 to 1985 are also given in Table 2.
The expatriate population of certain countries is quite substantial, particularly within the GCC countries, and is estimated to be between 15 and 20% of the total population of these six countries. Increased industrialization has resulted in the immigration of large numbers of non-Arab expatriate workers from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Philippines, and Arab expatriate workers from the Yemen, Egypt, and Lebanon. This has increased fish consumption figures and influenced consumer demand for non-indigenous fish species, such as tilapia, and introduced new fish preparation methods and new eating habits.
National and individual wealth has also influenced fish and shellfish consumption. In some countries it has increased the purchasing power for imported fish and fishery products, including luxury processed products.
The preference throughout these countries is generally for fresh fish. However, in recent years chilled and frozen fish have become widely accepted and are now sold through retail shops and supermarkets. Cured fish are also popular but mainly in remote areas. In Iraq smoked carp (masgoof) is popular and commands a high price, and generally freshwater fish are preferred and fetch higher prices than marine species. In Iran, a brackishwater cyprinid, kutum, commands the highest price, but salmon, trout, carp (common and Chinese), and sturgeon are also popular.
Fish species preference is to some extent based on traditional availability. In the countries bordering the Red Sea, rabbitfish, groupers, mullet, snappers, emperors, and shrimps are popular, whereas in countries bordering the Gulf, rabbitfish, pomfret, groupers, shrimp, and lobsters are popular, and command high prices (see Table 3).
1.5 Specific market data
In most of these eleven Middle East countries, with free markets and flexible price policies, fish are normally auctioned at the landing site at a wholesale or retail market. The price of fish is generally market driven depending on supply and demand.
In general, government participation in marketing operations is limited to the provision of markets, market facilities, and other related services, and the authorities rarely intervene in the daily pricing processes. There are exceptions, such as PDRY, where the Government controls most of the production, marketing, and pricing of fish. In Iraq the Government enforces fixed price arrangements in an effort to keep fish prices to the consumer as low as possible.
Traditionally most fish markets were sited near the fish landing areas but recently fish markets have been modernized or constructed next to other central markets in the larger inland cities. General economic development and urbanization has resulted in the construction of improved infrastructure facilities, including ice plants, cold stores, communication networks, refrigerated trucks and good roads to allow quick transportation of fish from landing areas to inland populations. Distribution of fish is also improving between neighbouring countries in the region with improved road links and comprehensive air freighting networks by airline companies.
Recently the respective government agencies responsible for fisheries (sometimes in joint venture with private investors) have set up fish marketing and retail companies, such as Bahrain Fishing Project, Saudi Fisheries Company, Oman National Fisheries Company, United Fisheries of Kuwait, Qatar National Fishing Company, and Iran Shilat Fish Marketing.
The Middle East region as described is a net importer of fish and fishery products (see Table 4). Data on interregional trade between countries are not reliable as records are not always kept. A large proportion of fish imported into member countries of the GCC is from Oman, while Kuwait re-exports a significant quantity.
Fish and fishery products imported into the region are fresh, chilled, and frozen. Among the many imports are a variety of shrimp, fish (such as pomfrets and mackerels), canned, cured, dried, or smoked fish (such as sardines, tuna, and mackerels), prepared and preserved Crustacea and molluscs, and other fishery delicacies, particularly caviar.
A major share of imports is from developing countries in South and Southeast Asia, South America, and Africa. Imports of frozen fish come from Korea, Thailand, Philippines, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Argentina, and from Arab countries, such as Morocco, Somalia, YAR, Egypt, PDRY, and Sudan.
The region also exports fish and fishery products, with shrimp, lobster, cuttlefish, squid, abalone, and caviar being some of the important items. The largest market for Arab fishery products is Japan, with exports of frozen shrimp from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, frozen lobster from Oman, frozen cuttlefish from PDRY, Oman, and UAE, frozen sea-bream and other fish from Oman, and dried or salted fish from PDRY. These exports alone are valued at over US$ 12.5 million. In addition Iran exports approximately 150 t/annum of caviar with a current value of US$ 20 million.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in the region is INFOSAMAK, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOSAMAK assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOSAMAK is based in Bahrain, and its working languages are English, Arabic, and French.
INFOSAMAK is one of four regional services (in Africa, Asia/Pacific, Latin America, in addition). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called Trade News, in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called INFOFISH International (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries including aquaculture with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called GLOBEFISH. This database stores original information collected by INFOSAMAK and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces Globefish Highlights, which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the Trade News (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Arab Federation of Fish Producers is based in Baghdad, Iraq, and was established to encourage fish production, development, and trade between Arab countries. It publishes a regular journal and some studies and reports. The United Fisheries of Kuwait and the Saudi Fisheries Company also publish promotional material such as posters and books of commercial fish species, recipes, etc.
The Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research produces technical reports on aquaculture and fisheries, some of which deal with fish consumption and marketing in Kuwait. A number of other marketing studies have been conducted for cultured species as part of feasibility studies for aquaculture ventures in Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
Eurofish Report is a fortnightly review (published in the United Kingdom) of European fisheries and world fishing news. In addition to items of current news in the industry, including aquaculture, it contains data of supplies and prices of commodities, including aquaculture products.
Many of the international markets relevant to the interests of the region are covered by Seafood Business (USA), Seafood International (UK), Seafood Leader (USA), and II Pesce (Italy). All these commercial publications are available through subscription and, in addition to prices and market trends, etc., often have relevant articles about aquaculture production worldwide.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The main project in the region supporting fish trade, identifying markets, etc., is INFOSAMAK. INFOSAMAK was established by UNDP/FAO to help 21 Arab countries. It has 13 active members of which six are in this region as described, namely, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, PDRY, and YAR.
INFOSAMAK was established in 1986 as a regional project and part of a worldwide fish marketing and promotion network (see 1.6), and provides guidance for such investments and production decisions, and identifies important opportunities in export-oriented fisheries and aquaculture. INFOSAMAK can, on request, provide specific advice with regard to handling and marketing of fish and aquaculture products.
Two other UNDP/FAO regional projects have covered the region but recently ended. A project on fisheries development in the Gulf involved Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE produced studies on stock assessment, fish marketing, and prospects for market development in the Gulf area. Nothing was directly specific to aquaculture products. The other project, for the Development of Fisheries in Areas of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden covered the bordering countries including Jordan, Saudi Arabia, YAR, and PDRY from the region; Djibouti, Egypt, and Sudan were the other participating members. This project conducted socio-economic and research related studies for Jordan, YAR, and PDRY, and included aquaculture components.
<section>4</section>
2. AQUACULTURE PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
In the region there is historical evidence of traditional small-scale aquaculture activity based mainly on freshwater pond culture. Old earth fish ponds have been located in Jordan, Iraq, Iran, and PDRY, but in most cases the practices were limited to holding fish or ongrowing wild-caught fry.
In 1965 the Fisheries Departments in Jordan and Iraq started pilot-scale fish farms to test culture systems and suitable species. In 1972 the Government of Iran established a fish hatchery based on technology from USSR and started a sturgeon restocking programme. Small-scale trials on shrimp culture were started in Bahrain with assistance from the Overseas Development Administration (UK) in 1973, in Kuwait in 1975 at KISR with the assistance of Japanese technology and technicians, and in PDRY in 1978 with assistance from Nichiro Gyogyo, Japan. Small-scale trials on tilapia culture were conducted in Saudi Arabia in 1979, and on rabbitfish and mullet in UAE in 1981. However, it was not until the late 1970s and early 1980s that large-scale aquaculture development took place in the region.
The rate of development has, to some extent, been constrained by the geography of the area which is not particularly suitable for aquaculture. In countries such as Iran and Iraq, where there are comparatively large freshwater resources, large-scale freshwater fish culture has developed; both these countries also carry out large-scale restocking programmes for their lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and open waters. In Jordan and Saudi Arabia, where freshwater resources are limited, development has been slower.
Development has also been constrained by technical ability and resources. Good associated research programmes exist in Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE with experimental and pilot production of fish and shrimp in intensive systems. Some aquaculture capabilities exist in Qatar and PDRY but there is no known aquaculture research taking place in YAR.
Development of aquaculture is also dependent on the suitability of the coastal areas and length of coastline. Countries with over 500 km of coastline bordering the Red Sea or Gulf (Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE) are particularly suited for marine development. In both the Red Sea and Gulf there are shallow lagoons protected by coral reefs which are appropriate for cage and pen/enclosure culture. Low lying coastal areas are also suitable for pond and tank culture and in the oil-producing countries, where electricity, energy and oil are relatively cheap, allowing pumped water systems to be profitable.
A summary of the typical geographic resources of the countries in the region for types of aquaculture may be summarized as follows:
Length of coastline
(km)
Land area
(km^2)
Inland waters
(km^2)
Bahrain
negligible
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
N. A.
Kuwait
negligible
Oman
negligible
Qatar
negligible
Saudi Arabia
UAE
negligible
YAR
negligible
PDRY
negligible
N. A. Figures not available
* Dams and rivers
** Rivers, lakes, reservoirs and deep marshes
In addition, the waters of both the Red Sea and Gulf are hypersaline (35-40 ppt), which is an additional constraint as this limits the number of species available for culture.
2.2 Regional production data
The FAO Fishery Statistics Unit has only received aquaculture production data from two countries in the region, Iran (in 1984, 1985, and 1986) and Saudi Arabia (in 1986). Other data have been collected from official government sources (Iraq), from reports of visiting consultants (Jordan, UAE, PDRY), published articles (Bahrain, Iran, Oman, Kuwait); there is no known aquaculture activity in Qatar and YAR.
The best estimate of annual aquaculture production in the region is approximately 14 989 t during the period 1986/7 (see Table 5). The largest proportion of this came from Iran with approximately 10 000 t, and Iraq with 4 564 t. Small quantities were cultured in Jordan with an estimated 70 t, Saudi Arabia with 36 t, and UAE with 14 t. A detailed breakdown of the species presently cultured commercially, produced on a pilot-scale or experimental production, or under research is given in Table 6. Common carp is cultured in the largest quantities with an estimated 13 584 t in 1986, followed by trout with 1 000 t, and tilapia with 83 t. A number of other species are cultured but in lesser quantities.
Iran and Iraq produce large numbers of fish fingerlings for restocking which contribute greatly to the inland fisheries catch, but the exact proportion of catch attributable to hatchery seed is difficult to assess. The 1986 FAO fisheries statistics quote the inland fisheries finfish production for Iran to be 30 294 t, and for Iraq to be 15 564 t.
In Iran the estimated present annual production of freshwater fish from aquaculture is 10 000 t, consisting mainly of common carp, but also some Chinese carps (bighead, silver and grass), and approximately 1 000 t of trout. Large numbers of kutum (Rutilus frisii kutum), Chinese carps (Cyprinid spp.), sturgeon (five Acipenser spp.) and Caspian salmon (Salmo trutta caspius) are released annually into rivers, lakes, reservoirs, and open waters and contribute to the inland fisheries catch. This is also the case for sturgeon; over 2 million fingerlings are released annually and contribute to the average sturgeon catch of 1 774 t (1980-85). This fishery produces approximately 250 t of caviar annually, of which about 150 t is exported with a value of US$ 20 million.
In Iraq there has been a gradual increase in aquaculture production from an estimated 3800 t in 1983, 4000 t in 1984, 4 476 t in 1985, rising to 4 564 t in 1986. This production is predominantly common carp. Recent changes in government policy toward aquaculture are encouraging the rapid development of fish farming. A large number of fingerlings are produced by hatcheries for restocking. These consist mainly of silver and grass carps (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix and Ctenopharyngodon idella); the grass carps are stocked in irrigation and drainage ditches. There is also a small number of indigenous fish cultured to restore the inland fishery in certain areas. This contributes to an estimated 16 000 t inland fisheries catch in 1985.
For Jordan there are no official statistics but estimates indicate that approximately 20 t of carp (Cyprinus carpio) and 50 t of tilapia (the hybridized red strain) were produced in 1987.
In Saudi Arabia statistics show a national production of 36 t for 1986, comprising 34 t of Cilapia (Oreochromis niloticus and O. spiluris), 1.6 t of rabbitfish (Siganus rivulatus) and 100 kg of penaeid shrimp (Penaeus monodon). This production rapidly increased during 1987 due to the establishment of many new commercial farms for tilapia, and the estimated production in 1987 was 330 t.
In Oman the only existing commercial aquaculture farm was established at Sur in 1984. The first production of shrimp (P. monodon) was approximately 100 kg in 1986, but the future of the farm is uncertain.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
A summary of production systems and practices of the major farmed species is given in Table 6.
The majority of fish cultured within the region are farmed semi-intensively in earthen ponds and concrete raceways. In Saudi Arabia and Oman ponds are lined with impervious material to prevent seepage. Average annual harvest rate from earth-pond culture in the region is 2.2 t/ha.
In Iran there are estimated to be 4 000 ha of carp fish ponds in operation with annual production rates of 2 to 3 t/ha, and 60 ha of trout ponds and raceways producing 1 000 t/year. In addition to this Shilat, (the National Fisheries and Fish Culture Section of the Department of Fisheries), is stocking 300 000 ha of rivers, lakes, and reservoirs with hatchery reared fish. The aim of the Government is to increase the productivity of the fish ponds as well as increase the total pond area to 35 000 ha within the next 10 years, giving a projected annual harvest of 100 000 t/year.
In Iraq there are 2 625 ha of fish ponds with an approximate annual production of 2 t/ha, giving 4 564 t of carp production in 1986. In 1985 a production of 33 t was recorded from cages moored in a freshwater reservoir. Both the State Board of Fisheries, part of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, and the Iskandaria Agricultural Company, a private company, are promoting the development of small-scale fish farming in Iraq, particularly among individual farmers.
In Jordan carp culture primarily takes place in earthen ponds and tilapia culture in concrete tanks. In Saudi Arabia the majority of the tilapia production is integrated with agriculture. Fresh water is pumped from ground water, by deep borehole pumps, into ponds in which tilapia is cultured. The fertilized effluent water from these ponds is then used to irrigate crops of wheat, barley, or alfalfa. There is also intensive pilot-scale production of tilapia and rabbitfish in saltwater in cages, pens (enclosures), and fibreglass tanks.
There are small quantities of shrimp cultured in saltwater ponds in Oman and Saudi Arabia.
In the GCC countries many different aquaculture technologies have been brought in, either by private companies employing foreign consultants or developed by national research stations. These include water recirculation systems (from UK and Germany), hatchery production of marine fish and shrimp (from Europe, Japan, and Taiwan), open-sea cage systems (from Japan), pen culture systems (from the Philippines and Ivory Coast), etc. A more detailed list is given in Table 7.
2.4 Producers in the region
There are estimated to be approximately 1 300 fish farms in the region. These range from small owner-operated subsistence farms in Iraq to farms such as Sefid Rud in Iran which has appoximately 1 000 ha of ponds.
In Iran 459 licences for fish farms had been granted by 1987 of which 86 farms were operational, 57 were under construction, and 316 planned with licences granted. The average production of the farms is about 116 t each year. The majority of production comes from farms in the north within the Caspian Sea Basin (Glan and Mazandaran Provinces), with smaller additional production from the south (Khuzestan Province).
In Iraq the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture has granted 1 173 licences to set up fish farms in the country. The average size of the farms is comparatively small (about 1-3 ha). These farms are all located within the Tigris and Euphrates river basins.
There are a number of commercial fish farms in Jordan and Saudi Arabia which are of a relatively large size. In Saudi Arabia the farms have planned production capacity of around 200 t per annum or more, with many new farms being initiated.
In UAE and Oman there is at present only one fish farm in each country. In UAE pilot-scale production of tilapia takes place in both marine cages and tanks and freshwater ponds; there is a commercial farm culturing marine shrimp in plastic lined ponds.
2.5 Organizations of producers
There is the Arab Federation of Fish Producers based in Baghdad, Iraq, but this organization is primarily involved in fish production by fisheries. It has produced a number of reports in Arabic dealing with subjects such as storage and refrigeration, marketing of fish and fisheries products, and the manufacture of nets.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
In Iran and Iraq there is strong governmental support for the development of fish farming with governmental investment in hatcheries for supplying fry for farmers and for restocking purposes, and also in governmental fish farms for production and demonstration.
In Iran there are two main organizations directing the development of aquaculture. The Shilat, which operate