<title>Forestry and food security</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This report summarizes the current state of understanding regarding the links between forestry and food security. It is the result of a series of investigations begun in 1985 in response to the widely felt concern that excessive deforestation is threatening not only the soil and water base essential for continued food production, but also the present and future availability of the many forest plants and animals that are sources of food.
In April 1985, the 10th Session of the FAO Committee on World Food Security considered a preliminary study of the role of forestry in promoting food security and called for further exploration. During 1986 and 1987, the matter was discussed by the Committee on Forestry and three of the FAO Regional Forestry Commissions; these bodies recommended that an FAO Expert Consultation be convened.
The resulting Consultation, held in Banglore in February 1988 at the invitation of the Government of India, brought together 57 experts from 27 countries and organizations. The scope of the Consultation included all forestry-related activities that have a direct or indirect impact on food production and food security at the local level. Particular attention was paid to the links between social, economic, technical, environmental and institutional issues. Emphasis was also placed on questions of equity, and especially to food security of the poor and other vulnerable groups.
To provide background for the Consultation, a series of papers were commissioned on various aspects of forestry and food security. The present report is a synthesis of the background material and the conclusions and recommendations of the Expert Consultation. The report also points to a number of important areas where information is still lacking, or where differences of view still exist. It is hoped, therefore, that this document will encourage the design of policies and programmes which reflect more fully the impact of the linkages between forestry and food security. At the same time it should stimulate further research aimed at closing the gaps in our understanding.
This publication was funded with inputs from the FAO/SIDA Forests,Trees and People Programme.
C.H.Murray
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1: Overview
1.1 Introduction: The concept of food security
1.2 Putting forestry in perspective
1.3 The links between forestry and food security
1.4 Opportunities for action
1.5 Setting the policy framework: new goals and approaches
1.1 Introduction: The concept of food security
Food security is a fundamental problem facing the world today. Despite substantial increases in food production in many countries, over 800 million people still suffer from malnutrition. According to FAO figures, approximately 20 million people are dying of starvation or related diseases each year. It is estimated that by the year 2000 up to 70 countries, including 49 in Africa, will not be able to feed themselves unless urgent action is taken.
Food security has been defined by the Committee on World Food Security as the "economic and physical access to food, of all people, at all times." The concept recognises that the nutritional well-being of people depends not just on food production; if that were the case then no-one would go hungry, since total food production is more than enough to feed the world's population. Food security is also crucially dependent on the reliability of production and on people's access to supplies. It thereby encompasses questions both of sustainability and equity.
For many foresters the issue of food security may seem to be a concern which goes far beyond the domain of their profession. And yet, in many rural areas forests and farm trees provide critical support to agricultural production (e.g. maintaining and improving soil conditions, and maintaining hydrological systems), they provide food, fodder and fuel, and they provide a means of earning cash income. Thus, both directly and indirectly forestry activities may have an impact on people's food security.
Within the community of forestry professionals, food security has emerged in the last few years as a new focus for forestry development and planning. While it is recognized that forests contribute to food security in many ways, these links have seldom been studied in depth and there have been few attempts to assess their significance. At the policy and planning level, very little has been done to incorporate food security as a specific objective in forestry strategies and programmes.
This report is the result of an Expert Consultation on forestry and food security sponsored by the FAO Forestry Department (held in India in 1988). It illuminates some of the links between forestry and food security, and shows how forestry activities can and do have an impact on food security. In this report forestry is defined in a broad sense to include management and use of trees and shrubs on farms and grazing areas, as well as within established forest reserves. Drawing on many different sources, it pieces together a picture of the complex interactions between people, trees, forests, agriculture and food production. It looks at negative as well as positive effects of forestry activities, and it aims to distinguish links between forestry and food security that are well proven from those that are still speculative or disputed. Going beyond this, the report also sets out some initial ideas about how forestry policies and programmes can be directed to improving food
security, especially for the poor.
The picture this report presents is in no way complete; there are important information gaps and many of the examples come from isolated reports that may not be representative. The conclusions reached should therefore be treated as preliminary. They do, however, provide a basis for further investigation, and are intended as a stimulus for the more detailed consideration of individual cases.
1.2 Putting forestry in perspective
The part played by forestry in food security must be kept in perspective. Forests are just one element within the complex fabric of rural life, and food security depends on a whole range of factors quite apart from forests and forestry activities.
It is clearly wrong, for example, to suggest that forestry can replace agriculture as a food production system to any significant extent. It must also be recognized that forestry initiatives, by themselves, cannot remove the underlying pressures caused by population growth. Neither can they fundamentally alter the social, economic and political factors that create inequalities, and separate the rich from the poor; the hungry from the well-fed.
The premise of this report, however, is that forests and trees do have an important role to play in food security. It is a role that has been ignored in the past, and is currently being eroded as forests in many parts of the world are cleared and the remaining trees on farmland come under increasing pressure. These trends are undermining existing agricultural systems and jeopardising their long-term productivity.
But these trends are not irreversible. Through better management of forests, and by supporting tree growing on farms, the contribution of forestry to food security can be both strengthened and enhanced. Forestry initiatives have the potential for providing a range of benefits - augmenting food production, increasing the sustainability of food supplies, and improving access to food for the landless and poor by providing subsistence products, income and employment.
Putting forestry in perspective
1.3 The links between forestry and food security
1.3.1 Environmental links
1.3.2 Production links
1.3.3 Socio-economic links
Figure 1.1 highlights some of the important links between forestry and food security and suggests some of the ways forest products and environmental benefits, as well as forestry activities, can have an impact on household food security and individual nutritional well-being. The boxes on the far left represent forest products and benefits on which forestry projects often focus (e.g. shelterbelts and fuelwood production). Moving to the right, the linkages between forestry outputs and household food status are illustrated.
It is clear that many links between forestry and food security are inter-related. To simplify the discussion, however, they can be divided into three main groups: environmental, production, and socio-economic factors.
1.3.1 Environmental links
Trees and forests influence both their immediate surroundings and the stability of the larger environment, and as a result have several important links to food security. Both at the micro and the macro-level, they help provide the stable environmental conditions on which sustainable food production depends. For many communities in tropical regions forests provide the only means for restoring soil productivity (through systems of forest fallowing). Forest areas also represent the single largest storehouse of genetic diversity, a resource of great importance to future agricultural production.
The effects of trees are most easily seen at the farm level, where they can play an important role in improving the microclimate, reducing the damage caused by wind, protecting against soil erosion, and restoring soil productivity. At the watershed level, forests can reduce sedimentation and improve water quality; they may also have an effect on water availability downstream, and may assist to some extent in reducing the incidence of floods. All of these factors have a major influence on downstream agriculture. At a regional and global level, forests may also affect climate and rainfall patterns - although the detailed interactions are controversial and still only partly understood.
1.3.2 Production links
The most direct connection between forestry and food security is the food items produced by trees. Fruits, nuts, leaves, roots and gums are just some of the huge array of edible foods that are obtained from trees and shrubs, either growing naturally in the wild or cultivated on farms and around the home. Forests also provide a habitat for many animals, birds, insects and other forms of wildlife that are hunted and consumed, often as delicacies. While these forest foods rarely provide staples, they do provide important supplements as well as seasonal and emergency substitutes when food supplies dwindle.
Figure 1.1 The links between forestry and household food security
In addition, forests can have an important indirect influence on food production. By maintaining and improving soil fertility, trees grown on farms can help sustain crop yields. In pastoral production systems, trees and shrubs provide an essential source of livestock fodder, especially during the dry season. And in mangrove areas, the forests are a habitat and breeding ground for many fish, crustacea and other marine animals that support coastal and off-shore fisheries.
1.3.3 Socio-economic links
Food security is fundamentally a social issue. The socioeconomic links between forestry and food security are those that link the products and "services" of forests to the people who depend on them. From the point of view of individual households, forests may affect their food security in several ways. Foods obtained from trees and forests make an important direct contribution to family diets, providing a tasty and nutritious supplement to otherwise bland staple foods. Although the quantities involved may be small, their nutritional contribution is often critical, especially at certain times of the year, and during droughts or other emergency periods when cultivated foods are unavailable.
Even more important for many families is the fact that forests provide a source of income and employment. Millions of rural people depend on money earned from gathering, processing and selling forest products to buy food and other basic necessities. For the poor, and also for women, these are often one of their only sources of cash income. Trees grown on the farm are also used as savings, that can be harvested and sold to meet large or emergency cash needs.
1.4 Opportunities for action
There is much that can be done by foresters to enhance household food security. Some of the most obvious opportunities for action include:
* directing forest management objectives to people's food security needs;
* broadening the range of products produced by forests food and other items - and improving their supply to local people through new management approaches and access arrangements;
* encouraging tree growing on farms using species and management approaches that complement crop and livestock production, help protect the environment, provide income to farmers, and assist them to spread risks;
* supporting small-scale forest-based enterprises by ensuring a sustainable supply of input materials, providing managerial and technological assistance, and improving access to credit;
* providing market support to help rural people get a better price for the forest products they sell, and secure a more sustainable livelihood.
While a number of promising approaches of this kind can be identified, experience in putting them into practice is still limited. Local circumstances will inevitably play a big part in determining their relevance and a great deal will depend on local people's needs, available resources and careful planning.
1.5 Setting the policy framework new goals and approaches
Forests and farm trees contribute to food security in many rural regions throughout the world. In order to strengthen and develop these contributions, forestry programmes and foresters need to review the goals and devise new approaches for their activities. Existing institutional structures, and the traditional focus of forestry training, research and extension work, are not at all well matched to the task of addressing food security objectives.
Support at the policy level is a prerequisite for change. This means reorganising the specific role of existing forests and of trees in the food security of rural people and their effectiveness in sustaining land-use and food production systems. It will also require support for staff, resources and training. Addressing problems of food security will require a shift in emphasis away from traditional goals of production and protection forestry to gearing forestry activities to meet local people's needs.
It could mean, for example, upgrading of the status of so-called 'minor forest products' to recognise the extremely important contribution they already make to local incomes and livelihoods, and to exploit the potential for enhancing their production and use. It will involve exploring new approaches to forest management which address issues of access and control of forest resources and which acknowledge the rights of local people to benefit from the forests.
Clearly this will involve putting a lot more effort into understanding local circumstances, and the problems - food security being just one of them - that people face, especially those who are poor. To this end forestry planners will need to build from the considerable traditional knowledge of forest resources that exists in many communities and on methods of managing their local environment.
New types of training will be required for forestry professionals and extension workers to broaden their outlook, and provide them with the skills needed to work more closely with local people. There is a need to bring in other professionals such as nutritionists and social-scientists. Special emphasis must be placed on incorporating the needs and perspectives of women in the planning and implementation of projects.
Much can be gained if forestry services can collaborate more effectively with agriculture departments, and agencies involved in fisheries, livestock and other related professions. Food security crosses over conventional sectoral boundaries and can only be tackled effectively through cooperative endeavours.
More fundamentally, the social, economic and political factors that create and maintain inequalities, and lie behind poverty and hunger, must be recognized. Forestry initiatives cannot change these realities. Even so, there is much that can be done to channel benefits towards poor and disadvantaged groups, provided their needs are properly identified and the necessary commitment exists.
There are many challenges to be faced if forestry is to contribute more effectively to food security. However, there are solid grounds for optimism: forestry philosophy and practice have changed radically over the last two decades, moving away from a narrow traditional view to broader and more people-oriented goals. Incorporating food security concerns can be seen as the logical next step in making forestry more responsive to people's needs, and more relevant to the development process.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2: Environmental links between forestry and food security
2.1 Trees and the microclimate
2.2 Windbreaks, soil erosion and food crop yields
2.3 Tree's role in preventing water erosion
2.4 Protection afforded by forests in critical or hazardous areas
2.5 Forests and water supply
2.6 Forests, sediment and water quality
2.7 Forests and the global climate
2.8 Forests, rainmakers?
2.9 Forests and genetic resources
Sustainable food production depends on a favourable and stable environment. At a local, as well as a regional and global level, trees and forests may have a profound influence on the environment. By protecting the soil from erosion, and stabilising hillsides, exposed coastlines and other fragile areas, they can help preserve the integrity of agricultural land. They may also affect climate and water regimes, both of which are crucial to agriculture.
In some cases the environmental benefits that trees provide are clearly visible. The damage caused by erosion is unmistakable, for example, when steep slopes are cleared of forest. Other environmental influences are much harder to measure. Particularly at the regional and global level it is often difficult to isolate the effects of trees from other factors. A number of controversies remain, and not all of the popular beliefs about the benefits of trees can be backed up by scientific evidence. Care is therefore needed when considering the environmental links between forestry and food security. It is important to distinguish effects that can be clearly demonstrated and relied upon from those that are still speculative, and may depend heavily on local conditions.
Environmental links between forestry and food security
2.1 Trees and the microclimate
2.1.1 Temperature and humidity
2.1.2 Shade
2.1.3 Moisture availability
Interactions between trees and food production are most apparent at the micro-level. Trees, for example, when planted within agricultural areas, have been shown to have a variety of effects on the local microclimate influencing temperature and humidity, moisture availability, and light conditions.
2.1.1 Temperature and humidity
Tree cover can have a considerable influence in moderating air and soil temperatures, and increasing relative humidity (Lal and Cummings, 1979). Both these effects are generally beneficial to crop growth, a fact that is made use of in many agroforestry systems (Weber and Hoskins, 1983; Vergara and Briones, 1987).
The extent to which these benefits are realised in practice depends on the number of trees involved. An isolated tree planted on farmland can only be expected to have a minor and localised effect. The more the system resembles a closed forest in its canopy structure and tree spacing, the greater the beneficial effect on humidity and temperature.
2.1.2 Shade
The shade cast from trees can have both negative and positive effects. Shade on crops or pasture reduces their photosynthetic activity and beyond a certain point will affect growth rates. Under prolonged and complete shade most annuals and shade-intolerant perennials will die. However, because trees alter temperature and humidity as well, these factors may more than compensate for the reduction in light.
Shade
In some cases therefore, varying amounts of shade may benefit different crops. Some types of coffee, for example, are deliberately grown under partial shade. Grevillia robusta has traditionally been used for this purpose in parts of Latin America. A Spanish name for Gliricidia septum, "madre de cacao" (mother of cacao), indicates its widespread use as shade for cacao plantations. In Sri Lanka, different tree species are used together; some of the best-managed tea estates have a tall shading of either Albizia lebbek or Grevillia robusta, and an intermediate canopy of Gliricidia septum or Erythrina sp.
Shade may also be very desirable in animal husbandry, particularly in hot climates (Daly, 1984). Though shade will tend to reduce forage production under trees, this is compensated by the protection a tree affords to animals and humans against the hot midday sun. Even single trees are prized in desert or semi-arid situations, such as in the Sahelian and Sudanian zones in Africa, where "every tree is an oasis" (Gorse, 1985).
In this connection, the African species Acacia albida has the unusual feature of being leafless in the rainy season so that there is no shading on crops cultivated beneath it, but full-canopied during the hot, dry season, providing important shade for livestock (Weber and Hoskins, 1983). Manure accumulates where the animals rest, and results in increased fertility not only for the tree, but for crops planted near it (Bonkoungou, 1985).
The overall benefits of shade are not always clear cut. In large intensively-managed monoculture systems shade may prove to be a disadvantage, whereas for less intensive systems, on smallholder properties and on less productive soils shade may provide many advantages (Beer, 1987). Site specific factors are crucial. The benefits of shade depend on the local climate and soils, as well as the particular species involved. For an individual farmer, management requirements of the trees themselves and the marketability of tree products are also important factors.
The trade-offs a farmer has to make in choosing the optimum shade cover are shown clearly in a study in North-east Thailand, where trees are a common feature in most rice paddy fields. The shade they provide was found to be the primary reason for retaining trees on farmland. During the hot, dry season, livestock spend much of their time resting in their shade and grazing in or near shade. Farmers were well aware of the negative effects of too much shade on rice (faster and taller growth - which makes it susceptible to lodging combined with fewer tillers, less grain and less filled grain). But they felt that the benefits outweighed these costs and controlled shade in many cases by lopping the trees. The species Phyllanthus polythyllus was particularly valued because its sparse foliage does not create too much shade. Its roots help stabilise the crumbly bunds and its branches can be used for bean poles, fences, fuelwood and charcoal (Grandstaff et al 1986).
2.1.3 Moisture availability
Trees influence the availability of soil moisture in their immediate vicinity. The interception of precipitation by tree foliage influences the amount of moisture reaching the soil. Under a densely crowned tree little or no precipitation may reach the ground in a short, light shower. Only when the tree canopy is fully wetted will most of the precipitation reach the ground. In addition, a tree influences the distribution of moisture reaching the ground. It may come as throughfall (raindrops falling between the leaves), leaf drip or stemflow. The exact pattern depends on the shape of the tree. Understorey plants may find places where stemflow or crowndrip concentrate moisture creating an especially hospitable micro-environment.
Some water is lost through evaporation from the tree canopy. In humid areas, evaporation losses from tree canopies can account for 10 to 30 percent of gross annual rainfall (Vis, 1986). Although a certain amount of evaporation will occur from any surface where water is temporarily held, losses from tree foliage are usually greater than from soil litter or close-to-ground plants, primarily a result of canopy roughness and height (Hamilton and Pearce, 1986).
Uptake of water by tree roots can also have a significant effect on local moisture availability. The impact on crop yields, however, will depend on the extent to which water stress limits crop growth. The drier the environment, the more this is likely to be a problem. The impact will also vary between different species; trees with horizontal surface roots will compete with crops to a much greater extent than deep-rooted species.
2.2 Windbreaks, soil erosion and food crop yields
2.2.1 Trees: barriers against erosion
2.2.2 Other benefits of windbreaks
2.2.3 Effects of windbreaks on crop yields
One of the most widely-recognised benefits of trees on their immediate environment is their ability to reduce wind speeds. Farmers in many parts of the world use windbreaks - or more elaborate multi-species shelterbelts - to protect crops, water sources, soils and settlements. In addition, windbreaks are essential first steps for sand dune stabilization.
There are numerous examples that can be quoted. Tall rows of Casuarina line thousands of canals and irrigated fields in Egypt. In Chad and Niger multi-species shelterbelts protect wide expanses of crop land from desertification. In China, there has been a massive programme in recent years to establish 'forest nets' throughout the exposed central plains region. These consist of a grid of windbreaks, each 'net' enclosing between 4 and 26 hectares of farmland, depending on the severity of the wind problem. Paulownia sp. has been the main species used, because of its deep roots and relatively light shading.
2.2.1 Trees: barriers against erosion
Reducing windspeeds helps substantially in preventing wind erosion, and the damage it causes (Chepil, 1945). This includes both damage due to the loss of nutrient-rich topsoil, and damage, as a result of physical injury to crops and livestock, or the partial burial of fields. Soils are most susceptible to wind erosion when they are dry and tare. Thus, overgrazing or any cropping activity that removes plant cover makes soils more vulnerable to wind erosion. The hazard increases with the length of time the soil surface is bare and with the degree of soil dryness.
A well-developed windbreak or shelterbelt can have a considerable influence in reducing wind velocity at the soil surface. Where the barrier is at right angles to the wind direction, this effect has been found to extend up to 5-10 times the height of the barrier to the windward side, and 30 to 35 times the height to the leeward, or down-wind side. Small reductions in wind speed can have a significant impact on soil erosion, in part because the drying rate of the soils is reduced after rain storms.
A windbreak using a mix of species provides an efficient semi-permeable barrier to wind over its full height. This produces a diverse shape to the windbreak as well as ensuring a long life of the windbreak (by mixing species with varied growth rates). In addition, a mixture of species provides risk protection against unexpected attack from diseases or insects that could destroy single species stands. Trees scattered throughout the fields such as the Acacia albida parkland savanna of West Africa can have the effect of breaking up wind patterns resulting in impacts similar to more formal windbreaks and shelterbelts.
2.2.2 Other benefits of windbreaks
As well as reducing wind erosion, windbreaks and shelterbelts can benefit agriculture in a variety of other ways:
* windbreaks and shelterbelts help prevent mechanical damage caused by high winds (Guyot, 1986). Winds in excess of 8 metres per second, for example, can break off twigs and small limbs in orchard crops. Such losses of photosynthetic surface reduce production, and can adversely affect flowering and fruiting the following year. Flowers on crops are particularly susceptible to high winds, and fruits may also be damaged or dislodged. With cereal crops, stem breakage or flattening (lodging) is an increasing hazard as the crop matures;
* shelter provided by windbreaks helps reduce the rate of water loss from crops through evapotranspiration; this can extend to as much as 30 times the height of the tree barrier (Konstantinov and Struzer, 1965);
* reductions in wind velocity can prevent adverse physiological changes in crops - such as the reductions in leaf area and photosynthetic rate that are characteristic of some crops when exposed to high winds (Whitehead, 1965);
* trees and shelterbelts protect livestock, particularly young animals, against the damaging effects of both cold and hot winds;
* windbreaks provide an essential element for dune stabilization;
* trees planted along coastlines can protect crops from salt spray and thus allow farming to be extended closer to the shore. The trees selected for such "salt-breaks" must have some degree of salt tolerance, for they will concentrate salt under their crowns. Species that have been used successfully include Casuarina equisetifolia, Casuarina glauca, Pinus pinaster, Pinus radiata and Cupressus macrocarpa;
* windbreaks can reduce evaporative losses from ponds, irrigation canals and other water bodies, thus making more water available to food production;
* by reducing wind velocities windbreaks can help improve insect pollination of crops. This is particularly important in fruit orchards (Caborn 1965). Beekeepers also find wind protection for their hives to be desirable in areas with strong, cold or hot winds;
* windbreaks may benefit crop yields by reducing the incidence and severity of pest damage. Studies of the Colorado beetle, for instance, showed large reductions in populations of eggs and larvae near to windbreaks, and higher predator densities closer to the trees (Karg, 1976). The effects are not uniform, however, since windbreaks can harbour harmful pest species as well as pest predators (Janzen, 1976). Trees have been traditionally thought to encourage tse-tse flies, though this view is not universally accepted. Kenyan and Tanzanian experience suggests that windbreaks need not shelter tse-tse flies if the under-storey is relatively open, the over-storey is high, and the ground surface is kept weeded;
* windbreaks can help prevent the spread of plant diseases by inhibiting the aerial dispersal of disease spores. This effect may be offset, however, by the more rapid development of disease spores near to windbreaks resulting from higher relative humidity (Guyot, 1986).
Colorado beetle
As well as reducing windspeeds, windbreaks and shelterbelts provide a range of direct benefits from the fodder, fruit, wood and other products they supply. Even in the harsh desert environment of Yemen, a two row windbreak of Conocarpus lancifolius yielded 350 m3 of wood per kilometre every 20 years, which was more than enough to offset the establishment costs, without considering the additional agricultural benefits (Costen, 1976). In the Majjia Valley in Niger, pollarding of windbreaks every four years is estimated to bring local residents US$ 800 worth of construction poles and wood per kilometre of windbreak (USAID, 1987). Several books and manuals on the subject of windbreak design are available (see Guyot, 1986; Bhimaya, 1976; Weber, 1986).
2.2.3 Effects of windbreaks on crop yields
The effects of windbreaks on crop yields is illustrated in Figure 2.1. Close to the windbreak, yields are reduced because of shading, root competition, and the physical space taken up by the trees. Moving further away the benefits become more apparent, until at a certain distance they start to drop off again as the influence of the trees diminishes.
Some of the most dramatic yield increases have been reported in China, where the hot, dry summer winds represent a major limitation on agricultural production. In Hetian Prefecture, where 110,000 hectares of land were planted with Paulownia sp. windbreaks in the early 1980s using the 'forest net' system, increases in grain yield of 60% have been recorded, along with a 70% increase in natural silk production, and a 300% increase in cotton output (Wang Shiji, 1988).
Significant increases have also been reported in a number countries with Mediterranean type climates. According to one survey covering Argentina, Bulgaria, California, Egypt, Israel, Italy, Saudi Arabia and Tunisia, well-designed windbreaks have