<title>The impact of structural adjustment on smallholders</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The importance of smallholder agriculture in a balanced development strategy for most developing countries has been strongly emphasized by FAO. It is labour-intensive and a source of nutritional safety for hundreds of millions in the Third World; its rapid decline can greatly destabilize societies by accentuating income distribution inequalities, endangering nutritional standards and increasing the pace and cost of urbanization. Structural adjustment policies in many developing countries change, sometimes significantly, the macro-economic and sectoral environment in which rural households make their decisions. What are the likely consequences for smallholders?
This study by Jean-Marc Boussard speculates on possible answers to this question. In general, he claims, by reducing inflation, improving the efficiency of marketing systems and increasing the producer prices of export crops, structural adjustment policies should have a beneficial impact on smallholders. Conversely, mismanaged privatizations, increases in input prices and cuts in public expenditure may have detrimental effects.
The major thesis, however, is that if smallholders are responsive to average prices, they are even more responsive to price variability and, more generally, to changes in the degree of uncertainty of their environment. Consequently, the author concludes, the development of smallholder agriculture requires institutional innovations aimed at reducing this uncertainty. Such innovations could represent a new dimension in structural adjustment programmes and policies.
The paper, in its final chapter on directions for research, advocates a coordinated use of macro-economic and micro-economic modelling approaches and sketches possible case-studies.
T. Kelley White
Director
Policy Analysis Division
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Dr Apostolos Condos and Heinrich Becker, for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper; to Mrs Susan BrownRichaudeau and Mrs 1. Boussard for linguistic improvement; and to Ms Valérie Wallet for her patience and care in typing. All remaining errors are the author's responsibility.
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Smallholders represent a significant proportion of rural poor in most developing countries. Their economic importance is far from negligible, because they constitute virtually the only source of domestic food production as well as, in many countries, a large proportion of export crop growers. In general, by reducing inflation, improving the efficiency of marketing systems and increasing the prices of export crops, structural adjustment policies should have a beneficial impact on smallholders. Conversely, it is also true that mismanaged privatizations, increases in input prices and cuts in public expenditure may have detrimental effects. But more important considerations must be kept in mind. If smallholders are responsive to average prices, they are even more responsive to price variability and, more generally, to changes in the degree of uncertainty in their environment. Consequently, smallholder development necessitates institutional innovations aimed at reducing this
uncertainty. This could represent a new dimension in structural adjustment programmes and policies.
In conclusion, further research in this direction is recommended, based on household models on the miero-economic side, and on computable general equilibrium models on the macro-economic side.
<section>3</section>
Part one : Smallholders and their characteristics
Introduction
Chapter 1 : What is a smallholder?
Chapter 2 : The role of smallholders in economic development
Introduction
Since the mid-1970s, as a consequence of the "debt crisis" and other developments, new economic policies have been proposed to many developing countries by a number of international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the Inter- American Bank, and other institutions, under the general heading of "structural adjustment programmes". These cover a wide spectrum of proposals, from tight monetary policy to tax system reforms and rate of exchange adjustments. The general idea behind these proposals is that the debt crisis is fundamentally a consequence of inadequate economic structures, that is, a bad arrangement of all the parts of the economic system. Therefore, the solution to the debt crisis depends on structural adjustment. They are not so new: most of them have been implemented long ago, in many developed countries. During the 1950s, few western European countries were exempt from the kind of recommendations we are dealing with here.
These recommendations, however, are now being made to developing countries. This is an important point since, in this context, historical investigations can be helpful in predicting the consequences of present policies, in so far as historical and present situations are comparable.
Another characteristic of these policies is that they are painful. This is not a case of pure masochism on the part of their promoters. On the contrary; their intended long-term effects are highly beneficial, with steadier economic growth and higher incomes for every section of the population. But, in the short term, changing the rules of the economic game makes economic agents revise their expectations and strategies, thus introducing the risk of error and failure. Apart from expressing scepticism about their final success (a point which will not be examined here), this is probably the most serious objection that can be made about structural policies.
But there are other causes for concern. It is quite possible that, in spite of their long-term beneficial effects, structural policies may at least temporarily impose severe losses to certain people. Such a possibility must be taken seriously, especially if these people are the poorest. In this case, it would probably be necessary to provide some form of compensation, or to mitigate the contemplated policies to avoid their most detrimental effects. Together with the urban poor and the landless rural workers, smallholders may be permanent or temporary losers in the structural policy game. This is an important reason for taking an interest in them.
Even so, although they are poor, smallholders play an essential role in the economic life of most developing countries. The success or failure of structural adjustment policies will thus depend upon how much they are resented by smallholders, whose production is individually negligible but who, taken as a whole, represent a significant share of the GNP.
The subject of this paper is, therefore, to examine the possible consequences of structural policies on smallholders, both in the long and in the short term, in terms of equity as well as productive efficiency.
But, before going further, the notion of smallholder must be defined.
Chapter 1 : What is a smallholder?
The difficulties of a statistical definition
Common features of smallholders
The difficulties of a statistical definition
In agricultural matters, especially when poor and traditional farmers are concerned, economic ideas are usually severely biased by the European and North American situation. The farmer is a well-identified decision-maker, most of the time head of a family presenting a certain degree of "stability". The farm itself is well defined by a set of clearly identified plots, which either belong to the farmer (who, in this case, possesses the corresponding titles) or are hired from a landlord, who can produce proof of his or her rights. Land is supplemented by machinery, cattle, buildings and trees, each of which has a clearly identified owner. In this case, defining a smallholder is mainly a matter of threshold: more precisely, a farm size index can be defined and below a certain size a farmer is called a smallholder.
Certain problems are involved in these two operations. The size of a farm may be defined by the cultivated area (however, a vegetable grower with 5 ha is obviously larger, from an economic point of view, than a cereal grower with 10 ha), or by gross income (however, the size will depend upon the price system), or by a weighed sum of outputs (with the same problem as above, the size then depending upon the weights, which play exactly the same role as prices and are just as arbitrary). The threshold is even more difficult to define: changing the minimum size required for being considered a farm in the European Community from I ha to 0.5 ha doubles the number of farms. This is because the size distribution of the plots of land belonging to, or being cultivated by, the same person has a very long lower tail (Figure 1). A slight change in any threshold in this region of the distribution may considerably change the number of cases belonging to one category or another. The same is
true whatever measure is chosen for farm size. This makes any definition of a smallholder rather arbitrary in these countries: one would have preferred a "double-peaked" distribution, such as the one shown in Figure 2. Such distributions are not uncommon in many developing countries, with the lower peak corresponding to peasant or traditional farmers, and the upper peak corresponding to colonial or modem or cooperative farming (other words are used, but these are adequate for our present purpose). In this case, defining smallholders is relatively easy, because fixing the threshold at a particular level in the valley between the two peaks is of limited consequence for the classification of most of the farms in the population.
FIGURE 1 : Typical distribution of farm area in developed countries.
Unfortunately, in many other developing countries, the problem is even more difficult, because the real problem is not so much the choice of a threshold as the definition of a farm. In these countries, land-use decisions are made at different levels, and by different individuals, so that the notion of "farmer" is not clearly identified. As an example, let us consider the Senegalese carré. The carré is a local community headed by a chief, usually the elder of a large family. All carré members live together in the same village, each household (husband, wife and young children) having its own house. The carré, as a whole, collectively cultivates cash crops, such as groundnuts or cotton. In this respect, the carré is a collective farm, the farmer being its head, just as the farmer of a cooperative farm is the president of the board of the cooperative.
FIGURE 2 : Double-peaked distribution of farm areas in many devoloping countries.
Apart from collective fields, the chief allocates plots of land to each household. Originally the plots allocated were intended for food crops. But it is now quite common to see ambitious young men growing cash crops on their individual plots, because cash crops give them more freedom, or are more profitable. At the same time, there is a division of labour between the sexes in the household. The wife is responsible for food, including growing crops such as paddy or cassava, necessary for feeding the family, whereas the husband is concerned exclusively with cash crops. Thus the household plot is again divided into two parts, one for food crops under the responsibility of the wife, and one for cash crops operated by the husband. In such a case, should husband and wife be described as two separate farmers? This is a question that may be raised.
An additional complication is that many meals from the carré kitchen are taken in common, men on one side and women on the other. The kitchen itself is supplied with foodcrops taken from collective fields. The working time allocation between individual and collective field is a matter of permanent negotiation between the various members of the community, with presumably an enormous amount of time devoted to these discussions.
Whatever the reasons for this situation, it does not facilitate the definition of the smallholder. The same kind of difficulty with other farms, for example, semi-collective farming, such as the eijidos in Mexico; the colonos in Peru; many forms of sharecropping arrangements; and even the kolkhoz in the USSR, which is a typical large farm, but which fosters links with the farm workers' individual plots in such a way that it is really difficult to define the latter either as an intrinsic part of the big kolkhoz, or as separate, small part-time holdings).
Another aspect is the existence of herder and nomads who do not own land in the usual sense. They usually claim right of passage or of pasture, although these claims are often denied by sedentary farmers whose land they cross. The size of their holdings cannot, therefore, be measured in terms of acreage. An alternative measurement is the number of head of cattle they possess, although this is often a somewhat elastic yardstick. Herders are disappearing in many countries, but still play an important role in Sahelian Africa, especially with respect to meat exports.
A difficulty arises from the fact that farming is not necessarily the only occupation of a smallholder. In the case of pan-time farmers, the judgement of the economic situation of a smallholder may be considerably modified by the consideration of other jobs he or she may have. In many Latin American countries, for example, it is fashionable for a doctor or a lawyer to operate a farm, usually not too far from the large town where they live. As a rule, this farm is relatively small (because the time spent on the farm is limited), and "modern" (again because this kind of "farmer", unlike real poor farmers, can obtain credit from banks and other sources). In this context, the naive analyst of a farm survey could reach the preposterous conclusion that small farms are among the richest and most modern!
The notion of a smallholder must not be considered in a purely static framework. If a particular man or woman is described as a smallholder at a certain date, he or she may not have been so for long, and the situation may not last until his or her death. In fact, it is a well-known feature of social statistics that the permanency of the number of cases falling into a given category may hide an important turnover, with many individuals departing, and being replaced by newcomers, between two surveys. This may be the case for smallholders. In the best situations, some of them will become mediumholders, or they may get a job in town. At worst, they may become landless workers or unemployed. Conversely, landless workers may become smallholders. Even industrial workers (although this is not very likely) may return to the land and also become smallholders. In any ease, the outcome of this process of state transition may be just as important as, if not more than, what happens to the
state of the smallholder, taken in isolation.
A statistical definition of a smallholder is, therefore, very difficult. This accounts for the scarcity of statistical data on performance of smallholders and is also an obstacle to the knowledge of their specificities and potentialities, as well as the main cause of the difficulty in assessing the impact of structural adjustment programmes on them. Nevertheless, smallholders do exist and can be defined at least notionally, even if such a definition is not of much use to a statistical office.
They constitute mainly the rural poor, because the notion of smallholders refers to poverty, although poverty is essentially relative, i.e. a full-time farmer with 10 ha of grain crops in Africa is rather rich, whereas the same situation would classify him/her automatically as poor in any western European country. However, the smallholder category excludes the rural poor who are so poor they would never be able to operate a farm of their own. This is because of the specific role of smallholders, in comparison with "simple" landless workers and other rural poor, in shaping economic activity in their countries. If the impact of structural adjustment programmes on smallholders was only a matter of equity, there might be no reason for taking an interest in this segment of the population. But smallholders play a important role in economic development, a role that is probably much more important than is apparent from their relative number or from their total income. Neglecting
their welfare could actually jeopardize the success of economic policies that would otherwise have every chance of succeeding. Here lies the basic justification for the present paper. We shall try to explain the reasons in the next chapter. For the moment, we shall define the common features which, despite their diversities, make smallholders a useful category for economic analysis.
Common features of smallholders
Despite the incredible variety of socio-economic status and organization of poor agricultural producers, they have many common features, especially with respect to their production techniques.
Specificity of production techniques
It is almost tautological to say that a poor entrepreneur has virtually no capital and thus the basic system of production is mainly a combination of land and labour. This is the original of "traditional agriculture" and the source of many justified comments about it.
First, it is not "backward" (with its pejorative connotation of irrationality). On the contrary, plain elementary economic theory teaches us that, with very small capital, the optimal techniques of the income-maximizing entrepreneur should actually be labour- and land-intensive. This has a number of consequences.
FIGURE 3 : Total output of labour functions at various levels of capital availability
Low productivity of labour
Labour productivity is low. Again, this is a consequence of the most elementary economic theory (see Figure 3).
As a consequence, since most of their incomes are derived from the rewards of labour, incomes are low, and this is both the cause and the consequence of poverty.
Land productivity depends on demography
Land productivity is also low, as shown by low yields, and for the same reason: far from being a proof of backwardness, the low yields of smallholders are a consequence of their lack of capital, and a mark of economic rationality. Two contrasted situations can nevertheless occur with respect to yields: in some cases, land is abundant at the regional or national level. This is the case in many parts of Africa or in the Amazonian region in South America. The productivity of land can then be extremely low, the limiting factor being the working time lost in cultivating remote fields. On the contrary, in overpopulated regions, such as the "groundnut basin" in Senegal, northeastern Brazil and many other regions, land is scarce. Yields are comparatively higher than in underpopulated areas. But the marginal productivity of labour is lower and people, in general, are poorer, especially if the land rent is appropriated by landlords not belonging to the class of smallholders.
Of course, there are intermediary situations between these two extremes, because land is never homogeneous. Scarcity usually begins with some types of land being defined by their pedological characteristics (such as the famous "grey soils" in Africa), or by distance to road or village, or by other geographical features. In this case, some soils are intensively cultivated, whereas others remain apparently idle (they are often used for extensive activities such as hunting, wild fruit harvest or even pasture). In any case, demography is the main determinant of these types of soil occupation, because land scarcity arises when there is population growth over a certain limit (otherwise, with free land available, newcomers simply occupy virgin land).
High productivity of capital
Capital productivity, by the same token, is extremely high: again, it is well known in economics that a very scarce factor can have a very high return. Simple budget calculations show the high profitability of simple tools such as spades, or bicycle wheels, or even donkeys or buffaloes. High capital productivity is also indirectly shown by the large interest rates charged by traditional moneylenders, which may reach several hundred percent. Without passing a moral judgement on usury, it must be recognized that such rates could not exist if the marginal productivity of capital were not large enough.
In such a case, economic theory assumes that firms only have to borrow to increase the quantity of capital they use, thus decreasing the marginal productivity of capital at a level commensurate with that in other activities. But, here, economic theory is wrong, because it neglects two points that are very important and, to a large extent, specific to smallholders.
First, the elements of capital at stake are very small: for example, a plough, or a fertilizer dose per hectare; the largest indivisible piece of equipment is a pair of oxen. Yet, oxen are often hired for few individuals can afford them. Nowadays, which bank would open a file for a credit of $50? Thus, the relative efficiency and the comparative advantage of the traditional moneylender begin to appear. He or she can make a loan of $50 without opening a file, simply because they know their client personally.
Second, lender availability is not the only obstacle to borrowing. Unless the peasant is dishonest (and this is rare), he or she knows the loan must be reimbursed. But nobody is ever sure of anything, especially in the case of a smallholder, who is subject to a variety of risks, both climatic and economic. Thus, peasant behaviour in borrowing matters is extremely conservative and highly "risk-averse". In fact, borrowing is a risk in itself! Only rich people can afford it. This is why so few poor people in developing countries borrow (and also, why is it so difficult for them to find a lender).
The blocking scheme just described must not be considered as the only obstacle to smallholders' economic development. If it were possible to remove it, other obstacles such as land scarcity or market saturation would appear. But it is an important factor in the explanation of the permanency of the smallholder's situation, whatever form it takes. It accounts for the combination of the low productivity of land and labour and the high capital productivity that are the fundamental characteristics of smallholders. The consequences of this situation will be examined from a macro-economic point of view.
Role of risk in economic decisions
One of the lessons learned from the above is the importance of risk as a deterrent to investment. But this is not the only effect of risk on smallholders. Risk plays a particular role in the decisions of smallholders simply because they are poor and, thus, considerably risk-averse. Whatever the technical solution chosen to express this risk aversion in models, it can be said that risk imposes diversified patterns of production, and costly practices to avoid it as far as possible. Also, the existence of risk and of risk aversion implies that average prices and yields are not the only elements entering into utility computations of rational producers. Their variability is just as important, as is illustrated by the following simple example. Let us assume that a farmer has the choice between two crops, with the same prices, the same yields and the same inputs. Of course, the decision-maker will be indifferent between the two. At the same time, the slighest change in prices or
yields will induce him or her to shift the totality of their resources from one production to another. If all producers act in the same manner, the markets of these crops will be characterized by a devastating instability.
Let us assume now that the yields are random, and independently distributed with, again, the same mean and variance. Nothing is changed with a risk-neutral decision-maker. But only a slight degree of risk aversion will suffice to induce any risk-averse farmer to choose unhesitatingly a 5050 output mix, which minimizes income variance. Even better, in such a situation, if the price of crop A decreases slightly, farmers will increase their production of B. but never cease to devote a part of their production capacity to A. Thus, risk not only clearly defines an optimum where it apparently does not exist, but it may stabilize markets and stand as the major determinant of price supply elasticity.
We shall now assume that the government decides to stabilize crop A. Since farmers are compensated for any loss due to random changes in the price or in the yield of A, with the unitary income at the previous average level being guaranteed, crop A is riskless. Then, every risk-averse farmer shifts to A, so that the production of B is nil. If the government wants to have the least quantity of B harvested, the return for A should be fixed at a level significantly below the average unitary income of B. particularly as farmers are more risk-averse.
This simple theoretical example has more applications than one might imagine at first. Consider the case of export crops and food crops (that is, crops consumed within the country) in most African countries. As a rule, export crops have a price guaranteed by stabilization boards, or other agencies, whereas food crops are sold (when they are sold) on unorganized markets, with tremendous seasonal and interannual fluctuations. Thus, mutatis mutandis, export crops resemble crop A, and food crops crop B in the preceding example. At present, prices give a definite advantage to export crops, and this has been the object of complaints from international organizations, and of recommendations to increase the prices of food crops, to make them competitive with export crops. The above analysis suggests that it would suffice to stabilize food crops at their previous average level to induce a very significant shift of resource allocation from cash to food crops. This illustrates the
importance of risk considerations in agricultural policy. Other examples are given later.
Supply responsiveness
The question of smallholder sensitivity to price variations has been the subject of controversy. Some economists deny any price responsiveness on the part of smallholders, either because they are "irrational" (a very strong assumption) or because their rationality is different from that of the capitalist entrepreneur. In this respect, 20 years ago, Sicco Mansholt, a member of the European Community's Commission in charge of agricultural questions, prepared a plan for the restructuring of European agriculture. The backbone of the "Mansholt plan" was to increase farm size to make farms more responsive to prices. European farms nowadays are, on average, considerably larger than was intended by Mansholt, and apparently not much more responsive to prices than before. Of course, smallholders in developing countries cannot be compared with European farmers; nevertheless, this story shows the need for intellectual modesty.
The smallholders response to price is never zero, but is determined by complicated patterns that jeopardize any attempt to measure it statistically. This is because a price variation in one crop (say, a price increase) has two separate effects:
* A profitability effect, because the cultivation of the crop is now more (and that of other crops less) advantageous. This effect always induces farmers to increase the production of the crop in question.
* An income effect. If the farmers already cultivate this crop, their income is now greater. A part of the incremental income will be saved. If this saving is reinvested in farming (this is not always he case ), it will serve to buy new inputs which will be allocated to the most profitable crop, not necessarily the crop whose price has been increased. Thus, in a situation where, say, groundnut and paddy compete for the allocation of scarce inputs in a Senegalese farm, it may happen that an increase in the price of paddy generates an increase in the sale of groundnuts, and vice-versa.
These considerations interfere with the risk effect which has been described above, in two different ways:
* Because of expectations: a sudden change in price may not be interpreted as permanent by farmers. It may be considered as a transitory expression of the "noise", exactly as for income expectation in the permanent income theory of consumption. For that reason, the lag for farmers' supply response may be large, perhaps several years, which considerably complicates econometric estimations.
* Because of the utility of financial reserves: in an uncertain world, keeping liquid or semi-liquid reserves is one of the most popular (as well as rational) anti-risk strategies. Even with very scarce liquidities, smallholders in developing countries make extensive use of reserves constituted, for example, by cattle and granaries, not to mention fostering good relations with the neighbourhood. Of course, the increased saving obtained from any price increase may be invested in reserves of any kind, with the consequence that the farmer can take more risks with increased reserves and, thus, expand the most risky crops at the expense of safer ones. Thus, increasing the price of a "safe" crop (say, groundnuts in Senegal) may decrease its supply and increase the supply of a riskier crop, such as sorghum, in excess of the needs of the family.
Admittedly, such results are complex and represent a challenge for econometric analysis (see Mundlak, 1988). It is not surprising, in such a context, that the latter gives back contradictory results. What is surprising is that, despite the difficulty of taking account of the preceding considerations, the results nevertheless generally suggest a relatively large and positive direct supply elasticity for many developing countries and for many commodities. A possible reason for this result might be found in the fact that fixed factors for smallholders in developing countries are not numerous, thus giving decisive weight to direct profitability in the decision-making process. This is contrary to what happens with farmers in developed countries. This point deserves funkier research.
Having thus shown both the diversity and the common characteristics of smallholders, before examining the likely impact of structural adjustments we have yet to demonstrate their economic role. This is the subject of next chapter.
Chapter 2 : The role of smallholders in economic development
They are a huge reservoir of labour
They constitute almost the sole source of domestic food production
They are often export crop producers and a source of foreign exchange
They constitute a potential market for non-food goods
Their disappearance should be among the targets of economic development
They are a huge reservoir of labour
Because of low labour productivity, smallholders represent a huge reservoir of labour which, like any reservoir, is probably capable of dampening the effects of sudden changes in labour demand.
The problem of labour transfers from the "traditional" to the "modern" sectors is recurrent in literature pertaining to development from the early works of Nurkse or Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) to the modern "computable general equilibrium models''.
In the early stages of economic analysis applied to development, it was thought that labour from the "traditional" sector (that is, essentially, labour coming from agriculture) was available in unlimited quantities, for virtually any wage. Of course, this was an over simplified view of reality and was later reassessed. It is now widely acknowledged that smallholders and landless workers do act according to economic considerations when leaving farming to seek an urban job, or a non-agricultural rural job. They compare their marginal productivity as smallholders or hired workers in traditional farming with expected wages in other sectors. The computation is greatly complicated by the considerable uncertainty on both sides of the balance sheet. As we have seen, the productivity of smallholders and rural workers is extremely variable, depending upon many circumstances. And if urban wages are more predictable, in general, than agricultural incomes, the probability of finding a
job is always small, and the risk of staying idle in an unknown town in very precarious conditions is never negligible.
In such situations, mean values of agricultural incomes and urban wages do not play a large role in the decision. Their variability, as measured, for instance, by variances or other dispersion indicators, is actually much more important. The migration flow between rural and urban zones may exist in both directions, and is regulated by forces resembling marke