<title>Soil and water conservation in semi-arid areas</title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Assistance is gratefully acknowledged from the many individuals and institutions who have helped by sending ideas, comments, literature and photographs for this Bulletin, particularly:
Staff of the Arab Centre for the Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands (ACSAD), Damascus, Syria; P.E.V. Charman, and staff of the Soil Conservation Service of New South Wales, Australia; Dr.. M.T. Dennet, Dept. of Agricultural Botany, University of Reading; Dr. Robert M. Dixon, Imprinting Foundation, Tucson, Arizona; Dr. H.E. Dregne, International Centre for Arid and Semi-arid Land Studies, Texas Tech. University, Lubbock, Texas; Dr. S.A. El-Swaify, College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources, University of Hawaii; Prof. Michael Evenari, Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Dr. Dwayne H. Fink, US Water Conservation Lab., Phoenix, Arizona; Barney Foran, Division of Wild Life and Rangelands Research, CSIRO, Australia; Dr. S.A. Gavande, Soils and Reclamation Consultant, Austin, Texas; Dr G. T. Gowon, Federal Dept. of Agricultural Land Resources, Kaduna, Nigeria; G.M. Hallam, DRSPR, Mali; Dr B. Heusch, Saint Mury-La Tour, France; W. Hoogmoed, Agricultural University of
Wageningen, The Netherlands; Dr. Hans Hurni, Soil Conservation Research Project, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; Staff of the Intermediate Technology Development Group, Water Group; Intermediate Technology Publications; Staff of the International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA), Aleppo, Syria; Staff of the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Hyderabad, India; Dr. Emlyn Jones, Chiredzi Research Station, Zimbabwe; C.D. Kagoro, The Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Zimbabwe; I.A.F. Laing, Dept. of Agriculture, Western Australia; Dr. H. Lal, EMBRAPA, Petrolina, Brazil; J. G. Lewis, WAPAC, World Bank; Prof C. Mathieu, Faculty of Agronomic Science, University of Burundi; Prof. W.G. Matlock, College of Agriculture, University of Arizona; Dr. A. Millington, Dept. of Geography, University of Reading; I.R. Melville, Conservation Commission of the Northern Territory, Australia; Dr. V.V. Dhruva Narayana, and staff of, the
Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute, Dehradun, India; Dr. W.E. Ormerod, Padworth, Reading; Staff of Overseas Development Institute, London; Staff of Oxfam; Dr. A.von Peter, International Potash Institute, Switzerland; Prof. J. De Ploey and Dr J. Poesen, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium; Staff of "Institut de Recherches Agronomiques Tropicales et des Cultures Vivrieres" (IRAT), Montpellier, France; R.G. Richards, Conservation Commission of the Northern Territory, Australia; Dr. E. Roose, ORSTOM, Montpellier, France; Prof. C.W. Rose, School of Australian Environmental Studies, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia; Dr. D. Rosenzweig, Director of Soil Erosion Research Station, Natanya, Israel; T.F. Shaxson, FAO, Brazil; D. Sims, FAO, Portugal; C.W. Steley and W.F. Buddee, Overseas Projects Division, South Australian Dept. of Agriculture; Dr. M.A. Stocking, School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia; Dr. R.K. Sivanappan,
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, India; Dr. C. Valentin, ORSTOM, Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire; H. Vogel, German Agency for Technical Cooperation, (GTZ); Dr. T.J. Willcocks, Overseas Division, NIAE, Silsoe, Bedford.
Many technical staff in FAO have also been most helpful, particularly D.W. Sanders, Officer-in-Charge, Soil Resources, Management and Conservation Service, who proposed the bulletin and helped define its scope and objectives, and the officers in that service for technical advice. The FAO Remote Sensing Centre who provided the satellite imagery.
The research for such a wide-ranging subject was greatly helped by support from the library of Silsoe College - data-base searches by the Librarian Bryan Morgan, retrieval through Inter Library Loan by Mrs Betty Laing, and all the staff helped find material in the College Library.
On the production side, many photographs have been kindly loaned, and the source of each is acknowledged in the captions. Photos without a listed source are from the author's collection. Most of the diagrams were drawn by Helen Trayner. I am most grateful to Linde Ovington Lee for ably taking the inumerable drafts and changes through her word-processor, and to Hazel Tonkin, AGLD Editor and Meetings Officer, for editorial help and advice, and for putting it all together.
<section>2</section>
SUMMARY
This Bulletin does not offer easy solutions to all the problems of soil and water conservation in semi-arid regions. There is no storehouse of tested methods and techniques ready to be taken off the shelf for immediate application. The conditions vary too much - the climate, the soil, and the social and economic factors. Instead, this Bulletin reviews methods and techniques which have been tested and found useful somewhere, and which might be suitable for use in other conditions.
We have not attempted to define semi-arid areas, and some of the examples come from arid or sub-humid regions. The objective is to make the bulletin relevant anywhere that rainfall is a problem because of amount, distribution, or unreliability. We have omitted the questions of salinity and alkalinity, wind erosion, and mechanization. Neither is there a discussion of the political, social, and economic issues, although in many cases these are as important as the technical problems.
The first three chapters are introductory, and outline the scale and importance of the problem, the difficulties and the possibilities for improvement. The bulletin argues strongly, and presents evidence, that drought is part of the natural order in semi-arid areas, and that the recent disasters of degradation and famine in Africa result from misuse and mis-management of the natural resources which reduced the region's ability to cope with the additional stress of drought.
Chapter 2 starts with a review of the extent of the erosion problem and the pressures on semi-arid ecosystems resulting from increasing human and livestock populations. There are problems which could be overcome, such as the shortage of information from agricultural research, which has in the past been mainly directed towards areas of higher agricultural potential. This has resulted in a lack of technology appropriate to the needs of sub- sistence farmers and nomadic pastoralists. The unchangeable problems are also discussed, particularly the variability of rainfall. The wide diver- sity of soils brings problems of soil chemistry and water storage.
Looking at the possibilities for improving agriculture in Chapter 3, a case is made for wider adoption in semi-arid regions of the existing techniques of resource inventory which would allow developing countries to make long-term plans for the optimum development of their resources, maximizing development of better land and minimizing stress on the marginal areas. To help the adoption of improved farming methods, Farming Systems Research is required to provide a better understanding of the motivation of subsistence farmers, semi-nomadic cultivators and pastoralists. The slow rate of adoption of promising new ideas is associated with failure to understand the farmers' thinking.
The first of the four technical chapters deals with soil conserva- tion under the headings Principles, Biological Soil Conservation, and Mechancial Conservation Works. It is argued that in semi-arid regions, with inevitable low production, much of the conventional approach is inappropriate because it has been developed in very different conditions. Expensive works using machinery are seldom justified, nor are the conser- vation tillage methods which are the backbone of biological soil conser- vation in developed countries with a more favourable climate. The requirements in semi-arid areas are that biological conservation through improved farming should show short-term benefit to the farmer, and that this need not necessarily be in terms of increased yield, for he or she may be more concerned with increasing the reliability of yield, or decreasing the labour requirement. Similarly, the emphasis should be on mechanical works which are simple, low-cost, and can be laid out and
constructed and maintained with only small inputs of technical advice.
Chapter 5, called Water Harvesting, deals with methods to increase the amount of moisture stored in the soil profile or where there is some small movement as surplus run-off. The choice of methods of water conservation is difficult because the desired objective may change from one season to another. In a dry area it may be sensible to increase surface storage to improve crop yield in most years, but in a wet year this could cause waterlogging and reduce the yield. On the other hand, a drainage system may have the objective of increasing run-off from areas usually too wet, but also have the undesired effect of exaggerating the effect of a drought. The principle of many methods is to make use of marginally inadequate rainfall by concentrating run-off from an uncultivated part of the land onto a cultivated part which then receives enough moisture to grow a crop. The general term for methods of this type is "rainfall multiplier". Examples are conservation bench terraces,
developed and widely used in the United States of America, and a number of simpler variations known as contour furrows, microcatchments, or contour bunds. The practice of ridging and tied ridging is discussed in some detail because there is a large amount of experience of this method in many countries, with varying degrees of success. The broad bed and furrow method is being increasingly adopted on the heavy black clays of India, closely associated with improved animal-drawn equipment which brings the method within the reach of peasant farmers. Other methods of localized surface storage are the semi-circular catchments and trapezoidal catchpits becoming popular in Burkina Faso and Kenya, which are variations on traditional methods of surface pitting.
Under the section Water Spreading there is a discussion of various forms of localized use of surface run-off, either occurring naturally from hill areas or after it has been diverted and collected in channels. Several ancient examples of this type of run-off farming are described from the American Indians, Tunisia, and Israel. There are also more recent examples from Kenya, Pakistan, and the Yemen Arab Republic. Inundation methods are where floodwaters are impounded and retained long enough to saturate the soil so that a crop can be grown on the stored moisture. These range from small-scale examples from the Sudan to Brazil to the much larger schemes in semi-arid areas of India, some of which have been used for hundreds of years. The diversion and spreading of floods and spate flows without storage are discussed with examples from Pakistan, Yemen Arab Republic, and several countries in Africa. Sub-surface drainage is felt to have limited application in semi-arid regions, but
several examples of simple surface drainage systems are described.
Methods where surface run-off is collected and stored in dams, tanks, or cisterns for later use are described in Chapter 6 on Water Harvesting and Use. The amount of run-off is critical to such schemes, so there is a discussion of ways of treating the catchment to improve run-off. This includes simple methods such as removing stones and vegetation, shaping the catchments as with the roaded catchments and flat-batter dams of Western Australia, and chemical treatments such as deflocculants and waxes, and going on to sealing the surface with waterproof membranes. Practical guidance is given on the design and construction of small earth dams and weirs. Sand dams are discussed, where water is stored in the pore spaces of sand retained by a weir, a method which may be particularly useful in hot climates because surface evaporation losses are reduced. Off-stream storage is described, including the traditional 'hafirs' of Arabic-speaking northern Africa, the tanks of India, and the
small reservoirs used in Western Australia for stock watering. There is a discussion of methods for reducing seepage losses through the floor of storage basins, and evaporation losses from the surface, although the available solutions to both these problems are frequently too expensive for general use. This chapter ends with a discussion on groundwater, covering methods of recharge and extraction from wells, boreholes, and horizontal wells, including the ancient qanats of north Africa and western Asia, and modern drilled horizontal wells in the western USA.
Chapter 7 discusses applications of water conservation to grazing land and to trees and shrubs. The problem of overstocking and overgrazing was briefly mentioned earlier among the difficulties and problems in semi-arid areas, and is developed here in more detail. The evidence of satellite imagery proves conclusively that the degradation of the Sahel and of Namibia was man-made and caused by overgrazing, and not the result of drought. Examples are shown from Niger in the Frontispiece and from Namibia in this chapter. There is no doubt that national herds of livestock are increasing and numerical examples are quoted from Swaziland, and from the Mambilla Plateau on the border of Nigeria with Cameroon. The decreas- ing mobility of nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists is discussed, quoting the example of Botswana where the two main causes are settlement, and the provision of permanent water supplies at the cattle posts by replacing the previous natural water supply with
boreholes. Two examples of successful group livestock management schemes are mentioned, from Niger and from eastern Senegal. Examples of good management are taken from the western USA and compared to the traditional management of the grazing by linking it to water supplies in the Butana region of the Sudan. Techniques for improving the grazing by reducing surface run-off are discussed with examples of large-scale mechanized schemes of creating furrows or pits. Small scale methods more suitable for Africa are semi-circular hoops, low banks of stone set out on the contour, and small basins formed by digging with hand hoes.
In semi-arid areas the landscape is always a mixture of woodland, bush, grazing land and arable land, and trees or shrubs are always a part of the ecosystem. They supply many needs; fuel, browse, construction materials, food crops, and cash crops, and usually a combination of more than one of these. Depletion of the natural stock of trees and shrubs is one of the indicators of excessive pressure on the land leading to an increasing rate of degradation. Ethiopia is the model for a study of the progressive phases of degradation starting with depletion of the tree growth, and ending in a massive exodus. In many countries the increasing scarcity of fuelwood is becoming as critical as the scarcity of food, and in this context, the need to expand the production of trees and shrubs is clearly a major challenge in the semi-arid areas.
The usual techniques for afforesation are seldom appropriate in semi-arid areas because of the unreliability of the rainfall. The methods suggested are variations of the rainfall multiplier approach discussed earlier for cropland. They range from a small basin in which a tree seedling is planted, perhaps with small channels to lead extra water to the basin, up to the 250 m^2 microcatchments developed in the Negev desert in Israel. Other variations of this principle are quoted from several countries in Africa. Agroforestry is considered outside the scope of this Bulletin, but a list of references is provided.
<section>4</section>
LIST OF PLATES
Frontispiece Satellite imagery shows overgrazing in the Sahel
2.1 Erosion damage from abnormal storms, Queensland, Australia
2.2 Erosion damage from abnormal storms, Queensland, Australia
2.3 Wind erosion on an irrigation project, USA
2.4 Severe geological erosion in a semi-arid climate
4.1 An erodible soil devastated by water erosion in Mexico
4.2 An example of expensive gully control, Australia
4.3 A self-help group in Kenya
4.4 The single-ox harness and hitch being developed at ILCA
4.5 Level irrigation terraces in Bhutan
4.6 Bench terraces in the Yemen Arab Republic
4.7 Step terraces
4.8 Fanya juu terrace in Kenya
4.9 Vegetation planted on a fanya juu terrace
4.10 Murundum terrace in Brazil
4.11 Contour bund
4.12 Graded channel terraces
4.13 Ridging
4.14 Tied ridging
4.15 Orchard terracing
4.16 Hillside ditch with lock and spill drain
4.17 Long-established terraces in Ethiopia
4.18 Old terraces in the Yemen Arab Republic
4.19 Overtopping one contour bank can cause the others to fail
4.20 Simple stop-wash lines in Ethiopia
4.21 Grass strips, Swaziland
4.22 Grass strips do not eliminate erosion on steep land, Swaziland
4.23 Live hedge in Kenya
4.24 A vegetative barrier, southern Mali
4.25 Grass strips can provide fodder, in Kenya, and in Brazil
4.26 Stone lines on the contour, Burkina Faso
4.27 Improved grass near stone lines, Mali
4.28 Stone lines on an eroded cattle track, Kenya
4.29 A stone barrier across a small wash, Mali
5.1 Broad bed and furrow system layout, ICRISAT, India
5.2 Cross-section of broad bed and furrow
5.3 A tool carrier for forming and cultivating beds, ICRISAT
5.4 An ox-drawn ridger at ILCA in Ethiopia
5.5 Run-off and erosion on a vertisol in India
5.6 Wide beds with open furrows in Ethiopia
5.7 Trials at ICRISAT of a 3-row planter on broad beds
5.8 Experiments with 'tied-mounding', Burkina Faso
5.9 Basin listing for wheat production in Israel
5.10 Lifting the ridger by hand, Malawi
5.11 The ridger lifted by an eccentric wheel
5.12 Ridges and ties from crop residues and roots, Ethiopia
5.13 Contour bunds with ties, Ethiopia
5.14 Contour bunds give increased grass growth, Ethiopia
5.15 Pits used to increase surface water retention on a tea estate in Malawi
5.16 Contour furrows in north-eastern Brazil
5.17 Contour furrows in Kitui Province, Kenya
5.18 Animal-drawn ridger to form contour ridges
5.19 A tractor-drawn ridger-blade
5.20 Field trials of contour ridges and furrows, Mexico
5.21 Terraced wadis, Tunisia
5.22 Ancient terraced wadis now abandoned, Negev, Israel
5.23 Ancient terraced wadis, some being cultivated by Bedouins
5.24 Run-off farming in the Negev, Israel
5.25 Shaped gravel strips increase run-off, Negev, Israel
5.26 Run-off farming on terraced fields in Afghanistan
5.27 Run-off farming for olive groves, Tunisia
5.28 An oasis in the Hunza valley, northern Pakistan
5.29 The supply canals or 'khuls' cross steep slopes
5.30 Terraced cultivation using run-off, Yemen Arab Republic
5.31 Run-off farming in the Yemen Arab Republic
5.32 Flood diversion structure, Yemen Arab Republic
5.33 Floodwater control structure, Mali
5:34 Inundation of an olive orchard, Tunisia
5.35 Flood diversion structures, Tigre, Ethiopia
5.36 Feeder canal in flood diversion scheme, Tigre; Ethiopia
5.37 Traditional surface drains cut through modern terraces, Ethiopia
6.1 Water harvesting from a granite outcrop, Kenya
6.2 Roaded catchments, shaping the soil surface, Australia
6.3 Smoothing and compacting the 'roads', Australia
6.4 Erosion can be a problem on the 'roads'
6.5 Two different layouts of roaded catchments, Western Australia
6.6 Flat-batter dams, Western Australia
6.7 A simple sand trap weir, Zimbabwe
6.8 A large sediment trapping dam, Republic of South Africa
6.9 The 'sausage' method of constructing water storage tanks
7.1 Reduced vegetation from overgrazing, Zimbabwe
7.2 Satellite imagery showing overgrazing, Namibia
7.3 Spreading floodwater to improve pasture, Australia
7.4 Pasture furrows to spread surface run-off, Australia
7.5 Marking out semi-circular hoops, Burkina Faso
7.6 Building the low stone wall, Burkina Faso
7.7 The opposed disc pitter, Western Australia
7.8 Opposed discs with ripper and grass seeder, Western Australia
7.9 Pits and furrows formed by machine, Western Australia
7.10 Range pitting, New South Wales, Australia
7.11 A spiked roller for range improvement, Western Australia
7.12 The imprinter for corrugating range land, New South Wales, Australia
7.13 The effect of excluding grazing, Ethiopia
7.14 Restoration of grazing land, India
7.15 A roller chopper to control shrubs, New South Wales, Australia
7.16 Staggered furrows to increase infiltration, Northern Territory, Australia
7.17 Ponding banks to leach salinity, New South Wales, Australia
7.18 Spirals of furrows to increase infiltration, Northern Territory, Australia
7.19 Grass seeded in pits, Northern Territory, Australia
7.20 Microcatchments for growing fruit trees
7.21 Half-moons for tree planting in Niger
7.22 Grass between rows of leucaena, India
7.23 Double rows of leucaena for mulch or fodder with space for arable crops, India
<section>5</section>
LIST OF FIGURES
1.1 Generalized map of arid and semi-arid regions
2.1 Risk of failure of improved varieties
2.2 Coefficient of variation of annual rainfall
4.1 Types of bench terraces
4.2 Progressive slope reduction with 'fanya juu' terraces
4.3 Sketch of a contour bund
4.4 Intermittent terraces
5.1 Soil surface modification for rainfall retention
5.2 Alternative crop and row arrangements on broad beds
5.3 Conservation bench terraces compared with other practices
5.4 Improved soil moisture from contour bunds
5.5 Simple structures to retain surface run-off
5.6 Shaping the soil surface into run-off and run-on areas
5.7 A non-symmetrical furrow former
5.8 The effect on soil moisture of contour ridges and furrows, and mulching in the furrow
5.9 Ridging in Botswana
5.10 Floodwater farming in Arizona by Navajo Indians
5.11 A run-off farming system from Kenya
5.12 Run-off diversion and spreading in Australia
5.13 Sketch of a 'khadin' or submergence tank
5.14 A small flood diversion scheme in Tigre, Ethiopia
5.15 A pilot project in Turkana, Kenya, diverting flood water onto pasture and crop land
5.16 The main areas of dark heavy clay soils in the tropics and subtropics
6.1 Roaded catchments are widely used in Western Australia for harvesting run-off
6.2 Plan of a small earth dam with a cut spillway
6.3 A reservoir with a natural spillway into an adjacent watercourse
6.4 A reservoir with a mechanical (pipe) spillway and an emergency spillway
6.5 Installation of an outlet pipe under a dam wall
6.6 An earth dam with an impermeable clay core
6.7 Examples of small weirs
6.8 Off-stream storage in a tank dam
6.9 Off-stream storage in a ring dam
6.10 Off-stream storage in a turkey's nest dam
6.11 Horizontal wells
6.12 The 'qanat' system of horizontal wells
7.1 Changes in cattle population (a) Mambilla Plateau, Nigeria, 1930-1980(b) Swaziland, 1947-1980
7.2 A modified disc plough for making pits on range land
7.3 Plan and cross-section of a negarin plot
7.4 Small microcatchments for trees, Baringo, Kenya
7.5 Combination of stone lines (cordons) with tree planting, Niger
<section>6</section>
LIST OF TABLES
2.1 Heavy rains in arid lands
4.1 Terraces for different objectives
5.1 The rainfall multiplier effect of conservation bench terraces
6.1 Capacities of mechanical pipe spillways
<section>7</section>
l. INTRODUCTION
1.1 THE SCOPE OF THIS BULLETIN
This bulletin does not offer easy solutions to all the problems of soil and water conservation in semi-arid regions. There is no storehouse of tested methods and techniques which can be taken off the shelf for immediate application. The conditions vary too much - the soil, the climate, the social factors such as land tenure, availability of mechanization and of labour, the place of livestock - the list is endless. This bulletin is therefore a review of techniques which have been tested and found useful somewhere, and which might be suitable for use in other conditions. Some of the methods are at the stage of being promising ideas which need more testing.
Since the bulletin covers such a wide range of geography, people, and climate, it will not meet the requirements of every reader. There will be too much detail in one place, not enough in others. In particular there might be more emphasis on the Mediterranean region, where the winter rain- fall regime gives a situation very different from the semi-arid regions with summer rainfall. We are also conscious that we have not done justice to the work in the Francophone countries of North and West Africa.
We have not attempted to define semi-arid areas, nor have we been concerned whether areas should be classified as arid or semi-arid. The working definition of areas which the bulletin is intended to help is anywhere that rainfall is a problem because of amount, distribution, or unreliability. We have not discussed all the problems of semi-arid areas, and particularly have omitted the questions of salinity and alkalinity, and wind erosion, and mechanization. A subject as wide as this could be arranged in chapters in a number of different ways, so we have tried to set up sign posts where a method or technique is discussed in more than one chapter. Figure 1.1 is a generalized map of arid and semi-arid areas.
The bulletin does not go into detailed design of all the practices because the circumstances of soil and climate make each application different, so we have tried to be more concerned with principles. Neither have we discussed the practicability of the methods reported in terms of manpower requirements, nor in terms of costs and benefits. Whether it makes sense to apply a method will depend mainly on the urgency of the problem; if a method will keep people alive the benefit/cost ratio is not the most important criterion.
The book does not discuss the political issues, such as land tenure and social systems, nor does it discuss political structure of government and the social structure of land use. This is not to imply that these aspects are not important. The consensus of many recent analyses of soil and water conservation programmes is that past programmes have been biased towards top-down projects with insufficient attention to the needs, aspira- tions and abilities of the peasant farmer who, as a result, has not been sufficiently involved. It is perhaps significant that many of the ideas and techniques discussed in this bulletin are either indigenous or have been developed together with the farmers by one-man projects operated by non-government organizations.
The other feature which comes through strongly when studying successful projects, is the importance of helping farmers by training them in the use of simple equipment. Examples are teaching the use of the water-tube level to lay out works on the contour in Burkina Faso, or the use of the line level for similar purposes in Kenya. Another important non-technical contribution can be to help the organization of local com- munities to manage their affairs more effectively. In India there is a centuries old tradition of local groups to manage water affairs. There are the Pani Panchayat for general water management, and the irrigation com- mittees, Pukka Warabundi (formally structured), and Katcha Warabundi (informal). In other countries, political and social change is leading to new organizations of Cooperatives or Peasant Associations, and guiding, assisting, or training these groups may be essential for the implementation of any soil and water conservation programmes.
1.2 THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SEMI-ARID REGIONS
Agricultural development naturally takes place first on the best land. Whether at the scale of the individual farm or a whole country, the tendency is to use the best land first. When there is a need to increase agricultural production it is usually directed to maximizing production in the areas which have the best potential. But as demand increases for the products of the land - food, fuel, shelter, and clothing - it is necessary to make increasing use of land which is less suitable for agriculture, or land in less favourable climates. People concerned with agricultural planning, or development, or production, must all pay more attention to the semi-arid regions.
Attention has been sharpened by the widespread droughts in Africa in the early nineteen-seventies, and again in the mid-eighties, as shown by the surge of conferences and workshops in the last ten years, and the explosion of aid programmes in semi-arid Africa.
It is futile to expect magic solutions to the problems of semi-arid regions. We cannot alter the unreliability of the rainfall, nor the fact that unpredictable rainfall and the occurrence of droughts are inevitable. Neither can centuries of abuse and mismanagement of the land and the people be corrected overnight. Short-term results to reduce starvation through improved yields is only part of the story; a programme to win the confidence of subsistence farmers should be planned to a timespan of at least five years, and plans to direct the attitudes of governments more towards land use will need much longer.
What this bulletin tries to do is to put ideas and techniques into a large array of labelled pigeonholes, from which technicians can select components to build into a project or a programme.
1.3 DROUGHT AND CHANGE
The place of droughts in relation to food supplies was admirably expressed by Sir Joseph Hutchinson in the preface to the Royal Society Symposium of 1977, when he said:
"These problems (widespread droughts of the early nineteen seventies) were not created by drought. Drought is but the dry extreme of the natural climate variability of semi-arid areas. The problems arise from the pressure of human and domestic animal populations on limited resources, and they have been aggravated by the rapid explosion of populations in recent years....
"It is in the nature of these marginal areas that agriculturally disastrous seasons are within the normal range of climatic variations. Such seasons must be accepted as something to be foreseen and planned for, and not as an "act of God" to be met by international charities. The difficulty of planning for drought conditions and hence of preventing famine has been increased by the great successes of science and technology in the last quarter century in the control of parasitic and nutritional disease.
Improvement in health has led to great increases in human and animal populations, and these have been maintained by fuller exploitation of the environment. Thus the pressure at the margin has increased, and what was a shortage that could be met by encroachment on unused resources becomes a famine because no unused resources remain."
The all too common attitude towards drought is typified by the Australian outback farmer who is reported to have explained his problems to the extension officer because "we have not had a normal rainy season for 25 years".
Hutchinson's comment about increasing pressure at the margins is reinforced by Ormerod (1978) who is concerned about the problems which may inadvertently arise from economic development in dry areas, and argues that "One of the most important factors operating to increase aridity in West Africa is the economic demand which has stimulated the growth of herds and of arable farming which compete for land in the arid range areas."
Ormerod suggests that the conventional view that demand is best satisfied by increasing local production may increase the rate of agricul- tural degradation and goes on to say:
"There is a particular danger in stimulating economic advance in desert areas and particularly in linking nomads to the monetary system and I make the plea that, before barriers to development ... in this remote and fragile part of the world are broken down, more information should be obtained about the dynamics of nomadic grazing and of the possible effects that the extension of their operations might have upon the environment and the climate ........"
He also urges the development of quantitative techniques which could be used to assess the capacity of soils to withstand exploitation, to provide a measure of the limits to which economic development can be pressed without causing ecological degradation.
A third commentary is the recent and thoroughly researched review by Sinclair and Fryxell (1985) who present a powerful argument for the view that the ecological disaster of the Sahel is primarily man-made.
Proof of the damage caused by overgrazing comes from satellite imagery, and examples are shown from Niger in the Frontispiece, and from Namibia in Plate 7.2
1.4 POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CHANGE
A recent change has been the increasing political interest in many countries to pro