<title>A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The concept of sustainable development is especially relevant when applied to the growing energy needs of more than three billion people living in the rural areas of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Over the last five years, FAO, both as part of its Regular Programme, and in collaboration with the ESCAP/UNDP Regional Energy Development Programme, REDP, has developed a systematic approach to energy problems in rural areas. The new approach, as presented in this document, draws on the accumulated knowledge of experts and of national and regional institutions. It proposes what it considers to be an enduring foundation for national operational programmes to bring about sustainable rural development through planned energy inputs.
An integrated approach for energy planning for sustainable rural development is presented and the framework within which this approach can be implemented is discussed. Guidelines are proposed for a comprehensive integrated rural energy planning programme which is intended to make the integrated approach and the framework operational in developing countries.
Consultations were held with governmental and other experts in the rural energy field to review national efforts in such fields as energy planning, technology development, institutional responsibilities and implementation strategies. The FAO/ESCAP/UNDP Regional Workshop on a Comprehensive Approach to Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agricultural Development held in China in September 1989 constituted an important part of these consultations.
The approach set out in this document stresses that energy planning, without effective mechanisms to convert its findings into implementable projects, becomes an academic exercise. National energy policies which do not converge with the interests of the smallest rural communities can only be theoretical. Mature rural technologies such as small diesel engines, solar dryers, wind generators, small hydropower schemes, biomass gasifiers or rural electrification programmes, can only be successfully implemented if they fulfill identified and assessed energy requirements for rural and agricultural activities and if they are supported by technical, financial and policy measures.
In drawing up this approach, an attempt has been made to create a bridge between the energy sector authorities and those authorities dealing with agriculture and rural development. Such a bridge already exists between the energy sector and the industrial, transport and commercial sectors. It has been established as a result of a long process. The industrial sector knows how to assess and negotiate its energy requirements, as do the other sectors. Trained personnel effectively discuss with energy authorities the energy needs related to industrial plans and programmes. The agricultural sector, however, lags behind in this respect. A major reason for this is that problems are aggravated by the dispersed, relatively small - scale nature of energy needs in the rural sector and because, contrary to other sectors where clear and powerful counterparts exist, this sector is composed of many, often poor potential energy users. Yet, energy is a lever which can raise agricultural and
agro-industrial productivity thereby improving the level and quality of life of rural populations. The new approach discussed here is an intent to break a hitherto vicious circle.
This document has been prepared with the assistance of Dr. S. K. Chopra, Adviser to the National Planning Commission, Government of India, in his capacity as Consultant to FAO.
Thanks are due to the members of the Energy Working Group of FAO who assisted in the revision of the document, and FAO is grateful to ESCAP and UNDP for entrusting it with its formulation and publication.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
1. Sustainable development is now becoming the guiding theme of many of the development programmes of national governments and international agencies. The UN General Assembly has called upon the governing bodies in the UN System to "review their policies, programmes, budgets and activities aimed at contributing to sustainable development".
2. FAO, as the specialized agency of the UN concerned with food, agriculture and overall rural development, has always been concerned with matters now defined as part of "sustainable development" (1). Energy and environment activities cut through the work of many FAO Departments. An Inter-departmental Working Group on Environment and Energy was established by FAO in 1969 to act as the focal point for these activities, to facilitate coordination between energy and environment, and to promote the concept of sustainable development (2).
3. While sustainable development concerns all activities in the energy sector and their close relationship with environment and development, as brought out in the Report on Energy to the World Commission on Environment and Development, this concept is, perhaps, nowhere more relevant than in meeting the growing energy needs for subsistence and production, of the more than three billion people living in the rural areas of the developing countries (3).
4. More than 75% of the energy needs of the rural areas in Africa, Asia and Latin America are met by "non-commercial" energy sources: firewood, cow dung and agricultural waste. The continuing and widespread use of "non-commercial energy" sources, as a result of the low economic power of the growing population and its dependence on rapidly diminishing supplies of firewood (and in its absence, on manure and agricultural waste), has become a major cause for large-scale environmental problems including deforestation, soil erosion, loss in soil fertility, etc., in several developing countries (4).
5. The transition from the growing use of non-commercial energy sources, which results in the rapid degradation of the environment, to more efficient commercial energy forms, has been seriously hampered by the oil price adjustments of the 1970s, the subsequent shortages of all forms of commercial energy, and the continuing uncertainty of the availability of petroleum-based fuels. While the contribution of non-commercial energy, as a proportion of the total energy consumed in many developing countries, has become less, the absolute consumption of non-commercial energy has continued to increase and therefore the social costs of meeting rural energy needs has been increasing rapidly over the last few decades (5).
6. The rural areas in the developing countries have thus been caught up in a vicious cycle of poverty and under-development, due to the scarcity of efficient commercial energy forms together with the poor economic situation of the rural people. The economic situation of the rural people could be increased through the promotion of new economic activities in the rural areas, and by increasing agricultural and non-agricultural income-generating activities. However, these activities require, as a basic input, the utilization of efficient energy sources and technologies including petroleum-based fossil fuels, electricity, and renewable energy technologies whenever these are technologically feasible and cost-effective.
7. Programmes for New and Renewable Sources of Energy (NRSE) have been promoted by FAO, as well as by other UN agencies, especially following the UN Conference on NRSE in Nairobi in 1981. However, during the past decade the combined impact of these NRSE programmes in meeting rural energy needs has been marginal. The technologies for harnessing renewable energy sources, including solar, wind and biomass, continue to be often way beyond the reach of the people in the rural areas in the developing countries, and their dissemination requires major government budgetary support and investments (6).
8. Technology development efforts for reducing costs and improving the efficiency of renewable energy technologies, especially in the industrialized countries, have received a major setback due to the fall in oil prices. Most developing countries have, for a variety of reasons, made limited progress in developing indigenous cost-effective NRSE for meeting any significant proportion of their energy needs. Moreover, the few renewable energy programmes that have reached the operational stage in the rural areas, for example, the improved woodstove and biogas programmes, do not directly increase income and productivity, and the rural people continue with their subsistence level existence, dependent on firewood and agricultural and animal wastes, in order to meet their basic needs.
9. In view of the continued importance of fuelwood as a major rural energy source, FAO, in coordination With other UN agencies, has initiated several programmes to augment the fuelwood supply in the rural areas of the developing countries, for example, through its Tropical Forestry Action Plan (8). Several developing countries have launched social forestry programmes with their own resources, and with the assistance of various bilateral and multilateral agencies. However, these social forestry and fuelwood programmes have made a limited impact in meeting the fuelwood and fodder needs of the rural people, especially the rural poor, as assessed during recent studies. Fuelwood is increasingly finding its way into the markets of urban and semi - urban areas due to the general scarcity and relatively high prices of commercial energy. Rural people are either unable to afford fuelwood, or have to utilize it to increase their income, with the result that rural energy problems have
often remained untackled, despite the large-scale sale investments made in social forestry and fuelwood programmes (9).
10. As stated above, rural incomes can be increased by sustainable economic activities which require commercial energy such as electricity, oil, gas and coal as a basic input. However, commercial energy supply, which has been scarce since the 1970's, has now received a further set-back because of the worldwide concern for the environmental damage caused by the utilization of fossil fuels.
11. The global concern for the increase in air pollution, acidification of the environment and climatic changes due to the use of fossil fuels, the destruction of forests caused by hydro-projects, and the widespread fear for the safety aspects of nuclear energy, is contributing towards the slowing down of support from multilateral and bilateral agencies for commercial energy production programmes (10). The effects of environmental awareness are already being observed by the blocking of ongoing power projects by environmental agencies and groups in some major developing countries (11). Many developing countries fear that the environmental factor may further widen the gap between the developing and industrialized countries in the consumption of commercial energy (12).
12. In this situation of overall scarcity of the energy required for sustainable development, the rural areas of the developing countries are the worst affected. This scarcity is further aggravated by the steady depletion of fossil fuels, their increasing costs, and the uncertainty of their availability; the growing awareness of the environmental hazards of producing energy from fossil fuels; the lack of progress in the development and commercialization of cost-effective new and renewable energy sources; and, the limited role of fuelwood programmes.
13. Therefore, while the overall energy supply for developing countries needs to be increased, the rural energy situation in these countries needs to be specifically and urgently tackled through conscious and deliberate interventions by national governments and international agencies in order to increase the energy supply from all types of energy resources. These interventions would have to be carried out through systematic assessment and planning, taking into account the constraints in supply and the requirements for different end-uses. The planning goals would include, not only provision for the basic needs of cooking, heating and lighting of the rural poor, and the creation of sustainable economic activities to eliminate the economic stagnation of the rural areas, but also the prevention of the growing degradation of the environment caused by the unchecked consumption of "non-commercial" energy resources.
14. Sustainable development of the rural areas would thus be possible when energy needs are integrated with environmental Concerns at the local and global levels, and for this purpose an integrated planning framework would be necessary. FAO's own energy activities and other related programmes in energy, environment and planning, have also brought out the need for developing such a framework for integrated- rural energy planning and assessment in order to meet the energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development, with the lowest possible cost to the economy and the environment (13).
15. The design and development of such an integrated approach for rural energy planning, and the framework to make this approach operational in its member developing countries, has been undertaken as a major activity of FAO's Energy and Environment Programme over the past few years. For this purpose, FAO collaborated in the preparation of studies and surveys to assess the work being done on energy assessment and planning for agriculture and rural development in its member countries. A study commissioned by FAO on "Rural Energy Planning in China and other developing countries" was published in 1985 (14). Subsequently, another study on "Integrated Rural Energy Planning Programme in India" was found to be especially advanced and relevant to FAO's activity in this field (15). Based on this Programme, and related experiences in other countries, a report on "Energy Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development" was prepared in October 1987 (16) and was discussed during an Expert
Consultation convened by FAO/ESCAP/UNDP in Rome in April 1988 (17).
16. The deliberations of the Expert Consultation and several other studies, were utilized in the preparation of a Discussion Paper on "Energy Assessment and Planning for Agriculture and Rural Development (with special reference to Asian countries)". This served as the theme paper for an FAO/ESCAP/UNDP sponsored Regional Workshop on "Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agriculture Development" held in Beijing, China in September 1989 (18). The discussions in this Workshop, in which representatives from thirteen Asian countries participated, confirmed this proposed approach.
17. The theme paper for the China Workshop was also discussed by FAO with various Latin American and African countries, and the proposed approach was also found to be relevant to them. They also provided various suggestions for its implementation in their respective situations and regional expert groups are presently discussing documentation prepared in this field (19).
18. Based on these inputs, as well as other recent studies on energy-environment interactions and sustainable development, a new approach for integrated rural energy planning for the accelerated and sustainable development of rural areas within the constraints of resources and environment, has been developed and presented in this document. The central feature of the new approach is the preparation and implementation of area-based decentralized energy plans for meeting energy needs for subsistence and development at the least cost to the economy and the environment, and linking the micro-level plans with national economic planning and development programmes, including those for the energy, agriculture and rural development sectors.
19. This document presents a brief account of the work of FAO in the design and development of the new integrated approach for energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development. The document has been prepared as follows: the justification and conceptual content of the integrated approach is discussed in Chapter I; the framework, including the methodology for preparing and implementing area-based integrated rural energy plans has been presented in Chapter II; Chapter III discusses the implementation of the framework, including the problems and constraints in implementation, and the strategies and mechanisms for overcoming them; Chapter IV gives the outline of a national level phased programme for setting up the proposed framework in developing countries; the concluding chapter briefly outlines the resource requirements and benefits of the proposed integrated rural energy planning programme for accelerated and sustainable development of rural areas in the
developing countries.
<section>3</section>
Chapter I - The new integrated approach: Justification and conceptual content
20. The major objectives of FAO include raising the level of nutrition and standards of living of the people in its member countries, increasing production and distribution of food and agricultural products, and improving the conditions of the rural people, through programmes of sustainable agricultural and rural development. Energy is a vital input in the fulfillment of all these objectives. Energy has also become a critical input, and a major constraint in sustainable agriculture and rural development, since the first oil price adjustment in the early 1970s, which brought in its wake shortages of all forms of commercial energy in most developing countries. Commercial energy shortages, combined with the "other energy crisis", caused by the continued dependence of the rural people, on the rapidly dwindling non-commercial biomass resources of firewood, crop waste end: manure have hit the rural areas in the developing countries the hardest.
21. The "rural energy crisis" has been receiving increasing attention from development policy makers because it affects the very survival of the vast majority of the world's population, who live in the rural areas of the developing countries, and is also deeply inter-linked with the whole concept of sustainable development (20). The linkages between rural energy and sustainable development, however, need to be understood in the overall context of the energy situation in the developing countries.
22. Energy scenarios in the developing countries vary widely. However, there are certain features common to most of these countries which can be taken into account in developing an integrated approach for energy planning for the sustainable development of their rural areas. These common features include:
- Total energy, in all forms, used in the economy, as well as per capita energy consumption, is much lower in the developing countries than in industrialized countries. This shows the need to augment energy production from all sources as a first priority in meeting development needs for subsistence and production in the developing countries (21). It also reflects the need for more efficient energy utilization in industrialized countries.
- A major proportion of the total "commercial energy" is consumed in the urban and industrial sectors, and for transportation, with agriculture and the rural sector getting a relatively small share of the available commercial energy.
- A major proportion of the total energy consumed in many developing countries continues to be provided by "noncommercial" energy sources - firewood, manure draught and pack animals and agricultural wastes which are mostly utilized in the rural areas.
- Energy is not only scarce in the developing countries, but it is used inefficiently both in urban and rural areas, with the result that the per unit consumption of energy is much higher than the per unit increase in national gross domestic product. Energy elasticity with respect to gross domestic product is much higher than unity in the developing countries, as compared to less than unity in the industrialized countries (22).
23. The above features bring out the sharp disparities between the energy consumption of developing and industrialized countries, as well as between the rural and urban areas within the developing countries. These areas require urgent interventions which have to be undertaken through integrated energy planning mechanisms which specifically take into account energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development.
24. Recognizing the critical role of energy for sustaining their economic growth, most developing countries have set up institutional mechanisms for energy sector policies and planning. However, energy sector planning in the developing countries, in its present form does not specifically meet the energy requirements for sustainable agriculture and rural development, except perhaps on a very aggregate, country-wide basis. The result is that there is often a lack of energy in the rural sector, as compared with the high energy consuming urban and industrial sectors.
25. Agriculture, for example, which contributes to the major proportion of national income and provides employment for more than half the workforce, usually gets 5 to 10% of the total commercial energy in these countries. The growth of other non-agricultural income-generating activities (such as agro and other rural industries) which have potential for providing employment to the growing labour force, and stem large scale rural/urban migration, is often seriously constrained due to the scarcity of commercial energy for rural development (23).
26. Rural economies in the developing countries, which support more than 70% of the world's population, are thus characterized by an intensity of energy consumption which is significantly lower when compared to that for urban areas. Moreover, energy in rural areas is used mainly for household consumption (as compared to urban areas, where the main consumers of energy are industry and transport). These household energy needs are met by "non-commercial" energy sources which are secured by private efforts at almost zero private cost. Non-commercial energy forms are outside the planning process and, even if awareness exists in conserving their resource base, the rural people often have no other alternative for their survival. Thus, economic and fiscal sanctions, and legal and administrative measures, make little impact in controlling the damage that is being caused to the environment by the continuing, widespread and often unsustainable use of these resources.
27. The rural energy consumption pattern, and its impact on the environment, has been the subject of several studies by many national and international agencies in the recent past. While the broad features of the rural energy consumption pattern in most developing countries may be similar, there is a marked variation in the specific end-uses and energy forms used from region to region, and from micro-region to micro-region, representing different agro-climatic and eco-systems within a country. This brings out the need for carrying out energy assessment and planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development, not only at the national or macro levels, but also at the decentralized and micro-levels (24).
28. Such micro-level area-based integrated planning would also have to take into account socio-cultural and economic variables, their relationship to the existing and desired patterns of energy consumption, environmental constraints in the micro-region, and, above all, the needs and priorities of the rural people as they see them (25).
29. Furthermore, as noted above, the economic situation of the rural people can be increased through promotion of economic activities and increasing the productivity of existing agricultural and non-agricultural activities which, in turn, require commercial energy as a critical input. A close relationship thus exists between the prevention of the destruction of the environment due to indiscriminate use of non-commercial energy sources, and utilization of commercial energy for improving productivity, creating employment and increasing income in rural areas.
30. Area-based micro-level integrated planning for meeting rural energy needs for subsistence and development, would therefore have to include, not only renewable energy resources which may be tapped locally, but also various commercial energy sources, including electricity, petroleum products, and coal, required for productive agricultural and non-agricultural activities for the economic development of the rural region. These commercial sources of energy often have to come from outside the rural region, or even from outside the country, and their production, procurement and distribution is usually planned and regulated at the national and provincial levels.
31. The proposed integrated approach for rural energy planning, therefore, while being area-based, with a micro-focus, and prepared with the active involvement of the potential rural beneficiaries, needs to be closely integrated with energy supply and demand and the economic situation at the national and provincial level. Such an integrated approach will ensure the equitable distribution of energy and bring about a reduction in the existing sharp rural/urban imbalances in energy consumption, and, within a rural micro-region, between the rural rich and the rural poor (26).
32. Moreover, this integrated approach for rural energy planning would also reconcile environmental considerations at the local level with national and global concerns. Finally, the integrated approach will provide the basis for coordinating the programmes at the micro-level - including those for technology transfer, research and development inputs, especially for developing low cost energy options for the low income groups in rural areas, education, extension and training programmes for rural beneficiaries, and people's participation (27).
33. In summary, the multi-dimensional and complex rural "other energy crisis" needs a comprehensive, integrated approach for tackling it. This integrated approach involves the preparation of micro-level area-based integrated rural energy plans, through which the most cost-effective mixture of different energy sources - commercial, non-commercial, renewable and nonrenewable - for meeting the diverse energy needs for subsistence and production of the different income groups in the rural area, are determined. The approach needs to take into account various technical, socio-economic and cultural constraints, including the people's needs and priorities, and coordination and integration of environmental concerns at local, regional and global levels, with existing and proposed development programmes in the micro region. The integrated area-based energy plans have to be linked with the total economy and energy sectors of the country in order to ensure the integration of energy with
employment and environment as part of the total Development process.
34. The linking of micro-planning for energy with other sectors of development at the micro-level on the one hand, and with the energy sector, environmental concerns and the economic development programmes and plans at the provincial and national level, on the other, is a complex process which involves overcoming a large number of institutional and sectoral barriers and constraints. The proposed new integrated approach, therefore, requires a new framework for planning to make it operational. The design and components of this framework are discussed in the next chapter.
<section>4</section>
Chapter II - The framework: Methodology and design for integrated energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development
35. The comprehensive multi-dimensional, integrated approach required for providing planned inputs of energy for the sustainable development of the rural areas of the developing countries at the least cost to the economy and environment, as proposed in the previous chapter, requires a framework in which energy is linked to economic plans, programmes and policies at the national level, on the one hand, and with the area-based, sustainable agricultural and rural development programmes at the grass roots and micro-level, on the other hand.
36. The conceptual linkages between micro-level energy planning for sustainable agriculture and rural development, and macro-level planning for energy, and for the total economy, as part of the framework, is given in the flow chart 1. The central feature of this framework, as noted above, is the preparation of area-based micro-level energy plans. The steps in preparing these area-based plans are as follows:
(a) Selection of the area.
(b) Assessment of energy consumption patterns in the region.
(c) Energy demand projections over a selected planning horizon.
(d) Assessment of energy supply resources originating from within and outside the micro-region.
(e) Techno-economic assessment of energy conversion technologies.
(f) Assessment of delivered cost and prices of energy alternatives over the planning horizon.
(g) Preparation of the area-based integrated rural energy plan for the micro-region, taking into account constraints in the availability of energy resources and technologies, the environmental impact of these resources and technologies, and the socio-cultural, agro-climatic and ecological characteristics of the micro-region.
FLOW CHART 1
37. The steps in the preparation of the area-based integrated rural energy plan are briefly discussed below:
i) Selection of the area
The unit of micro-level planning has to be decided after taking into account the broad economic and administrative set-up of the country. The size of the micro-planning unit has to be large enough to bring out the inter-relationship between development programmes and energy requirements for subsistence and production, and to justify the building up of a decentralized data base for the planning process. A village may be too small a planning unit in most countries because this unit would require a very large and disaggregated data base for the whole country; a collection or cluster of an appropriate number of villages, which also coincides with a local administrative unit, such as a block or municipal county, may be more suitable, especially if this micro-region also has specific ecological characteristics (28).
ii) Energy Surveys
Rural energy surveys provide the data from which the existing pattern of energy consumption for different end-uses for domestic consumption and productive activities are determined, and also an initial assessment of available energy resources and technologies are made. Several rural energy studies have been carried out in many developing countries by national and international agencies and groups, which provide the detailed methodology for such surveys. The survey formats, however, have to be modified to suit the specific situation of the country or, sometimes, of the micro-region being surveyed. The needs, priorities and socio-cultural preferences of the intended rural beneficiaries have to be assessed during these surveys. The Participatory Action Research Programme, sponsored by FAO, has developed useful methodology for such surveys, which can be appropriately modified and utilized for the specific country situation (29).
iii) Energy Demand Projections
Demand projections for energy have to be worked out for subsistence needs (i.e. cooking, heating and lighting) and for the economic development needs (including agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities) of the micro-region. Subsistence-level needs may be projected by taking into account existing consumption patterns, substitution possibilities and using norms, such as per capita energy consumption assumptions and increase of population growth for the region, as well as changes in consumption patterns as a result of increase in income and improvements in standards of living. Projections for energy requirements for economic development is, however, a complex exercise in which the needs and priorities of the rural beneficiaries have to be considered together with the existing and proposed development activities and programmes and other ongoing and proposed programmes for rural development programmes Energy requirements for agricultural production over the
selected planning period have to take into account existing and proposed cropping patterns, level of farm mechanization, irrigation requirements, pre and post-harvesting operations as well as fertilizer requirements. The methodology for energy demand projections is in the developmental stages, though several working formats and models are now available Computer software pa