<title>Keeping the land alive Soil erosion: its causes and cures</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The first Soils Bulletin was issued in 1965 and now, eighteen years later, the landmark of No. 50 has been reached. The technical subjects have covered a wide spectrum of soil science with the intention of bringing knowledge to anyone interested in developing the resources of their country for the benefit of mankind. In the early days, much of the material concerned surveys and inventories, later came methods of classification and evaluation and, more recently, the stress has been on conservation and good management of natural resources by using organic materials and erosion control measures.
The purpose of this Soils Bulletin is to convince the leaders of all countries, and the developing countries in particular, of the urgent need to reduce soil erosion and to persuade them to adopt and support practical programmes of soil conservation. The underlying messages are: to avoid erosion by using the land in accordance with its capabilities; to apply measures to heal the land where erosion has already taken place; and to employ a combination of these approaches with modern soil management techniques to improve the productivity of the l and.
Erosion is especially severe in many developing countries, which can ill afford further loss in productive capacity. A large body of knowledge and expertise already exists in the field of soil conservation. Many practices have been developed for application to cropland, rangeland, and forest land. The aim of practically all conservation systems is to permit a satisfactory level of production while keeping erosion as low as possible.
Depending on political, social, and economic conditions in each country, there are a number of workable approaches to soil conservation that should be undertaken promptly. Typically, these programmes require legislative and institutional changes; an agency devoted to soil conservation; a trained, highly motivated field staff, and technical and financial assistance to farmers and graziers.
Also needed is more accurate information about the soils of each country and their proper management, as well as improved agronomic systems that combine resource protection with acceptable yields. Shifting cultivation is a special problem requiring additional research, as is the growing threat of desertification in semi-arid zones. Research findings need to be communicated to growers in a form they can understand and apply.
A number of kinds of assistance are available to developing countries today that want to develop and implement soil conservation programmes. The help may be bilateral, from donor countries or multilateral, as provided by international agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. FAO is prepared to assist with research or directly with the creation and improvement of soil conservation programmes. It is hoped that these combined efforts will help bring a halt to the growing degradation of the world' s soil resources.
Cartoon by Bill Garner, reproduced by courtesy of The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tennessee, USA
<section>2</section>
1. How soil is destroyed
Soil is a complex mixture
Soil teems with life
Only a fraction of land is arable
Erosion destroyed civilizations
The worst threat is erosion
Bad farming encourages soil loss
Rainfall energy varies
Why some soils erode easily
Organic soils soak up water
"Invisible" erosion takes toll
Gullies climb uphill
How erosion reduces yields
Eroding soil affects water resources
Windblown soil endangers land
Poor management degrades soil
Soils degrade through waterlogging and loss of nutrients
Some countries poison soils
Why should the leaders of countries today commit their governments and their people to the hard work and expense of a national programme of soil conservation?
The answer is that soil takes many years to create, but it can be destroyed in almost no time at all. With the loss of soil goes man's ability to grow food crops and graze animals, to produce fibre and forests. It is not enough to describe the soil as a country's greatest source of wealth; it is more than that; it is a country's life. And in one country after another today, the soil is washing or blowing away.
Soil is a complex mixture
Soil covers most of the land surface of the earth in a thin layer, ranging from a few centimetres to several metres deep. It is composed of rock and mineral particles of many sizes mixed with water, air, and living things, both plant and animal, and their remains.
As man measures time, soil formation is extremely slow. Where the climate is moist and warm, it takes thousands of years to form just a few centimetres of soil. In cold or dry climates, it takes even longer, or soil may not form at all. While soil is technically a renewable resource, its slow rate of formation makes it practically irreplaceable.
Soil is a dynamic mixture, forever changing as water comes and goes and plants and animals live and die. Wind, water, ice, and gravity move soil particles about, sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly. But even though a soil changes, the layers of soil stay much the same during one human lifetime unless they are moved or scraped, or ploughed by man.
Soil teems with life
All soil is full of life, and good soils are teeming with it. Plants and animals help keep the soil fertile. Plant roots tunnel through the soil and break it up, and decaying plants form humus. Burrowing animals mix the soil; the excrete of animals contribute nutrients and improve soil structure.
Besides the soil's more obvious inhabitants, which include rodents, insects, mites, slugs and snails, spiders, and earthworms, there are countless microscopic residents, some helpful to man and his crops, some harmful.
Good soils seem to hold the greatest populations of bacteria. Almost without exception, bacteria are involved in basic enzyme transformations that make possible the growth of higher plants, including our food crops. From man's point of view, bacteria may well be the most valuable of the life forms in soil.
Chemical reactions occur in the soil as a result of exchange of positive ions, or cations. More exchanges take place in clay soils than in any other type. These chemical reactions are also essential to plant growth and development and are a good index of soil fertility.
Only a fraction of land is arable
Man's chief interest in soil is for agriculture, but not all soils are suitable for farming. The total land area of the world exceeds 13 billion hectares, but less than half can be used for agriculture, including grazing. A much smaller fraction - about 1.4 billion hectares - is presently suitable for growing crops. The rest of the land is either too wet or too dry, too shallow or too rocky. Some is toxic or deficient in the nutrients that plants require and some is permanently frozen .
Europe, Central America, and North America have the highest proportion of soils suitable for farming, although a number of the more developed countries seem intent on paving over much of their best farmland with roads and buildings. The lowest proportions of arable soils are in North and Central Asia, South America, and Australia. The single most serious drawback to farming additional land is lack of water.
Erosion destroyed civilizations
Civilizations began where farming was most productive. When farm productivity declined, usually as a result of soil mismanagement, civilizations also declined - and occasionally vanished entirely.
Of the three requisites for a thriving civilization: fertile soil, a dependable water supply and relatively level land with reasonable rainfall which would not cause erosion, it is likely that the third factor was most important, and evidence is mounting that soil degradation has toppled civilizations as surely as military conquest. In countries bordering the Mediterranean, deforestation of slopes and the erosion that followed has created man-made deserts of once productive land. Ancient Romans ate well on produce from North African regions that are desert today.
A recent study of the collapse in Guatemala around 900 AD of the 1700 year-old Mayan civilization suggests that it fell apart for similar reasons. Researchers have found evidence that population growth among the Mayans was followed by cutting trees on mountainsides to expand areas for farming. The soil erosion that resulted from growing crops on steeper and steeper slopes lowered soil productivity - both in the hills and in the valleys - to a point where the populations could no longer survive in that area. Today only empty ruins remain.
The same process of soil degradation which destroyed civilizations in the past are still at work today.
Firstly, billions of tons of soil are being physically lost each year through accelerated erosion from the action of water and wind and by undesirable changes in soil structure.
Secondly, many soils are being degraded by increases in their salt content, by waterlogging, or by pollution through the indiscriminate application of chemical and industrial wastes.
Thirdly, many soils are losing the minerals and organic matter that make them fertile, and in most cases, these materials are not being replaced nearly as fast as they are being depleted.
Finally, millions of hectares of good farmland are being lost each year to nonfarm purposes; they are being flooded for reservoirs or paved over for highways, airports, and parking lots. The result of all this mismanagement will be less productive agricultural land at a time when world population is growing and expectations are rising among people everywhere for a better life.
The worst threat is erosion
The most serious form of soil degradation is from accelerated erosion. Erosion is the washing or blowing away of surface soil, sometimes down to bedrock. While some erosion takes place without the influence of man, the soil is lost so slowly that it is usually replaced through natural processes of decay and regeneration. Soil loss and soil creation of new soil stay in balance.
What keeps soil in a natural state from eroding is vegetation. Undisturbed by man, soil is usually covered by a canopy of shrubs and trees, by dead and decaying leaves or by a thick mat of grass. Whatever the vegetation, it protects the soil when the rain falls or the wind blows. The leaves and branches of trees and the cushion of grass absorb the force of raindrops, and root systems of plants hold the soil together. Even in drought, the roots of native grasses, which extend several metres into the ground, help tie down the soil and keep it from blowing away.
With its covering of vegetation stripped away, however, soil is as vulnerable to damage as a tortoise without its shell. Whether the plant cover is disturbed by cultivation, grazing, burning, or bulldozing, once the soil is laid bare to the erosive action of wind and water, the slow rate of natural erosion is greatly accelerated. Losses of soil take place much faster than new soil can be created, and a kind of deficit spending begins with the topsoil.
Bad farming encourages soil loss
Unfortunately, many bad farming and forestry operations encourage erosion. Erosion accelerates when sloping land is ploughed and when grass is removed from semi-arid land to begin dryland farming. It accelerates when cattle, sheep and goats are allowed to overgraze and when hillside forests are felled or cut indiscriminately. While there are isolated instances of deserts being reclaimed by irrigation or of new forests being planted, man, in the majority of instances, degrades the soil when he begins agricultural operations.
And his highest risk operations are conducted on cropland, which is particularly prone to the hazards of soil erosion, especially if farming systems leave the land bare for part of the year, exposed to wind and water.
The mechanics of soil erosion are fairly well understood today by conservationists and by many farmers. Erosion from water proceeds in three steps: (1) soil particles are loosened by the bomb-like impact of raindrops or the scouring action of runoff water; (2 ) the detached particles are moved down the slopes by flowing water; and (3) the soil particles are deposited at new locations, either on top of other soil at the bottom of the slope or in ponds or waterways. The soil washed downhill is usually the most fertile, containing most of the nutrients and organic matter required for normal plant growth.
All other things being equal, the steeper the slope, the greater the soil erosion. Erosion is also more severe on long slopes than on short ones; the velocity of the water flow increases on long, unobstructed downhill stretches. Soil loss may be half again as great when the slope length is doubled.
Also significant is the shape of the slope. A convex or bulging slope loses more soil than a uniform slope. A concave or dish-shaped slope loses less. Many erodible soils also seal off the surface pores of the soil as they travel downhill with the runoff water. This action further decreases the amount of water that can be absorbed by the soil and increases the water's velocity, causing even more erosion.
Rainfall energy varies
Still another factor in soil erosion from water is the erosivity of the rain its intensity and duration. In many parts of Europe, where rains are relatively gentle, erosion is rarely severe. In most tropical countries and in parts of the United States, however, rains are much more intense and occasionally torrential. Much more rain falls per hour, and as rainfall intensity increases, the size of individual raindrops also increases. A tropical raindrop strikes unprotected soil with more force than raindrops in Europe, dislodging more soil. The flow of water down a slope is also greater, and the net result is more soil eroded and moved downhill.
Time is also a factor in erosion. A hard continuous rain will dislodge more soil than several brief showers, particularly when the soils are relatively impermeable.
Season is a factor, too. The monsoon rain in the Indian subcontinent keeps farmers from planting many soils, and the bare fields are subject to serious soil erosion. In the Corn Belt of the USA, spring rains are usually the heaviest of the year, striking the soil before seed can be planted or when seedlings can be easily washed out.
Why some soils erode easily
Another factor in water erosion is the character of the soil itself. Some soils tend to erode easily from the action of rain and runoff; others are remarkably resistant, even in heavy downpours. The susceptibility of different kinds of soils to erosion under cultivation varies widely. Perhaps the most important factor is the relative ability of the soil to absorb rainfall rapidly. Certain soils of the tropics absorb rainfall so rapidly that there is little erosion, even on steep slopes.
On the other hand, some erodible tropical soils require very little energy to disintegrate under the impact of raindrops. One reason for the instability of many tropical soils is the predominance of coarse particles, which are easily detached by the pounding action of the rain. The finer particles are then washed off the field with the runoff water.
A number of the world's most erodible soils have a topsoil layer that is from 10 to 40 centimetres deep, underlain by a layer of subsoil that is barely permeable by water. After the upper layer of soil becomes saturated by rain, it begins to flow downhill, even on gentle slopes.
What makes one soil subject to erosion and another relatively impervious is a complex matter. There is no single cause for erodibility. But without question, the organic matter in the soil - decayed and decaying plant and animal matter - helps protect it from washing.
Organic soils soak up water
Organic matter in soil can absorb and store much more water than can inorganic fractions. It acts like a sponge, taking up water and releasing it as required by plants. It also helps bind soil particles into larger aggregates, or crumbs. Soils with this kind of structure are very resistant to erosion. Conversely, nearly all soils containing little or no organic matter are very susceptible to erosion.
Besides absorbing water readily, a good cropland soil should be able to dry out or warm up quickly when the rain is over. It should hold enough moisture to supply the needs of a crop between rains, yet permit water to pass through the soil. A good soil will not stay too wet or too dry.
Another factor in erosion from water is the crop that is being grown in the soil and the way that crop is being managed. Sloping land planted with trees or grass will erode less than the same land planted with maize or soybeans. Maize planted on terraces will suffer less erosion than maize planted in rows that march straight down the slope, inviting runoff water to rush downhill between the rows.
There are other, less obvious relationships between soil erosion and crop selection and management. Many soils can be planted with maize without much erosion risk if the maize crop is rotated with legumes and small grains. If maize is planted year after year, however, soil losses begin to mount.
The basic factors then that contribute to soil erosion from water in rainfed agriculture appear to be similar the world over. For any particular plot of land, they include the degree of slope, the length of slope and its shape, the erosivity of the rain and inherent erodibility of the soil, and the mismanagement of the land by the farmer or herdsman. Much more remains to be learned, however, about the management of specific soils in tropical and subtropical areas to reduce the impact of these erosion factors.
"Invisible" erosion takes toll
There are several types of man-made erosion, all but the first clearly recognizable as trouble. The first - and most insidious - is sheet erosion, which is the more or less even removal of a thin layer or "sheet" of soil from a sloping field. It is insidious because the amount of soil seen to be removed is usually so small in any given year that a farmer often fails to notice that erosion is occurring. Occasionally he becomes aware of sheet erosion only after he notices that a formerly buried object - a rock, the lower portion of a fence post, or root of a tree - is suddenly exposed.
However, sheet erosion removes great quantities of topsoil. Even a very thin layer of soil, only slightly thicker than a piece of wrapping paper, when transported down a slope, can weigh several tons per hectare. It does not take many years or many rainstorms for losses from sheet erosion to become significant.
A second variety of erosion is more evident to the farmer, and that is "rill" erosion. Sheet erosion occurs mainly when the surface of a field is smooth and the slope is uniform. But the surface of most fields is irregular. There are apt to be low places and high places; rough places and smooth places; and various kinds of soils, even in a 5 hectare field. When it rains, the soil erodes unevenly, and rainwater accumulates and flows into depressions, taking the path of least resistance as it moves downhill. The surface flow moves into small channels, or rills, which are cut into the soil several inches deep. Rills are small enough to be erased easily with normal tillage methods, but left alone, they can become progressively wider and deeper until they cut into the subsoil and form gullies.
Gullies climb uphill
A gully always begins at the lower end of a slope and eats its way back uphill, where it creates a gully head with a sudden or steep fall. Eventually it will work its way to the top of the slope, growing deeper and wider with each rainstorm. The splash action of the falling water at the head of the gully undermines the lower part of the excavated earth wall, causing collapse of even more of the soil.
Unlike a rill, a gully cannot be smoothed out with a plough or a disk. While a new gully may be narrow and 2 or 3 feet deep, older gullies can grow to enormous size - 40 feet deep and as much as 100 feet wide.
The formation of gullies is frequently encouraged by man and his animals. Many gullies begin with stock trails, farm roads, and other regular or irregular pathways on sloping land. Some large gullies develop tributaries, particularly at points where livestock habitually enter and leave a ravine.
A recent study of the development in the 19th century of severe gully erosion at the head of a creek in New South Wales, Australia, revealed that it began during periods of cultivation and overgrazing and, not incidentally, during the years of the highest rabbit populations. These animals, like many insects, can speed up destruction of vegetation and soil erosion.
Gullies are relentless destroyers of good farmland. They can cut up a field into small, odd-shaped parcels and restrict the free movement of animals and farm machinery. They are a menace to livestock; calves and other animals frequently fall in and are unable to escape. Gullies can also threaten nearby barns and other buildings, which may have to be moved before they are undermined.
The stabilization and repair of gullies is the most costly of all erosion control work. Stopping a gully often requires extensive earthmoving and construction of dams or other measures. On the other hand, the formation of gullies can usually be prevented through good land use.
How erosion reduces yields
For the farmer, and for the consumer as well, the worst thing about soil erosion is that it reduces crop yields and increases the costs of growing food and fibre.
Firstly, erosion reduces the capacity of the soil to hold water and make that water available to plants. This subjects crops to more frequent and severe water stress.
Secondly, erosion contributes to losses of plant nutrients, which wash away with the soil particles. Because subsoils generally contain fewer nutrients than topsoils, more fertilizer is needed to maintain crop yields. This, in turn, increases production costs. Moreover, the addition of fertilizer alone cannot compensate for all the nutrients lost when topsoil erodes.
Thirdly, erosion reduces yields by degrading soil structure, increasing soil erodibility, surface sealing and crusting. Water infiltration is reduced, and seedlings have a harder time breaking through the soil crust.
Fourthly, erosion reduces productivity because it does not remove topsoil uniformly over the surface of a field. Typically, parts of an eroded field still have several inches of topsoil left; other parts may be eroded down to the subsoil. This makes it practically impossible for a farmer to manage the field properly, to apply fertilizers and chemicals uniformly and obtain uniform results. He is also unable to time his planting, since an eroded part of the field may be too wet when the rest of the field is dry and ready.
Eroding soil affects water resources
Damage from water erosion is not limited to the loss of productivity on the land where it occurs. The bulk of eroded soil from a hillside comes to rest a short distance away, at the foot of the slope or on a nearby flood plain, where it may bury crops or lower the fertility of bottomlands. A portion of the eroded soil is deposited in local drainage or irrigation ditches or runs into ponds, reservoirs, or tributary streams and rivers. Wherever it is deposited, it is unwelcome. Sediment-filled ditches have to be dug out again; ponds, lakes, and reservoirs either have to be dredged out or abandoned. Locally, sediment is an expensive nuisance .
Damage also occurs downstream, sometimes at great distances from the farmland that originally contributed the sediment. Carried along by a river, sediment is dropped out as the waterway reaches flatter, lower reaches. The sediment deposits raise the level of the riverbed and reduce the capacity of the channel to hold water. Riverbanks overtop more frequently, and valuable bottomland, often extremely productive, is damaged by flooding.
Windblown soil endangers land
Soil blown by wind is second only to erosion by water as a destroyer of agricultural land. It occurs most often in arid and semi-arid regions, but it can also happen in areas of seasonal rainfall. Wind erosion is a persistent hazard in the Sahara and Kalahari deserts of Africa; in Central Asia, particularly in the Steppes of the Soviet Union; in central Australia, and in the Great Plains of the United States, well known as the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.
Windborne topsoil may be transported over very long distances and, like soil eroded by water, it is usually deposited where it is not wanted.
Farmlands, fences, machinery, and buildings can be severely damaged by wind erosion, and sometimes they can be buried completely. Costs of rehabilitation can run so high that the land is abandoned.
The following conditions set the stage for erosion from wind:
* the soil is loose, dry, and finely divided;
* the soil surface is relatively smooth and plant cover is sparse; and
* the field is sufficiently large and the wind strong enough to initiate air movement.
When the wind blows hard over a smooth field, at some point near the surface the wind velocity will be zero. Above that point there is a layer of smooth airflow, and above that, an area of turbulence. It is this turbulent airflow which causes soil particles to begin to move. Once movement is begun, the soil particles themselves abrade the soil surface and magnify the effect of the wind. In a severe storm, dust clouds rise hundreds of metres into the air, and on occasion travel hundreds, even thousands, of kilometres before the eroded soil falls on the land or into the ocean.
The soil particles that are blown away are usually the finer ones; the coarse and heavy sand remains. If this process continues for long, the productivity of the damaged land gradually decreases.
The physical causes of wind erosion are clearly different from those which allow soil to wash, except for one factor that is constant in all man-made soil erosion - the absence of vegetation to hold and cover the soil. It is when trees, bushes, grasses, and other plants are removed from land that erosion occurs.
Poor management degrades soil
Soil does not have to be washed or blown away for its productivity to be lowered. Through improper soil and water management, a soil's properties may be altered so that its fertility is seriously reduced or lost for good. Excessive cultivation, for example, can wreck the structure of some soils so that they are no longer capable of holding enough moisture for growing plants.
Salinization, or the accumulation of salts in the topsoil, can also have a deletrious effect on soil productivity and crop yields. In extreme cases, damage from salinization is so great that it is technically unfeasible or totally uneconomic to reverse the process.
In general, salinization is caused by water and dissolved salts moving up in the soil through capillary action. While salinization is occasionally the result of natural soil-forming processes, it occurs most frequently in irrigated soils, where it is worsened by the high salt content of irrigation water.
Salt-affected soils are found on every continent and nearly 7 percent of the land area of the world is affected. Salinization is a serious problem in Australia, the Soviet Union, and the United States, and it is critical in countries of north Africa and the Near East.
Soils degrade through waterlogging and loss of nutrients
Waterlogged soils also deter agriculture in many countries, even in parts of the world where an excess of water is not usually thought of as a problem. Waterlogging interferes with agriculture in many countries; in Egypt, for example, where about one-third of the Nile Delta has a water table only 80 centimetres below the surface. Other countries with waterlogging from high water tables and runoff include Iran, Iraq, Somalia, parts of Syria, and Pakistan.
Soil can also become degraded through loss of nutrients - chiefly nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium - if these are not replenished to maintain soil fertility. Besides being lost through erosion, nutrients are also depleted by the crops themselves, particularly if the same crops are grown on the same land year after year. And in the humid tropics, many nutrients are leached during the intense rainstorms, especially on unprotected land. Without question, farming all over the world is removing more nutrients from the soil than are being put back.
Soil compaction is still another destroyer of the soil. Sometimes it results from repeated passes over the same field with heavy machinery, particularly when the field is wet. It can also result from the hooves of grazing animals pounding down the soil too often in the same area, as they do around the only waterhole for miles. Compaction is not easy to correct.
Some countries poison soils
Other forms of soil degradation occur in the more developed countries, but are rarely of concern to the developing ones - so far. Farmland is not only paved over by urbanization but is occasionally poisoned with chemicals. While pesticides and even fertilizers are sometimes suspected of causing soil impairment, the damage in most cases is not permanent. However, some apple orchards sprayed with arsenic compounds in the 1930s were reported as still unproductive 30 years later. In recent years, there has been a general movement in many developed countries against using the more persistent insecticides, including a chemical group that includes DDT and chlordane. Radioactive fallout, and Strontium 90 in particular, also caused public concern during the period of nuclear bomb tests.
Today a more serious problem in several highly industrialized countries is the indiscriminate dumping of chemical wastes, some of which are extremely toxic to plants, animals, and man, and the growing use of sewage sludge, some of which contains dangerous heavy metals which can be taken up by plants. For a developing nation, however, such problems are at present insignificant compared with the growing threat to their agricultural productivity from erosion, salinization, waterlogging, and general loss of fertility.
<section>3</section>
2. Food production versus land degradation
Population pressures increase
Extent of soil erosion
Lower productivity forecast
Hillside forests destroyed
Overgrazing is critical
Salinization threatens production
Extent of sediment damage
Efficient shifting cultivation declines
Deserts are spreading
FAO studies indicate that agricultural production will have to increase by an estimated 60 percent by the year 2000 if the world's population is going to be fed. For this goal to be met, three things will have to happen. First, agriculture will have to be intensified on lands already being cultivated. In the 1970s, one hectare of arable land supported about 2.6 persons; by 2000, one hectare will have to support 4 persons.
Second, the area of cultivated land will have to be expanded by some 200 million hectares, or about 14 percent. It appears, however, that this amount of land - even if it can be found and developed will only just compensate for the amount of soil productivity lost over the same period, if erosion continues at present rates.
The third requisite, therefore, is that the continuing degradation of the world's soils be reversed and soils managed for sustained production. Meeting all three requisites will require a new sense of commitment on the part of the developing countries as well as the more developed ones.
Population pressures increase
There is no doubt that the number of people in the world is growing rapidly. Under even the most conservative projections, world population will increase from 4 billion in 1975 to an estimated 6.35 billion in the year 2000. Most of that population growth is expected to occur in those countries with the least capacity to feed themselves. The population of Asia and Oceania would increase 60 percent; that of Latin America, nearly 100 percent, and that of Africa, more than 100 percent.
World food production, of course, is also expected to increase, but most of that increase will occur in countries that already have relatively high per capita food consumption. For many in developing countries, per capita consumption will decline. These are a few of the disturbing predictions contained in The Global 2000 Report, published in the USA in 1980.
It is not necessary, of course, to look into the future to find hunger and misery. Despite major technological advances in agricultural production, millions of people in the world today are undernourished or starving. This paradox stems from a number of causes, of wh