<title>Non-wood forest products: the way ahead</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Recently increased attention has been focussed on the potential importance of non-wood forest products (NWFP) toward meeting rural communities' needs for food, fiber and forage, as well as essential sources of cash and better income. The value of such products to forest-dwelling peoples underlines the importance of efforts to conserve and manage natural and planted forests. Such resources provide a range of products and services, and their potential contribution to income generation has too long gone unnoticed by the development community.
This recognition of the possible role of national forestry development strategies has led the FAO Forestry Department to embark upon a series of concerted activities to encourage NWFP development through technical assistance activities in member countries.
Thus the Department has established the post of Forestry Officer (Non-Wood Forest Products) in the Forest Products Division, with responsibilities to oversee the initiation and coordination of programmes and projects in this sector. The Tropical Forestry Action Plans in various stages of preparation in over 80 nations include consideration of NWFP priorities and activities, following a consistent set of guidelines.
The present publication, prepared by Dr. G.E. Wickens of the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, England, is intended to serve as a broad guide to issues and potentials regarding NWFP development.
As "The Way Ahead" emphasizes throughout, NWFP development must by necessity comprise a multidisciplinary approach, for which task there must be devised close lines of collaboration both within FAO itself, and between FAO and other organizations, both international and national, governmental and non governmental. Efforts to strengthen common programmes toward sustained use of NWFP should be encouraged, as one among many approaches for the conservation and wise use of forest resources.
C H. Murray
Assistant Director-General
FAO Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Non-wood forest products (NWFP), as used in this report, refers to market or subsistence goods and services for human or industrial consumption derived from renewable forest resources and biomass, bearing promise for augmenting real rural household incomes and employment. The products include the use of plants for food, forage, fuel, medicine, fibre, biochemicals, as well as animals, birds, reptiles and fishes for food, fur and feathers. Wood used for handicrafts is included, as are services derived from the standing forest that generate such benefits as tourism revenues and preservation of biodiversity.
An extensive bibliographical search revealed that there have been numerous meetings and conferences where the more commercially important NWFP (tannins, cork, turpentine, fungi, etc.) have been the focus of discussion. The more domestic activities, such as food, handicrafts, fuel and fodder derived for subsistence purposes have been increasingly discussed in the realm of the Community Forestry programme.
The division between forestry, agriculture and horticulture is ill-defined, both at national and international levels. Therefore, it is not surprising that there should be some overlap of interests between FAO Departments concerning NWFP. For example, the Agriculture Department has been concerned with the development of wild species of oil producing palms, while the Forestry Department has been concerned with the resource management of vicuna in Peru and the management of captive crocodiles for leather. Inter-and intra-Departmental co-operation can ensure that technical expertise is applied to specific product development problems in response to international need.
The major factors, which have impeded the development of NWFP in the past, include the following:
1. Prejudices against the use of wild resources.
2. A lack of appreciation of the value of non-wood forest products to the national economy
3. A lack of understanding of the role of non-wood forest products in the life of the rural community.
4. Prejudices by both field workers and scientists in favor of products requiring highly specialized technology, rather than natural products, that often require only simple processing.
5. Substitution in industry by synthetics to reduce cost.
6. Lack of information, poor access to literature and lack of adequate training.
The major factors encouraging the development of NWFP are:
1. Deteriorating internal and external economic factors restricting imports and placing increasing reliance on indigenous natural resources.
2. Increasing publicity regarding the benefits to be derived from developing NWFP for national and community economies and environmental conservation.
3. New market opportunities created by the green movement in western countries and new ethnic markets created by the migration of peoples.
4. The ever increasing search for new biochemicals for pharmaceuticals and industry.
Marketing new NWFP requires a niche in the market waiting to be filled by either replacing an existing product with a superior and/or cheaper product, or to supply a demand that has until now been unfilled. Price information and market infrastructure are necessary to ensure adequate returns to the producer. There may be financial problems for the individual supplier when increasing production to meet the demands of new markets. Institutional changes in property rights arrangements may be necessary to avoid over-exploitation and resource exhaustion.
Because of the wide range of products and other contextual conditions affecting development prospects, it is difficult to select any particular ecological zone as a priority for development of NWFP. The humid tropical forests present the greatest range of unexploited NWFP. The arid and semi-arid areas, on the other hand, with their limited natural resources, lack a wide range of options, but a concerted effort to develop any potential product is likely to be beneficial. Food, forage and medicine will always rank high among any community's needs, but product development efforts should give priority to those non-wood sources that promise to improve incomes and employment, while also providing other benefits for local consumption.
The development of NWFP is a multi-disciplinary task requiring close collaboration between specialists within FAO and other international and national organizations. An insufficient effort has been made in the past to strengthen common programmes on sustained use of key NWFP among concerned agencies. Such efforts should now be encouraged, as one among many approaches toward conservation and wise use of forest resources.
<section>3</section>
1 FAO: Involvement in non-wood forest products
1.1 Definitions
1.2 Past involvement
1.1 Definitions
1.1.1 "Wood products"
The distinction between wood and non-wood products is ill-defined. In the present context "wood" refers to round wood, sawn timber, wood-based panels, wood chips and pulp, and usually involving commercial enterprises as well as the domestic use of unfinished poles for construction purposes.
1.1.2 "Forest"
The term "forest", as used here, embraces all the natural ecosystems where trees and shrubs form a significant component. Here "forests" range from evergreen rainforest to desert, although in the latter the trees and shrubs are confined primarily to oases and waterways. In certain areas, plantings of non-wood forest products (NWFP) on farmlands constitute chief supplies available for household consumption or sale (eg., bamboo in Bangladesh; forage species), or have potential as sources of supplemental income (eg., medicinal herbs; mushrooms). In these cases, coordination among NWFP and agroforestry activities is required.
1.1.3 "Non-wood forest products"
Non-wood forest products (NWFP), as used in this report, refers to market or subsistence goods and services for human or industrial consumption derived from renewable forest resources and biomass, bearing promise for augmenting real rural household incomes and employment. The products include the use of plants for food, beverages, forage, fuel and medicine (Table 1.1), animals, birds and fishes for food, fur and feathers, and of their products such as honey, lac, silk, etc. (Table 1.2) and the services of land for conservation and recreation (Table 1.3). These tables may be considered to form a preliminary basis for the classification of NWFP.
Forage, in the sense applied by FAO usage (Ibrahim 1975), includes "all browse and herbaceous food that is available to livestock or game animals". Thus forage includes NWFP that sustain such animal populations.
Fuels derived from wood or NWFP are not considered in this report, although there is an overlap of interests where biofuels have as secondary products tar or chemicals useful to industry. Similarly, handicraft products derived in part from wood are included in this report, as they are insufficiently covered by other FAO branches.
Table 1.1 non-wood plant products
Food
wild, domesticated, semi-domesticated plants, useable weeds, fungi, etc. and their edible roots, tubers, bulbs, stems, leaves, shoots, flowers, fruits, seeds, etc. to provide cereals, vegetables, edible fats and oils, spices and flavourings, salt substitutes, sweeteners, rennet substitutes, meat tenderizers, beverages, cordials and infusions, thirst quenchers, etc.
Forage
food for livestock and wildlife, including birds, fishes, and insects such as bees, silkworms, lac insects, etc.
Pharmaceuticals
drugs, anaesthetics, salves, ointments, lotions, purgatives, etc. for both human and veterinary use.
Toxins
for hunting, ordeal poisons, hallucinogens, pesticides, fungicides, etc. Note, some may have a pharmaceutical potential, especially as anaesthetics.
Aromatics
essential oils for cosmetic and perfume industries (international market highly specialized and vulnerable), unguents, incense, etc.
Biochemicals
non-edible fats and oils, naval stores, waxes, gums and latex, dyes, tannins, biochemicals for plastics and coatings, paints and varnish industries, etc.
Fibre
cloth, matting, cordage, basketry, brooms, stuffing for pillows, cork, etc.
Wood
wood for handicrafts.
Ornamentals
aesthetically pleasing plants for horticultural and amenity planting, cut- and dried-flower trades, etc.
Table 1.2 wild animal products^1
^1Note: Some Wildlife Products are Protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).
Mammals
meat, hides, skins, furs, wool, hair, horn, bone, pharmaceuticals, etc.
Birds
meat, eggs, feathers, edible nests, guano, etc.
Fishes
food, fish oil, feed protein, etc.
Reptiles
food, skins, shell, toxins, pharmaceuticals.
Invertebrates
edible invertebrates, plant exudates (manna), honey, wax, propolis, silk, lac, etc.
Table 1.3 Services Functions of Forest Lands
Habitat
Grazing, browse, shade and shelter for domestic livestock and wildlife, etc.
Soil improvement and protection
green manure, humus, N-fixation, soil stabilization, shade, shelter, hedges, etc.
Protected Areas
non-consumptive use by such tourism/recreation use as wildlife viewing, photography, bird watching, etc. i.e. eco-tourism carried out in National Parks, Wildlife sanctuaries, etc.
consumptive use by such recreational activities as hunting, shooting, fishing, insect and plant collecting, etc. carried out in hunting reserves and similar areas where such activities are permitted/promoted;
aesthetic, scenic and historic sites are some of the additional "tourist attractions" which may be present in protected areas and add to their value, rather than a source function of forests.
1.2 Past involvement
1.2.1 FAO collaboration with external agencies
The Forestry Department has been involved in several relevant conferences, symposia and other meetings in collaboration with other agencies, which have included discussion of NWFP as tannins, cork, furfural, rosin, camphor, turpentine and edible fungi^2. The emphasis has historically been on the better known, commercial NWFP rather than those of more domestic importance to the local communities, such as food plants and handicrafts. The latter has, however, been increasingly addressed through the programme of the Community Forestry group during the past few years.
^2See, for example, FAO/ECA/BTAO (1965), ECE/FAO (976a, b, 1982, 1988), FAO/ECE (1978), FAO, ECE, FINNIDA (1987) and FAO/Instituto Italo-Latino Americana (1980) for relevant conference proceedings.
The recognition of the need for community involvement has led to a number of projects with SIDA, such as a community study in the Republic of Korea on mushrooms (FAO/SIDA 1982). More recent collaboration includes a useful series of Community Forestry publications where the role of NWFP in the community is discussed and analyzed (FAO/SIDA 1989a-e), as well as the final report on the first FAO/SIDA expert consultation (FAO/SIDA 1989f). In a similar vein, a major FAD/WHO/UNICEF effort is the organization in 1992 of a conference on Human Nutrition, in which NWFP are one of the focuses for their role in food security and nutrition.
Training courses have also been organized in conjunction with DANIDA (FAO/DANIDA 1985) on dune stabilization, a subject which also included forage plants.
Joint studies involving government institutions include a series on forest fruit trees that involved cooperation with the Silvicultural Research Institute, Lushoto, Tanzania (FAO 1983), Forest Research Institute, Laguna, Philippines (FAO 1984) and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazonia, Manaus, Brazil (FAO 1986).
FAO has also provided technical cooperation for a WHO/IUCN/WWF International Consultation on the Conservation of Medicinal Plants held at Chiang Mai in 1988, as well as providing joint sponsorship with UNESCO/MAB for the International Round Table on Prosopis tamarugo Phil. held at Arica, Chile in 1984 (FAO 1985).
However, FAO has not been in evidence in other projects or meetings that have taken place to discuss critical NWFP, such as those conducted by UNIDO on the fruit resources of Balanites aegyptiaca or on medicinal plants (UNIDO undated). Neither does FAO appear to have participated in UNSO/ITC's discussions on the marketing, production and management of gum arabic (UNSO/ITC 1983).
Other potential areas for inter-agency cooperation include work with other international organizations concerned with NWFP, such as ILCA and ICRAF on browse species, or with WHO on medicinal plants, and both IBPGR and UNIDO on conservation of genetic material.
1.2.2 Past involvement within FAO
Past involvement in NWFP within FAO crosses departmental lines owing to sometimes arbitrary distinctions that are made between what are considered to be forestry, agricultural and horticultural subjects; similarly vague boundaries also exist among other international organizations as well as within and between national agencies.
Thus, although the growing and felling of trees for timber would appear to be indisputably the responsibility of the forester, and to be logical to expect forest resources and forest management to be his responsibility, yet these assumptions are not always ascertained in practice.
The responsibility for the management of wild tree resources varies from country to country, possibly due partly to the training and interests of the foresters, but probably more to internal politics. Thus, in the Sudan Republic, gum arable, irrespective as to whether it is obtained from the wild, plantations or fallow, is a forest responsibility. By way of contrast, the Brazil nut, which is almost entirely harvested from the wild, is the responsibility of the agriculturalist. The wild Jessenia and Oenocarpus oil-producing palms of Latin America are similarly regarded as agricultural (FAO 1988). On the other hand, the mandate of some forestry departments even extends to all forms of wildlife, such in Chile, where CONAF's interest even extends to the barren salt flats of the Atacama Desert and the conservation of flamingoes as well as an interest in reptiles.
It is no wonder that in an international organization such as FAO there should be grey areas regarding the division of responsibility. Thus, the Forestry Department, as part of its programme for the promotion of appropriate forestry enterprises, has investigated the impact of rural enterprises as vicuna management in Peru (FAO 1985) and the management of captive crocodile for leather (FAO 1989). It is possible that such studies may have received some input from other Departments, although this is not always apparent.
Examples of such cooperation include a major project funded by IBPGR and executed by FAD/FORM, on Genetic Resources of Arid and Semi-Arid Zone Arboreal Species for the improvement of Rural Living (1978-1985), originally involving eight countries. This project, continued since 1985 under the auspices of the FAO regular programme, has expanded to include over 30 nations, having as its focus fuelwood in combination with NWFP.
Other cases include the Fishery Resources and Environment Division's report on the utilization and management of mangrove resources (FAO 1987), written with the collaboration of the Forestry Department. Advising governments regarding suitable management of the mangrove ecosystem for the production of fishery resources and both wood and non-wood products can only be done if there is such collaboration between the two Divisions.
Most of the work involving NWFP is of interest to some other Departments and should not be carried out in isolation; this dictum applies equally within the Forestry Department, where, for example, Community Forestry is especially relevant to our understanding of how people can make more adequate use of the forest's natural resources, and Forest Resources are essential to ensure development and suitable management of this resource base (see Chapter 5).
Fodder is an essential non-wood forest product in Nepal
<section>4</section>
2 Major factors impeding or facilitating development
2.1 Factors impeding development
2.2. Factors encouraging development
2.3 Problems of marketing
2.1 Factors impeding development
The development of NWFP has been impeded in the past by a number of factors, some of which appear to be either social or political in origin.
2.1.1 In many cases prejudices among both government functionaries and the population at large within the developing countries favour western style products over indigenous ones. Commodities from wild sources are either socially unacceptable or are considered technologically inferior because they were used by one's less sophisticated forbearers (Sène 1985). Such prejudices can persist even when the western-style product can be clearly seen to be environmentally or otherwise unsuitable. Such changing tastes and preferences are especially true for food products.
An education programme using the mass media could seek to overcome these prejudices and create a national pride in the utilization of natural resources. Competitive pricing and quality control are also important factors in ensuring continued acceptance of natural products.
2.1.2 Government personnel is often unwilling to assume responsibility for efforts to strengthen areas of lesser apparent priority to the national economy. Although individually NWFP often make a minor contribution, collectively they often represent a large proportion of the rural economy, and can add significantly to export revenues. However, when costed individually, they may also appear to require a disproportionate amount of effort to develop and market.
Improvement in valuation of the social and economic benefits to be derived by rural communities and industries following better utilization of NWFP needs to be stressed, as well as strengthening of decentralized rural institutions and enterprises.
2.1.3 Government personnel and urbanized communities may lack sympathetic appreciation regarding the importance of NWFP to the rural population. Development plans and projects that affect such products and resources may be devised without consulting the rural communities involved, leading to possible rejection of measures to be undertaken.
The advantages of NWFP to the rural communities and the need for their involvement and adequate consultation must be emphasized before the start of any project.
2.1.4 There are prejudices by both field workers and scientists in investigating and developing what may be considered minor natural products requiring unsophisticated analysis. Scientists in developing countries who have received advanced training in the West often find it demeaning to undertake relatively basic research, often based on nothing more than intelligent observation and selection rather than genetic engineering. The major exception to this generalization is the search for new biochemicals, which requires advanced scientific screening, linked with adequate ethnographical observations.
The growing international concern for biodiversity and protection of endangered gene pools may stimulate scientists to have greater pride in their countries' natural resources and to appreciate their value to the community. Such pride should be engendered through forestry training and extension with the help of the mass media.
2.1.5 There is a lack of detailed basic information on resource availability, yield, quality, preparation and utilization for most of NWFP and their relevance to the local rural economy, let alone any consideration of their potential value to the national economy.
The creation of natural resources data banks should be encouraged, attention given to the collection of information for the adequate valuation of their economic contribution, and assistance given on the sustainable development of these resources.
2.1.6 The full potential of a product may not be recognized often because of insufficient exchange of knowledge between countries, for linguistic or political reasons. For example, although the baobab is widely distributed throughout Africa, people in the individual countries where it occurs probably would recognize less than a dozen usages for its products. Yet, when these uses are considered over the entire distribution range of the tree, they number more than fifty.
Baobab trees provide sustenance and shade
There is clearly a need for more and better distributed monographic treatments of potentially useful species; specialists under contract are one means of achieving this, but project outputs may include public information and extension, demonstration and exchange as means of overcoming this constraint.
2.1.7 Few academic institutions provide instruction in NWFP, economic plants or ethnobotany. These are multidisciplinary subjects, a knowledge of which is essential for any development programme involving NWFP.
The training programme within academic institutions and short-term training courses for responsible forestry officials and rural development planners should be considered.
2.1.8 Information sources on NWFP within the developing countries are generally poor. Even where journals are available, there are very few dealing specifically with NWFP^3. Other articles are to be found scattered through a wide range of publications so that major libraries in the biological sciences need to be consulted when seeking information. ^4
^3The major plant journals are Economic Botany, Journal d'Agriculture Traditionelle et Botanique Appliquée, and Travaux d'Ethnobotanique et d'Ethnozoologie; others, such as A Ouarterly Journal of Natural Products (formerly known as Lloydia) and the Journal of Ethnopharmacology, deal with medicinal plants.
^4Further references to the literature on NWFP may be found in Wickens (1990).
The available textbooks are largely concerned with plants that either are or are soon to be commercially exploited. However, important studies at the species or subject level have been published as monographs or reports by FAO, IBPGR, UNIDO, WHO, ILCA, ICRAF, GTZ, US National Academy of Science, etc. Wildlife, with its greater popular appeal, is better documented than plants.
Encouragement should be given to preparing regional and/or national textbooks. Developing country professionals should be informed of the availability of abstracting services solely for the benefit of the developing countries that may facilitate access to ephemeral ("grey") literature on NWFP, such as ILEIA, ODI Social Forestry Network, etc.
2.1.9 The utilization of NWFP was largely predetermined by earlier colonial exploitation patterns when many tropical countries were governed by Europe. Under the various colonial systems only a few key species were selected for export and thereby determined cultivation and research policies. In some cases the market advantages that such crops obtained were due to the disproportionate amount of research that they received compared to less-exploited crops of similar or possibly better potential.
Shifting research resources toward those neglected products that have promising potential may provide significant economic dividends, but may require a long-term commitment.
2.1.10 The relative prosperity of the early 1960s meant that many traditional NWFP, e.g. plant-based pesticides, were discarded in favour of western-style products (see 2.1.1 above). The elder generation that knew of their usages may die without first handing down their knowledge. Furthermore, much of the relevant information that was recorded during the colonial period is no longer readily accessible within the country concerned, although often still available within the former colonial power.
Information retained by the colonial metropolis needs to be extracted and made available to the countries concerned. Attempts should also be made to record and document the traditional usages known to older generations before their knowledge is lost forever.
2.1.11 Potential uses of NWFP may have been discarded, either because the appropriate technology was not available or the economic climate was not propitious. In other cases, where the species has been introduced, the appropriate source material (provenance) was not selected.
Unfortunately such failures tend to discourage further ventures due to discredit.
Discarded usages need to be revised in the light of present-day technical and economic viability.
2.1.12 Utilization of NWFP may, in some countries, be either hindered or prevented by restrictive forestry legislation, sometimes even to the extent of forbidding the harvesting of dead wood, wild fruits, etc.
Such restrictive legislation requires amendment. Customary laws and taboos should be assessed regarding potential conflicts with formal legislation
2.1.13 World market forces have encouraged increasing concentration on a limited range of raw materials in the belief that uniformity is more efficient than diversity. This puts increasing pressure on developing countries to concentrate on staple products.
Fortunately there is a growing awareness of the inherent dangers in using restricted germplasm and monoculture. Nevertheless, there is still a need to increase this awareness further through education and the mass media.
2.1.14 It is not generally appreciated that NWFP demand a multi-disciplinary approach by biological and social scientists^5. Even palaeo-scientists and historians can contribute. For example, the rediscovery of the use of penicillin by Flemming earlier this century could possibly have been made much sooner if greater attention had been paid to the writings of Pharaonic Egypt where the use of a penicillin-type mould is recorded.
^5See Appendix A for the function and interaction of some of the disciplines that might be involved in developing plant products.
Training programmes need to be strengthened and a greater interchange between the social and biological scientists encouraged. Furthermore, acces by industrialists and entrepreneurs to information on market potential for new forest products should be improved.
2.2. Factors encouraging development
The development of NWFP in developing countries has mainly received encouragement from deteriorating internal and external economic factors, and from efforts to conserve tropical forests and biodiversity.
2.2.1 Worsening domestic economic condition and balance of payments crises have meant that many developing countries can no longer afford certain imports and have been forced to consider a greater use of their own natural resources. Synthetic pesticides are an example of costly imported products that now need to be replaced by local plant pesticides (see 2.1.10 above).
Training programmes for national forestry officials in opportunities for product development should be encouraged. For example, Zambia's Forest Department has, after training at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, created a data bank on NWFP in order to advance their utilization.
2.2.2 There is a growing realization by some governmental administrations that a segment of local communities is dependent on non-wood forest resources for their wellbeing and that the use of such resources can provide a steady improvement in their living standards.
Publicity should be given to success stories to encourage further development.
2.2.3 There are new market opportunities being created by the green movement in the western countries, especially in their demand for herbal instead of synthetic pharmaceuticals. Recent efforts to link forest product sales with rainforest conservation have stimulated demand and improved prices for some goods. Profits are being reinvested in community development projects by groups such as Cultural Survival, the Body Shop, Conservation International, etc. (May 1990).
These opportunities need to be identified and developed.
2.2.4 New ethnic markets are sometimes created by the migration of peoples, such as the Jewish community from Morocco to Israel; their preference for argue oil from the wild Moroccan endemic, Argania spinosa, has stimulated its introduction for domestication in Israel.
Such demands need to be identified and met.
2.2.5 The ever continuing search for new biochemicals for pharmaceuticals and industry has been stimulated by the urgent need for a cure for AIDS. Drugs for treating cancer and the necessity for strategic alternatives for rubber and sperm whale oil are part of ongoing research programmes underway for decades.
Strengthening the national institutions in the developing countries is recommended so that they too can become involved in the search for new biochemicals and pharmaceuticals and benefit from their development. Such participation should ensure intellectual and provenance property rights and standards for payment of royalties to the country of origin of genetic resources.
2.2.6 It is increasingly being realized that the world has become dependent on fewer and fewer staple resources, especially for food, and that there is an urgent need to diversify in order to avoid the possible consequences of panendemics.
As mentioned in 2.1.13, even greater awareness must be encouraged through education and the mass media.
2.2.7 The ever increasing global population and the occupation of the more hospitable land have created a need for the better utilization of less hospitable areas. New NWFP, adapted to such environments, are often necessary as a basis for regional resource development. This is particularly true for the arid, semi-arid and saline regions of the world, but also for the humid tropics.
Strengthening of national institutions is required to encourage greater research and development in the utilization of NWFP in these less hospitable regions.
2.3 Problems of marketing
Although complex, the problems involved in NWFP development from identification through manufacturing are relatively simple compared to those of marketing at the local, national or international level (Wickens et al. 1989).
2.3.1 There must be a niche in the market waiting to be filled, either by replacing an existing commodity by something that is superior and/or cheaper, or supply a demand that has until now been unfilled.
The price structure for a product must be such that the provider, merchant and buyer are all reasonably satisfied, without the middleman making an excessive profit at the expense of the provider.
2.3.2 Expanding production to enter new markets can cause problems for the producer. The unprofitable time lag during which stocks have to be increased, so as to meet the quantity demanded by the new market, can be beyond the financial resources of the individual supplier. In general, the more expensive the processing required, the greater the volume of