<title>A study of the reasons for success or failure of soil conservation projects - FAO soils bulletin 64</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Modern soil conservation, as we know it today, developed in the 1930s when concern with problems of soil erosion led to the creation of soil conservation services in the United States and, shortly after, in other countries. Since then a vast amount of money, time and effort has been expended on many different soil conservation projects and programmes.
It is not known how much has been spent on soil conservation but one estimate is that the United States Government alone has spent in excess of US$ 16 billion since the 1930s with present expenditure exceeding $ 1 billion a year.
Expenditure of this magnitude would be acceptable if the problem was being solved, but indications are that approximately 6 billion tons of top soil are still being lost annually in the United States, with off-site damage caused by erosion, estimated to be in the order of $ 3 billion a year.
In other parts of the world the picture is no better. Although extensive soil conservation work has been done in Australia over the last 40 years, the Australian Government recently claimed that the country was losing 90 million tons of soil annually and admitted the cost of land degradation to every Australian farmer to be around A$ 3600 a year. If soil erosion in the United States and Australia is bad, the situation over most of Africa is even worse. For example, terrible famines in Ethiopia in recent years are at least partly attributable to advance soil erosion. In fact, so bad has land degradation become in Africa that a new word - desertification - has been coined to describe the situation. This is in spite of many soil conservation programmes and projects which have been running in Africa for many years.
There have, of course, been some very good and effective conservation projects and programmes in a number of countries but, nevertheless, in spite of substantial efforts and the expenditure of large sums of money over the last half century, the results have frequently been disappointing.
With this problem in mind, this study was undertaken to try to identify the reasons for success and failure in soil conservation projects. Armed with the results of this study, it should now be possible to avoid repeating many of the mistakes of the past and developing new projects which have a far greater chance of success.
<section>2</section>
Summary
PROJECT BACKGROUND
In 1985 and 1986 FAO undertook the important study "African Agriculture: the next 25 years". During the study soil conservation projects in Africa were examined to see why some have been more successful than others. The results were interesting so a more detailed study was undertaken. The findings of this detailed study are given in this publication.
The first plan was to select a few representative projects and study them in detail. However it soon became clear that projects vary so much that a small sample could not be representative. The plan was therefore changed to a less detailed study of a much larger sample. It also became apparent that there is a large amount of literature on assessments which has been carried out by other agencies, and although none of these were specifically addressed to soil conservation projects, their data and conclusions would still be very relevant to this project.
METHOD
The plan of work was to study all the available books, reports, assessment studies and project evaluations, and from this database to form some tentative conclusions. At the same time a fairly detailed evaluation was made of a sample of 40 projects which had a significant soil conservation component. A four-page assessment report was completed for each project, divided into sections relating to:
- planning and preparation before the project starts;
- implementation during the project; and
- assessment and continuity after completion of the project.
The projects covered all types of agency: multilateral, bilateral, and NGO, and geographically were spread worldwide. The simple six-point evaluation method used in the FAO Review of Field Programmes was also applied to all assessed projects.
CONCLUSIONS - BEFORE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
By far the most significant conclusion from the study is the importance of project design. Every major assessment reaches the same conclusion, for example the World Bank study of almost 1000 projects over a ten-year period found that of projects which had poor performance, 86 percent had design faults, that is the problems were designed into the projects. In one third of these cases poor design was the most important single factor leading to poor performance.
Design errors are mainly the result of incorrect assumptions made at the design stage.
The main donor errors are:
- over-optimism, including over-estimating the effect of new practices;
- over-estimating the rate of adoption of new practices;
- over-estimation of the ability of the host country to provide backup facilities;
- under-estimation of the time required to mobilize staff and materials for the project; and
- frequently a quite unreal estimate of the economic benefits.
Some of the main problems arising from the assumptions of the host governments are:
- over-estimating their capacity to provide counterpart staff and the funds for the recurrent costs arising from the project;
- a tendency to under-estimate the problems of coordination among different ministries or departments;
- a tendency to over-estimate the strength of the national research base and its ability to contribute to the project.
Other design problems on the recipient side may include the absence of a long-term policy for the development of natural resources and the political stability necessary to ensure continuity of political support. There was sometimes a reluctance to make full use of low-level institutions (e.g. farmers' associations, cooperatives, village councils), which are usually very important for the successful implementation of agricultural projects. Finally, some technical problems are not adequately considered or resolved at the planning stage, such as the pricing policy for agricultural products, the effect on the project of variations in exchange rates, and the existing social background, e.g. land tenure.
A checklist of good project design requirements
1. A project must have clear objectives and definable measurable targets which must be limited and obtainable. It must be clear whether the project is primarily directed towards achieving national objectives or those of the individual farmer.
2. Project design must be flexible so that the project can grow and change and adapt during the course of the project. The old style of a detailed blue-print type of plan may be appropriate for engineering construction projects but is highly unsuitable for agricultural development.
3. Project design must include details of implementation. The duties and responsibilities of project staff and counterparts must be clearly defined, and the details of operating, down to who pays for the petrol for the project vehicles. An annual workplan is essential.
4. Changes in agricultural systems take place slowly, and projects must be designed with a realistic duration. In the sample of soil conservation projects, of the successful projects 75 percent had a duration of five years or more, and only 25 percent less than five years.
5. Many projects have failed because of the technology.
The technology should:
- be appropriate and tested locally;
- offer short-term, on-site benefits, and large increments (50-100 percent);
- require affordable inputs, especially labour;
- not include foregone benefits, e.g. giving up land;
- not include any increased risk;
- be in tune with existing social factors, e.g. the separate roles of men and women in agriculture.
6. Where it is clear at the project design stage that there is a weakness in the capacity of local institutions, there should be heavy front-end loading of the training component. A three-year project which includes overseas post-graduate training means that the key counterparts are unavailable for most of the project. In soil conservation projects there is a trend away from overseas university training and towards more management training, widening of experience, and exchange visits with neighbouring countries.
CONCLUSIONS - DURING IMPLEMENTATION
Projects or programmes which set up a separate Project Management Unit (PMU) are in rapid decline, partly because these were frequently associated with multi-sector or multi-component projects, like the Integrated Rural Development Projects which are no longer in favour. The trend is towards projects which are based within existing line departments.
A high proportion of projects report problems arising from delay in staff appointments, both international experts and local counterpart staff. This occurs in many donor agencies from the largest to the smallest. Since appointing procedures are unlikely to change, the important thing is that the project design should be based on realistic assessments of the necessary lead time.
In project design the importance of flexibility was noted. This implies that there must be delegation of responsibility so that necessary changes and adjustments can be made on the spot by field staff without having to refer back to headquarters. When former project managers were asked why a project was successful, a common reply was, "Because head office left me alone to get on with it".
Most agricultural projects involve the introduction of new concepts or methods or materials but these have seldom been fully tested under farm conditions, and so a continuing backup from the national research service should be available.
Another common weakness is monitoring during the project. All the agencies which have conducted detailed evaluations of their operational procedures recommend that much more emphasis should be placed on regular monitoring.
CONCLUSIONS - AFTER THE PROJECT
Along with the need for better monitoring is a widely expressed need for more and better evaluation. It is only by the careful evaluation and study of past projects that the lessons and experience can be applied in the design of future projects. The increasing awareness of the low level of success of agricultural development projects has led to much greater interest in evaluation as a step towards improvement.
Current development jargon is so full of the buzz words sustainability, continuity, and replicability, that it is surprising to find how few of the projects designed more than five years ago gave any serious thought to the question of what would happen at the end of the project. Certain types of project have a specific objective to be achieved within a fixed time span (e.g. many FAO TCP projects) but in all cases where the objective is to introduce or encourage change, the question of the long-term future should be built into the project design.
SOME OBSERVED TRENDS
Projects on the whole are getting better. The FAO Evaluation Centre reports that in the period 1980-84, 50 percent of projects were rated good or satisfactory. In the period 1985-86 this had increased to 73 percent.
In the sample of soil conservation projects where, of those started in the 1970s, 25 percent were rated successful, but of the projects started in the eighties the proportion of successful projects has risen to 56 percent (Appendix 1).
Evaluations by the World Bank give a less encouraging result. They report that failure rates were 12 percent in 1979, 37 percent in 1984 and 40 percent in 1986, but not too much importance should be attached to these figures because the Bank assessment is based only on whether the project achieved its expected economic rate of return.
Projects are getting smaller and simpler. There is little interest today in Integrated Rural Development Projects which were thought to hold out so much promise in the seventies (Sections 6.1 to 6.5). There is also a noticeable decrease in multiple-donor and multiple-sector projects.
Projects are getting longer. The record clearly shows the need for a steady sustained pressure on agricultural problems rather than a short hammer blow. The three-year project is relatively uncommon now, apart from the narrow, specific-objective project mentioned earlier. The problem inhibiting the more widespread use of long projects results from the budgeting and accounting procedures of most donors. Where a country has an established long-term development programme, a donor can fund a time-slice of the programme.
The study of soil conservation projects does not give a clear picture of the usefulness of incentives, particularly subsidies and Food For Work. The most common view seems to be that all such incentives should be avoided if possible, relying only on the farmer's own perceived wish to carry out conservation practices. However many projects report that terracing programmes could not have been achieved without the incentive of FFW.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Terms of Reference
1.2 Background to the study
1.3 Development of the study
1.1 Terms of Reference
This study was carried out as a part-time activity over two and a half years, in two phases. The Terms of Reference for Phase 1 were "To compile information, data and reports on a representative selection of soil conservation projects with a view to subsequent evaluation of the effectiveness of the projects in achieving their objectives". The final report of Phase 1 was submitted in January 1987, and reported 121 projects as possibly suitable for further study, of which about half were expected to yield sufficient documentation.
The Terms of Reference for Phase 2 were "On the basis of information gathered during Phase 1, analyse a number of selected soil conservation projects with the objective of identifying those factors which have led to success and failure, and prepare and submit a report covering the findings".
1.2 Background to the study
In recent years there has been much analysis and evaluation of aid and technical assistance programmes, spurred by the worry that many programmes and projects appear to be less effective than the expectations at the time of planning. Several major studies have confirmed this, and show that projects in the agricultural sector are particularly weak. For example:
- A World Bank analysis of 994 projects over ten years 1973-1983 showed a failure rate of 14 percent in all sectors, but 26 percent in agriculture.
- The Bank analysis of 212 agricultural projects 1979-1983 shows an average of 75 percent successful, with wide geographical variation, from Asia 85 percent to 45 percent in agricultural projects in East Africa (World Bank 1984).
- In an FAO study of 310 projects over 5 years to 1986, 63 percent were assessed as good or satisfactory in the definition of objectives, and 52 percent as good or satisfactory (FAO 1987).
The second point which comes through strongly in many studies is that the reasons for disappointing success rates have now been identified, and the question is how soon agencies can learn from these results and adapt their procedures. Two contrasting changes are worth mentioning.
FAO rated 50 percent of projects as good or satisfactory in the period 1980-1984, improving to 73 percent in 1985-1986. However the World Bank in 1985 said "Failure rates in agriculture continue to rise. Their proportion tripled over 1979-84, from 12 percent to 37 percent, the average for the period being 27 percent. The 1986 figure is 40 percent" (World Bank 1985a).
In his excellent survey of success stories in agricultural development in Africa, Harrison (1987) sums up the position by saying "It is not the purpose of this book to pretend that the battle is well on the way to being won. That is far from the case. By and large the breakthroughs are surrounded and vastly outnumbered by failures. On present trends, disaster will carry the day. But it need not be that way. Our success stories are like seeds. If they are sown widely enough, they can take over the field".
The brief was to study projects with a component of soil conservation and try to identify the reasons for success and failure. However in most projects, soil conservation is one of many components, and frequently a minor one. It was therefore necessary, in order to answer the question about soil conservation projects, to collect and study the literature concerned with broader projects, often covering the whole agricultural sector, and sometimes beyond. These wider studies are useful because although looking at wider issues, e.g. the whole question of aid (Cassen 1986), or soil conservation policy (Morgan and Rickson 1989), the conclusions can also be applied to soil conservation projects.
1.3 Development of the study
During the preparation of the FAO "African Agriculture: the next 25 years" study, (FAO 1986) there was a preliminary study of projects in Africa with a soil conservation component. Fourteen projects were subjected to a quantitative assessment, on a five-point scale, of thirteen parameters considered likely to have a bearing on the success of the project. It was decided to use a similar approach for the present study, but using many more parameters divided into:
Before project: concerned with identification, appraisal and design;
During project: concerned with implementation and monitoring;
After project: concerned with evaluation and sustainability.
An example of the evaluation sheets is shown in Appendix 3, and the results are discussed in Appendix 1.
The first plan was to make a detailed analysis of a few representative projects, but it soon became clear that projects vary in so many different ways that a small sample cannot be representative. So it was decided to use as large a sample as possible.
At the end of Phase 1, 41 projects were identified as suitable for assessment with sufficient documentation available, and a further 80 projects to be included if further documentation could be obtained. By the end of Phase 2 information had been collected on 133 projects (list in Appendix 4).
It was surprising that there were so many projects which could not be evaluated because there was insufficient documentation available. Eventually about 35 projects were assessed (listed in Appendixes 1 and 2).
During the study it became apparent that evaluation and assessment of assistance projects have become very topical in recent years. In addition to self-analysis by many development agencies, both large and small, there have been several major conferences devoted to the subject, and a shelf-full of books and reports. The distillation of information and ideas from these sources, listed in Appendix 5, has therefore been a major activity throughout the study.
The projects studied covered a wide range of types of assistance, so the terms donor, lender and aid agency have been used, as if they were interchangeable. Similarly the other side may be called the borrower, recipient, host or local institution.
The purpose of the study is to identify factors affecting the success or failure of projects with a significant soil conservation component, but attempts have been made to avoid recrimination for the mistakes of fifteen or twenty years ago because these are mostly recognized and admitted. Neither was it a duty to debate the strengths and weaknesses of different agencies, or the political economy of aid in general. It would be artificial to ignore all the peripheral factors affecting projects (such as the place of NGOs or the use of Food for Work) so some of these are briefly covered in Chapter 6 with references for readers wishing to study them in more detail.
<section>4</section>
2. Evaluation methods
2.1 What is "success"?
2.2 Evaluation methods used by some agencies
2.3 Methods used in this study
2.1 What is "success"?
Before attempting to evaluate the success of projects the criteria to be used to measure success must be defined. There are a number of possibilities:
- Banks work in terms of money. For the World Bank, an economic rate of return (ERR) of up to 25 percent is the base for setting up projects, and they are usually considered successful if they achieve more than 10 or 12 percent.
- "The principle determinant of success or failure is the degree to which new practices are associated with visible increases in annual domestic income for the farmers" (Murray 1979). This is a rather narrow view, although the question of farmer benefit is emerging as a major factor in successful projects.
- A rather cynical suggestion is that success of a project could be judged from the answer given by the project manager to the following question, "If this project were operating as a commercial venture, using funds coming from shareholders, would you invest your own personal money in it?"
- Probably the best yardstick, and the one used in this study, is to measure the extent to which the project achieved its objectives. However this requires that the project should have defined its objectives and also set up criteria for measuring their achievement. Later it is shown that it is rare to find this situation.
Followers of the British TV series "Yes Minister" or readers of the derived book may remember the occasion when a technical expert comes up with what the Minister thinks is an original and brilliant idea to control expenditure on projects. In that case it was local government expenditure, but the arguments apply equally to aid agencies because they have much in common - they are spending public money, they are concerned about spending it properly and being accountable, but they seldom manage to get it right.
The expert's idea was that all new proposed projects would be required to include a method of measuring the success or failure of the project. The proposal would have to include minimum thresholds in the form "The scheme will be a failure if it takes longer than this time... costs more than a given expenditure... employs more staff than this number... fails to meet the following preset performance standards". The official proposing the project would be responsible for applying these criteria.
The Minister thinks that this is a beautifully simple and effective way of managing expenditure on projects but is out-manouvered by his civil servants, one of whom reminds him that the practice of transferring officials every two or three years is done to "stop this personal responsibility nonsense" (Lynn and Jay 1984).
A related real-life anecdote came from a large agency where an official, commenting on the high failure rate of projects in a particular sector, said "Of course in this organisation you get credit for the number of projects you initiate, but before they are evaluated you have been moved to another desk so there is little risk of being associated with failed projects".
Whether evaluation reports provide a true picture has been questioned. Two major reviews suggest that there is likely to be a negative bias, because "evaluation reports naturally tend to focus on what went wrong, because the object is to profit from experience" (ODA 1983). Another comment is "Evaluations tend to focus on projects which have had or are encountering some form of difficulty. Thus the evaluation sample is not entirely representative" (FAO 1987).
2.2 Evaluation methods used by some agencies
During this study no single agency was found which could produce documentation which would allow a thorough study of the planning, operation and evaluation of all its projects. In some cases this was because documents were restricted to in-house use, but most agencies had poor records of what reports and documents had been written and an equally poor ability to retrieve them. One of the Bank Audit Reviews points out that the lack of documentation inhibits the process of learning from experience (World Bank 1986).
On the other hand every agency without fail recognized weaknesses in its monitoring, reporting and evaluation procedures, and was talking about, or doing something about, improving this aspect.
Generally, the scale of the evaluation operation correlates with the size of the agency. Several agencies have an evaluation unit which is independent of the operational divisions, e.g. World Bank, ODA and FAO. This has the merit of allowing impartial assessment of projects, but it also means that it can only offer advice and suggestions, which are not always accepted by the operational divisions.
Small agencies and NGOs find that maintaining an independent evaluation unit makes additional demands on the technical staff who are usually in short supply. The NGOs with whom this was discussed felt that monitoring and evaluation deserved more attention, but were reluctant to allocate more resources to it.
Agencies have their own sequence of steps in project planning, implementation and evaluation. Most include the four main components:
- identification and proposal;
- appraisal;
- implementation; and
- evaluation.
Studies of the methodology of monitoring and evaluation point out that plans for monitoring during the project, and evaluation both during and after, should be planned in complete detail right from the stage of project proposal (Casley and Kumar 1987 and 1988, Unesco 1984). However all the major reviews which cover many projects (e.g. World Bank, ODA, FAO) conclude that both monitoring and evaluation are weaknesses in most projects. Monitoring during the project is generally held to be essential so that the feedback can be used to make adjustments and improvements during the life of the project. Evaluation would ideally be a continuous process, starting at appraisal, continuing with mid-term reviews and at termination, followed by an ex-post review, and ideally a follow-up review 5, 10 or 15 years after the end of the project. All agencies have some programme for evaluation of at least some of their projects, but no agency was found to have procedures which approached the
ideal specification such as that set out by Goodman and Love (1980). The procedures of the World Bank are probably the most comprehensive, but even this agency is unable to do a complete evaluation on every project and since 1982 has followed "selective auditing".
Each agency has its own methodology for evaluation, and there seem to be two approaches to getting the most information with limited staff capacity. One is to carry out a fairly detailed study of a limited number of projects, limited perhaps by geographical location or by sector. An example is the "Synopsis of reviews of six African Rural Development Projects" by ODA (Morris 1981). The other approach is to use a simple assessment which can be applied easily and quickly to a large number of projects. An example of this approach is the FAO Review of Field Programmes which covered 715 projects in 81 countries. (FAO 1987).
2.3 Methods used in this study
There were four components of the evaluation procedure used in this study, using a mixture of subjective and objective assessments.
i. From the 20 or 30 books and reviews which each analysed many projects, several recurrent themes emerged. Some of these were formulated as a hypothesis and kept in mind when studying or assessing individual projects, so that one could note whether the project supported or contradicted the idea. Examples are:
- Duration of project is important and ten year projects are more likely to be successful than 5 year projects.
- Farmer involvement should start at the time of project preparation not at implementation.
- Projects implemented through Project Management Units (PMU) are less likely to be effective than those integrated into line departments.
This was a subjective and non-quantifiable exercise but very useful in distilling the enormous amount of information in the literature.
ii. The 13-point questionnaire used in the earlier FAO study (see Section 1.3) was expanded into a set of evaluation sheets, shown in Appendix 3. The 3 main sections ask questions relating to what happened before the project started, during implementation, and after the project was completed. Some questions collect background information and ask for a yes/no/do not know answer. Where possible a quantitative answer is requested using a five-point scale. A quantitative assessment can be made for each of the before, during and after sheets, and they can be combined for an overall assessment of the project. Another sheet records background information about the project and the documentation available, and there is a separate sheet for assessment if there was a significant training component.
Sets of evaluation sheets were completed by the author and by a number of past and present FAO staff members. Some projects were assessed independently by more than one person to check whether they obtained similar results. (They were encouragingly similar.)
The numerical results of these studies are shown in Appendix 1.
iii. The assessment sheets also used the simple six-factor evaluation developed by the FAO Evaluation Service and used in the FAO Review of Field Programmes. The six factors are clarity of objective, project design, borrower support and involvement, and achievement of objectives, which is sub-divided into output, transfer of skills, and follow-up prospects. Each of the six factors is assessed as poor, satisfactory or good. Assigning numerical values of zero, plus one and plus two to these categories gives a single score out of twelve.
iv. Many projects were identified as suitable for analysis but it was found that there was not sufficient documentation available to complete the evaluation sheets. All of these projects were studied to some extent and yielded points of interest and subjective assessments which have been incorporated into this report.
<section>5</section>
3. During project planning
3.1 Agency policies and procedures
3.2 Policies and procedures of recipient
3.3 Design of projects
3.1 Agency policies and procedures
The growth of the aid industry in recent years has had positive and negative effects. On the plus side there is more money available, and more experience to share. On the negative side, in the frenetic rush to find and fund projects and to speed disbursement, there is not enough time for assessing what is being done, and for using experience to improve programmes.
All aid agencies are trying to help less developed countries, but the identification, location and size of projects can all be influenced by preconceived policies or procedures or spending targets.
When evaluating projects planned in the early seventies, two facts should be borne in mind -one which distorted planning, the other which upset implementation.
Between 1970 and 1980 multilateral commitments for assistance to agriculture rose from US$ 700 million to US$ 6700 million per annum. This led to an increase in "pressure to lend", and to the setting of over-ambitious lending targets. The result was that it was too easy for marginal projects to slip through appraisal.
The second factor was the oil price rise in 1973, which knocked sideways all the assumptions about local costs and the national economies of borrower countries. To quote FAO - "Given the ubiquitous impact of the oil price shock-wave, it is hardly surprising that so few projects prepared in the 1970s were on target" (FAO 1988).
Disbursement is a major problem for most agencies. Project plans and appraisals are nearly always over-optimistic about implementation, such as the time needed to import equipment, to recruit and bring in experts, to select counterpart staff for training. But there is seldom enough flexibility in the budget to get over this problem. Perhaps some money can be transferred to the following year, but then there is a surplus to be spent in a hurry at the end of the project. Transferring funds between components because one is underspent distorts the planned balance of the project. Unplanned spending in order to meet disbursement requirements is a common failing. The problems of achieving planned disbursement have led some agencies to adopt special policies. For example the UK all-party parliamentary group on overseas development reported "The Government intends to expand what it terms 'Fast disbursing programme aid' to Africa" (All Party Parliamentary Group 1985). Concerned about
slow disbursement on projects in sub-Saharan Africa, IFAD set up in 1985 a programme of seven major steps to improve matters.
Disbursing aid funds wisely and effectively is more difficult than is assumed by people outside the industry. Band-Aid is an interesting example. A large sum 