<title>Wood gas as engine fuel</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Wood gasifiers played an important role in the past in the substitution of oil-based fuels in internal combustion engines, but fell into disuse after the Second World War because of their economic and technical disadvantages as compared with relatively inexpensive imported fuels.
Since the middle of the 1970's the increase in oil prices has led to a renewed interest in wood gasification technology, especially in countries dependent on oil imports but with adequate supplies of wood or other biomass fuels or, as in the case of Sweden, where the technology is maintained and developed as a matter of policy.
Research into the technology of gasifier/engine systems has provided modern designs which work reliably at a level of technical skill appropriate to rural applications in developing countries. Such systems are economic in certain conditions found in many developing countries, but the technology and manufacturing facilities are not widely available and their commercial utilisation is limited.
In "Wood Gas as Engine Fuel" FAO presents a summary of modern wood gasification technology and the economics of its application to internal combustion engines. Texts on different aspects of wood gasification, prepared by specialists, are the basis of this publication.
FAO gratefully acknowledges the co-operation of B. Kjellström of the Beijer Institute, Stockholm; H. Stassen of the Twente University of Technology, Enschede, Netherlands; D. de Silva of the Ceylong Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research; N.E. Cañete of the Sociedad Cooperativa Chortitzer Komitee, Paraguay and R. Thun of the Technical Research Centre of Finland.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
1.1 Background
1.2 The present case for wood gasifiers
1.3 Overview of the contents of this publication
1.4 What to expect from a wood gasifier system
<section>3</section>
1.1 Background
Coal, wood and charcoal gasifiers have been used for operation of internal combustion engines in various applications since the beginning of this century. The utilization peaked during the Second World War when almost a million gasifiers were used all over the world, mainly vehicles operating on domestic solid fuels instead of gasoline.
It is important to keep in mind that small gasifiers have been used quite extensively in the past and that they have played a very important part in reducing or eliminating the need for fuel imports in some countries. There is no need, however, in this publication to go deeper into the history of the development of small gasifier technology. Those who are interested in the subject are advised to study the reviews made by the Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences (43) Kaupp and Goss (20) Skov (36) Bailey (3) Earthscan (12) or the National Academy of Sciences in U.S.A. (32).
Interest in the technology of gasification has shown a number of ups and downs over the last eighty years, as is strikingly illustrated in Fig. 1.1 which reproduces a histogram that plots the number of wood gasification reports referred to in "Chemical Abstracts" since the year 1900.
It appears that interest in gasification research correlates closely with the relative cost and availability of liquid and gaseous fossil fuels. The histogram shows that the number of articles was at an all-time peak in 1979, following a period of low activity in the 1950's and 1960's.
There is an important difference between the earlier periods of high interest and the present situation, however. Earlier, the increase in scientific activity corresponded to an increased number of gasifiers in practical use. The recent increase in scientific interest has not yet resulted in much practical and commercial activity. The reason will be discussed in the last chapter of this publication.
<section>4</section>
1.2 The present case for wood gasifiers
After the double fuel crises of 1973 and 1979, the harmful effect of high and rising oil prices on the economies and development efforts of oil-importing developing countries have become apparent. There has, as a result been increased interest in indigenous, renewable energy sources, of which biomass in the form of wood or agricultural residues is the most readily available in many developing countries.
Figure 1.1 Wood gasification citations in Chemical Abstracts
A characteristic of the energy system in many developing countries - in particular in rural areas - is that internal combustion engines are widely used in stationary applications such as electric power generation and operation of water pumps and mills. Technologies such as gasification, which allow utilization of biomass fuel in such engines after minimum preparation, are therefore of particular importance.
In industrialized countries internal combustion engines are mainly used for vehicles. Electricity generated in large central power stations is used for most of the stationary applications.
These different structures of energy systems explain why there appears to be fairly small interest in using biomass gasifiers for operation of internal combustion engines in the industrialized world, whereas several developing countries are either introducing small biomass gasifiers or are in the process of evaluating the technology.
Charcoal gasifiers dominate the present re-introduction of small gasifiers for engine operation in developing countries. They are the basis of the systems used in the Philippine programme and in Brazil, see (5). Much of the indigenous research and development now carried out in developing countries is also concentrated on charcoal gasifiers in view of their good prospects for early commercialization.
As illustrated by Figure 1.2, the utilization of charcoal gasifiers does, however, imply higher demands on the biomass resources, resources which are indeed already over-exploited in many developing countries. On the other hand, at least some designs of charcoal gasifiers are less likely to cause operational trouble than wood gasifiers or gasifiers for agricultural residues. This is because one of the potential problems with the latter, the excessive tar content in the gas, is virtually eliminated by the removal of most of the volatiles in the production process for charcoal.
Experience from the Second World War shows, however, that properly designed wood gasifiers, operated within their design range and using fuels within the fuel specifications (which may differ between designs), can provide a sufficiently tar free gas for trouble-free operation.
One of the objectives of this publication is to make decision-makers more aware of the possibilities of using wood gasification as a substitute for gasoline and diesel oil, without unreasonable increase of the demand on the natural resource.
<section>5</section>
1.3 Overview of the contents of this publication
In this publication, an overview of gasifies technology and the main design rules for downdraught wood gasifiers are presented together with some accounts of recent experiences from practical operation, and assessments of the economy of the technique.
The possibilities of fuelling different types of engines by producer gas, the theory of wood gasification, gasification fuels, gasifier types and their design rules are presented in chapter 2. This chapter should not be considered as a complete design handbook for downdraught wood gasifies systems, but as a guide to those who wish to be able to assess the suitability of a particular gasifier system for a particular engine. Health and environmental hazards associated with the use of producer gas are also outlined.
Figure 1.2 Comparison between the amounts of gasoline which can be substituted by producer gas if wood or charcoal is utilized in the gasifier
The economy of using wood gasifiers for different stationary applications is discussed in chapters 4 to 6. These chapters also include accounts of recent operating experiences.
Use of gasifiers for operation of modern vehicles is discussed in chapter 3, on the basis of recent Swedish experiences. This chapter is designed to assist in evaluating the feasibility of wood gasifiers for road vehicles or tractors.
Even if the results presented in chapters 3 to 6 are valid in the strict sense, only for the particular circumstances of the cases described, they should be useful as indications of what can be expected in similar situations. The information can be adapted for applications where the operating conditions or the economic circumstances are different.
The future of wood gas as engine fuel is discussed in the final chapter where the need for continued international cooperation in this field is also emphasized.
<section>6</section>
1.4 What to expect from a wood gasifier system
Operation of modern spark ignition or compression ignition stationary engines with gasoline or diesel fuel is generally characterized by high reliability and minor efforts from the operator. Under normal circumstances the operator's role is limited to refuelling and maintenance. There is little need for action and virtually no risk of getting dirty. Start and operation can in fact be made fully automatic.
Anybody expecting something similar for wood gas operation of engines will be disappointed. Preparation of the system for starting can require half an hour or more. The fuel is bulky and difficult to handle. Frequent feeding of fuel is often required and this limits the time the engine can run unattended. Taking care of residues such as ashes, soot and tarry condensates is time-consuming and dirty.
It is a common mistake to assume that any type of biomass which fits into the opening of the refuelling lid can be used as fuel. Many of the operational difficulties which face inexperienced users of gasifiers are caused by the use of unsuitable fuels. In order to avoid bridging in the fuel bunker, reduced power output because of large pressure losses, or "weak" gas, slag cakes, tar in the engine and damage to the gasifier caused by overheating, it is necessary for most designs that the fuel properties are kept within fairly narrow ranges. This is not necessarily a more serious limitation than the need to use gasoline of super grade for high compression spark ignition engines rather than regular gasoline or diesel fuel. But in the case of gasifier operation, more of the responsibility for quality control of the fuel rests with the operator. The need for strict fuel specifications is well documented in the experiences reported from the Second World War (43). It is unfortunate
that some commercial companies, with little practical experience, but trying to profit from the renewed interest in gasification, have advertised the possibility of using almost any kind of biomass even in gasifiers which will work well only with fuels meeting fairly strict standards. This has in some cases created unrealistic expectations and has led to disappointments with the technology.
Operation of wood gas engines can also be dangerous if the operator violates the safety rules or neglects the maintenance of the system. Poisoning accidents, explosions and fires have been caused by unsafe designs or careless handling of the equipment. It may be assumed that modern systems are designed according to the best safety standards, but it is still necessary to handle the equipment in a responsible manner.
Finally, it must be realised that the current technology is generally based on the designs of the mid-1940's. Only a few persons have retained detailed practical knowledge of design, material selection and operation and maintenance procedures. Many of the currently active manufacturers have no access to the experience of such persons and base their designs on information available in the literature, and on recent and comparatively limited experience. There has been some improvement of the technology, for instance of filter designs based on new materials, but the practical operating experience with these improved systems is limited. A consequence of this is that equipment failures caused by design mistakes, choice of the wrong materials, or incomplete instructions to the user on operation and maintenance, must be expected in the first period of reintroduction of wood gasifiers.
The reports on operational difficulties presented in this publication and elsewhere must be evaluated with this in mind. It can safely be assumed that second generation systems will show improved performance.
Those interested in the technology must accept that it demands hard work and tolerance of soiled hands by a responsible operator, and that it is not yet perfect. But as will be shown, it is both serviceable and economic in many applications in spite of its inconveniences.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 2 - Small wood and charcoal gasifiers for operation of internal combustion engines
2.1 Fuelling of engines by producer gas
2.2 Theory of gasification
2.3 Types of gasifiers
2.4 Gasification fuels
2.5 Design of downdraught gasifiers
2.6 Gas cleaning and cooling
2.7 Applications of biomass gasification
2.8 Health and environmental hazards associated with the use of producer gas
The gasification of coal and carbon containing fuels and the use of the gas as fuel in internal combustion engines is a technology which has been utilized for more than a century.
There has recently been renewed interest in this technology, mainly as a means to utilize biomass fuels instead of imported petroleum fuels in-developing countries. This interest derives from the documented evidence that, during the Second World War, more than a million vehicles buses, trucks, motorcars, boats and trains - were powered by gasifiers fuelled by wood, charcoal, peat or coal. After the war, nevertheless, there was a complete reversion to liquid fuels as soon as these again became available, obviously because of their convenience, reliability and economic advantages.
Therefore, the impact of biomass gasification on the energy supply systems of developing countries seems to hinge on the answer to one central question: has modern technology and gasifier development led to improved gasifier designs and gasification systems, that can work reliably, efficiently, economically and at a suitable technical level where special skills may be lacking?
In order to answer this question it is necessary to review a number of aspects of the gasification technology. The type of system considered is schematically illustrated in Figure 2.1.
The internal combustion engine uses as fuel gas generated by gasification of vegetable matter with-air. The gas is cleaned and cooled before entering the engine. In Fig. 2.1 the engine is shown driving an electric generator, but it may of course be utilized for any other purpose where such engines are employed.
The possibilities of using different types of engines with producer gas, and the quality of gas needed, will first be reviewed in order to provide the necessary background for an understanding of the effects on gasifier system design.
The theory of gasification, different type of gasifiers and gasified fuels will then be discussed and design guidelines for down-draught gasifiers will be presented. Techniques of gas cleaning and cooling will then be examined. The chapter concludes with a discussion of possible applications, and the hazards and environmental consequences associated with this technology.
Figure 2.1 Scheme of a producer gas power plant
From the treatment of these subjects it will become clear that severe constraints still exist to the introduction of gasification systems. However, it will be shown that, within the current state-of-the-art of gasification technology, several technically and economically sound possibilities exist.
In order to assist users and designers of gasification equipment, examples of the power output of an internal combustion engine fuelled by producer gas are given in Appendix I; and the design of a simple downdraught gasification unit, fuelled by wood blocks, is presented in Appendix II.
<section>8</section>
2.1 Fuelling of engines by producer gas
2.1.1 Possibilities of using producer gas with different types of engines
2.1.2 Engine power output using producer gas
2.1.3 Maximizing the power output in producer-gas operation
2.1.4 Resulting power output
2.1.5 Gas quality requirements for trouble-free operation
2.1.6 Use of Stirling engines or gas turbines with producer gas
Producer gas, the gas generated when wood, charcoal or coal is gasified with air, consists of some 40 per cent combustible gases, mainly carbon monoxide, hydrogen and some methane. The rest are non-combustible and consists mainly of nitrogen, carbon dioxide and water vapour.
The gas also contains condensible tar, acids and dust. These impurities may lead to operational problems and abnormal engine wear. The main problem of gasifier system design is to generate a gas with a high proportion of combustible components and a minimum of impurities. How this can be achieved will be shown later. First, the peculiarities of producer gas engines will be discussed both from a theoretical and operational point of view.
2.1.1 Possibilities of using producer gas with different types of engines
Spark ignition engines, normally used with petrol-or kerosene, can be run on producer gas alone. Diesel engines can be converted to full producer gas operation by lowering the compression ratio and the installation of a spark ignition system. Another possibility is to run a normal unconverted diesel engine in a "dual fuel" mode, whereby the engine draws anything between 0 and 90 per cent of its power output from producer gas (17), the remaining diesel oil being necessary for ignition of the combustible gas/air mixture. The advantage of the latter system lies in its flexibility: in case of malfunctioning of the gasifier or lack of biomass fuel, an immediate change to full diesel operation is generally possible.
However, not all types of diesel engines can be converted to the above mode of operation. Compression ratios of ante-chamber and turbulence chamber diesel engines are too high for satisfactory dual fuel operation and use of producer gas in those engines leads to knocking caused by too high pressures combined with delayed ignition (20). Direct injection diesel engines have lower compression ratios and can generally be successfully converted.
2.1.2 Engine power output using producer gas
The power output from an engine operating on producer gas will be determined by the same factors as for engines operating on liquid fuels, namely:
- the heating value of the combustible mixture of fuel and air which enters the engine during each combustion stroke;
- the amount of combustible mixture which enters the engine during each combustion stroke;
- the efficiency with which the engine converts the thermal of the combustible mixture into mechanical energy (shaft power);
- the number of combustion strokes in a given time (number of revolutions per minute: rpm);
Conversion of an engine to producer gas or dual-fuel operation will generally lead to a reduced power output. The reasons for this and possibilities to minimize the power loss will be discussed below.
(a) Heating value of the mixture
The heating value of producer gas depends on the relative amounts of the different combustible components: carbon monoxide, hydrogen and methane.
The heating value of these three gases are given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1. Heating values and stoichiometric oxygen demands of combustible producer gas components.
Gas
Eff. Heating kJ/mol
value kJ/m³/
Stoichiometric Oxygen demand (m³/m³)
carbon monoxide
hydrogen
methane
1/ The gas volume is given as normal - m, unless otherwise specified, throughout the publication.
In order to achieve combustion however, the producer gas has to be mixed with a suitable amount of air. The combustible mixture will have a lower heating value per unit volume than producer gas alone.
The amounts of oxygen necessary for complete burning (stoichiometric combustion) of each of the combustible components are also presented in Table 2.1.
The heating value of such a stoichiometric mixture can be calculated from the following formula:
where:
V[CO] - volume fraction of carbon monoxide in the gas (before mixing with air)
Heating values of producer gas and air mixtures are around 2500 kJ/m³. When this value is compared with the heating value of a stoichiometric mixture of petrol and air (about 3800 kJ/m³ ), the difference in power output between a given engine fuelled by petrol and by producer gas becomes apparent. A power loss of about 35% can be expected as a result of the lower heating value of a producer gas/air mixture.
(b) Amount of combustible mixture supplied to the cylinder
The amount of combustible mixture which actually enters the cylinder of an engine is determined by the cylinder volume and the pressure of the gas in the cylinder at the moment the inlet valve closes.
The cylinder volume is a constant for a given engine. The actual pressure of the combustible mixture at the start of the compression stroke depends however on engine characteristics (especially the design of inlet manifold and air inlet gate), the speed of the engine (higher speeds tend to result in lower pressures), and on the pressure of the gas entering the air inlet manifold. The former two factors are incorporated in the so called "volumetric efficiency" of the engine, which is defined as the ratio between the actual pressure of the gas in the cylinder and normal pressure (1 atm). Normally engines running at design speeds show volumetric efficiencies varying between 0.7 and 0.9.
The pressure of the gas at the air inlet manifold depends on the pressure drop over the total gasification system, i.e. gasifier cooler/cleaner, and gas/air carburettor. This drop reduces again the entering pressure by a factor of 0.9.
In sum, it must be concluded that the actual amount of combustible gas available in the cylinder will be only 0.65 - 0.8 times the theoretical maximum because of pressure losses on the way to the cylinder. This will obviously reduce the maximum power output of the engine.
(c) Engine efficiency
The efficiency with which an engine can convert the thermal energy in the fuel into mechanical (shaft) power, depends in the first instance on the compression ratio of the engine.
The influence of increasing the compression ratio of an engine can be calculated from the following formula.
In which:
h [1] = engine thermal efficiency at compression ratio
h [0] = engine thermal efficiency at compression ratio
e [1] = engine compression ratio in situation 1
e [0] = engine compression ratio in situation 0
k = a constant equal to 1.3 in the case of producer gas
Figure 2.2 Relation between compression ratio and thermal efficiency of an engine (7)
Figure 2.2 shows the influence of compression ratio on maximum engine power output.
Figure 2.2 Relation between compression ratio and thermal efficiency of an engine (34)
In the case of engines fuelled by petrol, the possible compression ratio is limited by the "octane" number of the fuel, which is a measure of the compression ratio at which detonation or "knocking" (which can lead to severe engine damage) occurs. Producer gas/air mixtures show higher octane numbers than petrol/air mixtures.
It is for this reason that higher compression ratios (up to 1:11) can be employed with producer gas, resulting in better engine thermal efficiencies and a relative increase in engine shaft power output.
(d) Engine speed
Because the engine power output is defined per unit time, the engine power output depends on the engine speed.
For diesel engines the power output is nearly linear with the rpm. For spark ignition engines the power increase is less than linear because of changes in the different efficiency factors.
When the power output of a 4-stroke engine is calculated, allowance must be made for the fact that only one out of every two rotations represents a compression and combustion stroke.
The maximum speed of engines fuelled by producer gas is limited by the combustion velocity of the combustible mixture of producer gas and air. Because this speed is low as compared to combustible mixtures of petrol and air, the efficiency of the engine can drop dramatically if the combustion speed of the mixture and the average speed of the piston become of the same order of magnitude.
In the types of engines that are currently mass-produced, one can expect this phenomenom to occur at engine speeds of around 2500 rpm. Engines fuelled by producer gas should therefore generally be operated below this speed.
2.1.3 Maximizing the power output in producer-gas operation
The possibilities of maximizing the power output are generally related to the theoretical causes of power loss discussed in the preceding section. They will be treated in the same order here.
(a) Heating value of the mixture
It is evident that the highest heating values for the combustible mixture are achieved at the highest heating value of the producer gas itself. As will be explained later, the heating value depends on the design of the gasifier and on the characteristics of the fuel provided to the gasifier. Minimization of the heat losses from the gasifier is important in order to achieve a high heating value of the gas. The moisture content and the size distribution are two of the most important fuel characteristics.
In mixing the producer gas with combustion air there is an additional reason for power loss because of changes in the composition of the gas, as well as of variations in pressure drop over the gasifier installation and it is very difficult to maintain continuously a stoichiometric mixture of producer gas and air.
Because both excess and deficiency of air lead to a decrease in the heating value of the mixture (per unit volume), both will lead to a decrease in power output as illustrated in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3 Decrease of the heating value of a producer gas/air mixture as a function of air deficiency or excess (34)
The only feasible way to adjust the mixture to its stoichiometric combustion is by-installing a hand operated valve on the combustion air inlet of the engine and operating this regularly for maximum engine power output.
If maximum engine power output is not needed, it is usually better to operate the engine with a slight excess of air, in order to prevent backfiring in the engine exhaust gas system.
(b) Amount of combustible mixture
Apart from minimizing the pressure drop over the gasifier, cooling and cleaning system and carburettor (while still maintaining adequate gas/air mixing as discussed above) the amount of combustible mixture per engine combustion stroke can be maximized in two ways:
- increasing the volumetric efficiency of the engine by introducing a wider air inlet manifold resulting in less gas flow resistance and smaller pressure drops. The influence of a well designed air inlet manifold is often underestimated. Experiments by Finkbeiner (11) show that a well designed air inlet manifold can increase maximum engine power output by 25 per cent.
- supercharging or turbo charging the engine. From the remarks made earlier, it will be clear that increasing mixture pressure at the engine inlet will increase the engine's maximum power output. The recent development of turbo-chargers driven by the exhaust gases of the engine makes this option attractive. However care should be taken to water-cool the turbo charger in order to prevent explosions of the combustible mixture.
(c) Engine efficiency
The increase in engine efficiency that can be reached by increasing the compression ratio of petrol-engines (for example to 1:10 or 1:11) has been discussed earlier. Gas engines have standard compression ratios in this range and for this reason are especially suited to producer gas operation.
The influence of correct air/gas mixing has been described by Finkbeiner (11) and has recently been studied by Tiedema and van der Weide (42). Installation of suitable gas/air mixing devices (such as the type of carburettor developed by TNO, (the Dutch parastatal research organisation) can lead to an increase in maximum engine power output of 10-15 percent as compared to the usual two-valve pipe and chamber type carburettors.
(d) Engine speed and ignition advance
Because of the slow combustion speed of the gas/air mixture the timing of the ignition in producer gas fuelled petrol engines must generally be changed.
The optimal timing of the ignition in petrol engines depends on the load and the engine speed. This is also the case in producer gas operation. Experiments by Middleton and Bruce (29) indicate that, in general, ignition timing should be advanced by 10° - 15°, leading to ignition advances of 35° - 40° before top-dead-centre (TDC).
If a diesel engine is operated in a dual fuel mode, it is also advantageous to advance the timing of the diesel fuel injection. Again the necessary advance depends on the engine speed, as shown by Nordstrom (33), Tiedema e al. (42) report good results with injection timing advances of 10° as compared to full diesel operation.
A problem sometimes encountered in dual fuelled engines is detonation. Apart from engines with too high compression ratios (above 1:16), this phenomenon mostly occurs when an attempt is made to remedy low power output of the engine by introducing increased amounts of diesel fuel. Depending on the composition of the producer gas and on the mixture strength of the fuel, an excess of pilot fuel can lead to detonation. For this reason the amount of pilot diesel fuel, in dual fuel operation, must have an upper limit. Generally a limitation at around 30 percent of maximum engine power output will prevent detonation.
The amount of pilot diesel fuel in dual fuel operation also has a lower limit. Depending on the engine speed (30) a certain minimum amount of diesel fuel per cycle has to be injected in order to ensure ignition. The minimum amounts vary from 3-5 mm per cycle.
In practical operation however a somewhat higher amount of diesel fuel is injected per cycle in order to stay on the safe side. Diesel fuel injections of 8-9 mm³ per cycle and cylinder is recommended.
2.1.4 Resulting power output
Assuming that the engine modifications described above are correctly implemented, decrease in maximum power output of petrol engines without turbo or supercharging can be limited to about 30 percent. Turbo or supercharged combustion running engines on producer gas can have power outputs equal to those in petrol operation.
Derating of direct injection diesel engines in dual fuel operation can usually be limited to 15 - 20 percent (80 percent producer gas, 20 percent diesel fuel).
2.1.5 Gas quality requirements for trouble-free operation
When a gasifier system is used in conjunction with an internal combustion engine, an important requirement is that the engine is supplied with a gas that is sufficiently free from dust, tars and acids. The tolerable amounts of these substances will vary depending on the type and outfit of the engine. Tiedema and van der Weide (38) give as tolerable average amounts for currently available engines the following values:
dust:
lower than 50 mg/m³ gas preferably 5 mg/m³ gas
tars:
lower than 500 mg/m³ gas
acids:
lower than 50 mg/m³ gas (measured as acetic acid).
2.1.6 Use of Stirling engines or gas turbines with producer gas
In addition to the use of producer gas with internal combustion engines, other possibilities are the combination of gasifiers with gas turbines or with Stirling engines. Because high inlet gas temperatures aid the thermal efficiency of gas turbines, these in principle present an attractive option for converting hot producer gas into mechanical and/or electric power. However, the current state-of-art of gasifier as well as turbine technology prevents their use. Gas turbines are very sensitive to dust, especially at high inlet temperatures, and it is doubtful if gas quality requirements can be met with the filtering systems described in section 2.6.
Another problem stems from the sensitivity of current turbine vanes to corrosion by alkaline vapours (Na, K and Ca) which are usually present in tiny amounts in producer gas. An optimum system would require a pressurised gasifier, which would add considerably to cost and complexity and probably will only be economic for very large installations.
Beagle (6) mentions the possibility of using Stirling engines in conjunction with gasifiers especially in micro scale applications. Stirling engines in this power range are now becoming commercially available.
Because of a number of advantages as compared to the use of inter