<title>Agricultural engineering in development - Post-harvest operations and </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
"Every day, millions of individuals do not have enough to eat, and many of them simply do not eat at all".
For a number of developing countries, cereals and grain legumes represent the basic element of the population's diet, especially for the lowest-income, generally rural, groups.
In these countries, food self-sufficiency still remains an unachieved objective, and this is not always or only because of the inefficiency of the local production systems.
The extent of post-harvest losses sometimes seriously limits the impact of the efforts made to increase food production; such losses decrease local availability of food, forcing national policy-makers to resort to massive imports of foodstuffs, thereby increasing their food dependency.
The governments of developing countries, as well as a number of NGOs, bilateral and multilateral international cooperation agencies, and especially FAO, have been engaged for several years in projects aimed at the prevention of food losses.
The experience acquired during these interventions has often demonstrated the need not only for improving production methods but also for making both farmers and concerned institutions aware of the problem of post-harvest losses.
This publication is primarily addressed to members of the technical or administrative staffs of government services or assistance to development agencies working in field projects related to prevention of grain losses. It is a manual of basic information on post-harvest operations concerned with the principal foodstuffs of the developing countries: rice, maize, sorghum, beans, groundnut and sunflowers.
As such, it will be useful to field staff (extension agents, rural leaders, development agents) who are participating in the implementation of projects aimed at improving post-harvest operations.
It is also addressed to those working in the actual production of these food grains, and who, because of a regrettable interdisciplinary compartmentalization, have only a partial and generally insufficient understanding of post-harvest problems.
Misdirected efforts over recent decades, largely aimed at improving yields rather than at post-harvest commodity enhancement, have led to some paradoxical situations. Indeed, even though the technical conditions for increasing production have all been met, the increase cannot take place because of post-harvest obstacles.
For example, since the 1970s, in the Senegal River valley and in many irrigated areas which have been developed in West Africa, the objective of two annual harvests has not yet been achieved. One of the main causes of this delay is the fact that rice-threshing is done manually.
Since there is only a small labour force available, this operation continues for several weeks, preventing the immediate planting of the land for a second crop. A bottleneck at this level therefore has direct repercussions on production itself.
The introduction of small motorized threshing-machines, in such a situation, can not only reduce the cost of threshing but also stimulate production itself by fostering bi-annual harvests.
This example clearly shows that production improvement must be matched by improvement in post-harvest operations and prevention of post-harvest losses.
In this spirit, this manual can be of interest to all those who, in one way or another, are working in the field for the improvement of food production in developing countries.
This publication should help to unify the criteria and to standardize the dissemination of knowledge about post-harvest technologies.
It examines the total process from harvest to consumer, from determination of physiological maturity to marketing of products, which makes up the "post-harvest system".
Technologically, it particularly covers operations of harvesting, drying, threshing/shelling, storage and transport of the principal cereals (maize, sorghum, rice), grain legumes (beans) and oilseeds (groundnuts, sunflower seeds).
Experience or solutions resulting from the use of traditional methods, suitable technologies and mechanized systems are systematically presented.
Taking into account the breadth of the subjects discussed and the general public to which this publication is addressed, we have endeavoured to take a simplified and concrete approach to the subjects, with minimal insistence on theoretical aspects, for which a rich and widely diffused bibliography already exists.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
For those who make their living by working the land, it is a great satisfaction to be able to observe a field of maize, sorghum or beans that is about to be harvested.
But what a disappointment it is to discover that often, after the harvest, a large part of the grain produced has been lost, or has so badly deteriorated that it is unfit to eat or to sell.
What happened, and when? And above all, what can be done, after so much effort, so many hours devoted to field-work, to avoid post-harvest losses?
Before attempting to answer these questions, it is a good idea to briefly summarize the series of operations which the grain undergoes after the harvest.
<section>3</section>
Grain and post-harvest systems
Definition
In the agrofood chain, harvesting is the stage between the phase of actual agricultural production and that of grain processing or, more broadly, treatment of the produce.
Chart
Whether it is done by hand or with the help of machines, the harvest should generally not take place until the produce has reached its optimal maturity.
After the harvest, it may be necessary to pre-dry the produce before the subsequent threshing or shelling operation.
The grain must be cleaned and dried, so that it can be stored or undergo further processing.
Grain can be stored in bulk or in bags, on the farms where it was produced, in collection centres, or with storage agencies.
Finally, the grain is sent from the warehouses to markets for sale to consumers, to smallscale food-processors, or to agrofood industries.
The sequence and interactions of these operations contribute to the formation of a complex system called the post-harvest system.
TECHNOLOGIES AND PHASES OF THE POST-HARVEST SYSTEM FOR GRAIN
POST-HARVEST OPERATIONS TRADITIONAL TECHNOLOGIES INTERMEDTARY TECHNOLOGIES INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGIES
Harvest Manual Manual and mechanized Mechanized
Pre-drying Standing or in shocks Incribs or in shocks 
Storage in the ear In traditional In cribs granaries 
Threshing Manual Mechanized Mechanized
Pre-cleaning Mechanized Mechanized
Drying Natural Artificial Artificial
Cleaning and sorting Winnowing in the wind Mechanized Mechanized
Storage in grains In traditional granaries In bags or in bulk In bags or in bulk
Processing Manual Mechanized Mechanized
Cereals
Rice
A gramineous plant native to the tropical regions of Asia (China and Indochina), rice is the staple food of much of humanity.
Ears of rice which have reached physiological maturity are cut and left in sheaves in the field to pre-dry.
Then threshing is done manually or mechanically, to separate the paddy, that is the whole grain and its protective envelopes (hulls), from the straw.
When rice is harvested with a combine-harvester, cutting and threshing are simultaneous.
After threshing, the paddy often contains impurities (earth, stones, plant residues, etc.), and its moisture content is over 20 percent.
To preserve or hull the paddy, it must be pre-cleaned, and the moisture content reduced to about 14 percent by drying.
This can either be done naturally, by exposing the kernels to air and sun and turning them frequently; or artifically by a current of warm dry air in mechanical dryers.
Once dried, the paddy is cleaned and then stored (in bags or in bulk) in warehouses or silos.
The dried, cleaned paddy is ready to be milled, that is, to undergo the following treatments:
* Hulling: the external envelopes of the grain (hulls) are removed manually (mortar and pestle) or by hullers (disc or roller type) to obtain brown rice;
* Whitening: the outer layers (pericarp) and the germ of the kernel are eliminated by milling the brown rice by machine to produce "white rice".
After sorting, the white rice may undergo other treatments - polishing or glazing (with a mixture of talc and glucose): the object is to enhance the product's commercial value and prolong its shelf-life.
The rice is then ready to be packaged and marketed.
After industrial milling, 100 kg of paddy yields about 60 kg of white rice, 10 kg of broken grains, 10 kg of bran and flour, and 20 kg of hulls.
Because rice is highly nutritious, it is mainly used for human consumption.
It is also used industrially in the production of alcohol, beer, starch, oil and other byproducts.
By-products such as broken grains and flours are often used as animal feed.
Rice-hulls are sometimes used as fuel and their ashes as fertilizer.
Maize
A cereal native to tropical zones of America, maize is one of the most widely cultivated gramineous plants in the world.
Maize can be harvested either in ears or in grains. The ears can be harvested by hand or by a mechanical corn-picker. The harvested ears are stripped of their husks and then shelled manually or mechanically.
In small-scale cultivation when the harvest takes place in the dry season, the ears (with or without husks) can be sun-dried, and then stored under cover.
In industrial cultivation, on the other hand, the maize is harvested only by machines (cornsheller or combine harvester) capable of supplying grains ready for drying or for sale.
At harvest time, particularly in the rainy season, grains of maize have too high a moisture content to keep well; therefore, before storage, the product must be dried, to lower the moisture rate to about 14 percent.
Artificial drying of the grain, by dry heated air, is done by machines in the collection or storage or in the processing units (mills, cattle-feed factories etc.).
The dried maize is cleaned, and then stored (in bags or in bulk) in warehouses or silos. The dried and cleaned maize is ready for sale or for further processing.
For human consumption, maize can be eaten as fresh ears or in the form of cakes made from dough obtained by cooking the grain. The flour or semolina from husking and grinding can also be eaten.
The processing industry also uses maize to produce oil and margarine, cattle-feed, beer, baby food, soap, glue and varnish.
Grain sorghum
Grain sorghum, also simply called sorghum (Guinea grass), is a graminaceous plant native to central and eastern Africa (Ethiopia, Sudan).
At physiological maturity, the panicles of sorghum are cut and left to dry in the sun.
The ears of grain thus obtained can be kept in traditional granaries or can directly undergo manual or mechanical threshing. Cutting and threshing can be carried out simultaneously by combine-harvesters, as with rice, but this is far less common in the tropics.
In hot climates with little rainfall, the sorghum harvest can be delayed until the grain has completely dried in the field.
If the grain has a moisture content higher than 13 percent, the product must be dried before it can be stored or treated.
Once dried, the sorghum is cleaned, then stored (in bags or in bulk) in warehouses or silos.
The dried and cleaned sorghum is ready for sale or for further processing.
Like maize, sorghum can be eaten in the form of flour or semolina from husking, then grinding.
The processing industry uses this cereal in the production of cattle-feed, beer, oils, glues or adhesives, etc.
Grain legumes
Bean
A pulse native to tropical America, the bean is very widely cultivated for its high nutritional value, owing to the high protein content.
The product can be harvested by hand, by pulling up or cutting down the plant, letting it pre-dry, and then threshing it manually or mechanically. Otherwise, a combine-harvester can be used.
After threshing, the beans often contain impurities and have a moisture content higher than 20 percent. Before they can be stored, it is necessary to pre-dry them, and then to lower their moisture content to about 14 percent by natural or artificical drying.
Traditional methods of storing grain legumes call for the use of jars, mud-walled cribs, or bottles, but the most satisfactory results are obtained by storing completely dry grain in air-tight containers (metal cans or drums, plastic bags, etc.).
Commercial storage is in bags in warehouses. Beans thus produced are ready for sale or consumption.
Oilseeds
Groundnut
The groundnut, native of tropical and subtropical America, is a pulse grown chiefly because its grains are rich in oil.
The product is harvested by hand or machine, by pulling up the plant and allowing the shells to dry in the field for two or three days.
Then, when the moisture content is below 15 percent, the shells can be separated from their stems by manual or mechanical threshing.
In mechanized cultivation, these operations of pulling up and threshing can be done directly to fresh plants, with the help of special machines like grubber-threshers.
After threshing, the groundnuts are pre-cleaned, then artificially dried.
When the moisture content has fallen to 7-8 percent, unshelled groundnuts are ready to be stored in bulk in the open air (in pyramids known as "secco"), or in very dry and well-ventilated storerooms.
After drying, one can proceed directly to the shelling and then the cleaning of the groundnuts.
Once put into bags, the shelled groundnuts are stored in the open air or in warehouses.
In the processing industries (oil-mills), the shelled kernels are increasingly stored in silos. In the oil-mill, the dried grains, shelled and cleaned, are ready for oil-extraction treatments.
The oil is used for human consumption, as are the nuts themselves either whole (boiled in the fresh shell, grilled in the shell and either plain or salted, shelled and grilled or coated) or as peanut butter.
Oil-mill by-products, especially groundnut cake, make an excellent raw material for animal feed.
Sunflower
A native plant of North America, the sunflower is grown mainly for the richness of oil in its seeds.
The capitula (flowering heads) are harvested, by hand or machine, when the upper leaves of the plants are dry and the petals faded.
If the moisture content of the harvested product is higher than 15 percent, the heads must be pre-dried in cribs before proceeding to manual or mechanical removal of the seeds.
In mechanized cultivation, harvesting and removal of the seeds are carried out simultaneously by combine-harvesters.
When the moisture content is below 9 percent, sunflower seeds can either be stored directly or undergo oil-extraction treatments. If the moisture content is higher, the seeds must be artifically dried.
Given the excellent quality of the oil, sunflower seeds are used almost exclusively in oil-making.
In addition to its nutritional use, sunflower oil is used as a raw material in making paint colours, soap, and lamp oil.
The by-products of oil-making, especially feed cake, are an excellent livestock feed.
<section>4</section>
Post-harvest losses
Definition
The expression "post-harvest losses" means a measurable quantitative and qualitative loss in a given product.
These losses can occur during any of the various phases of the post-harvest system.
This definition must also take into account cases of product deterioration. However, rather than actual losses, it would be more accurate to call it restriction in the use of the product. As a matter of fact, grain partially damaged by insects, for example, may no longer be suitable either for human consumption or for sale. Where it was intended for those uses, losses in value have obviously occurred, even if the grain can be salvaged by using it for poultry feed.
From an economic point of view, the sum of the losses in quantity and quality of the products inevitably means losses of money.
In addition to direct economic losses, there are those resulting from poor management of post-harvest systems. They are evidenced by a lack of growth in production and in the income of the farmers.
Post-harvest system and losses
Seeds of poor quality, inadequate farming practices, or insect attacks in the field can provoke losses of products even before their harvest. But we are concerned here only with prevention of losses after the harvest.
From the harvest onward, then, the grain undergoes a series of operations during the course of which quantitative and qualitative losses can occur.
The sequence of these operations and the conditions in which they take place can, furthermore, create physical and biochemical phenomena that will bring about an alteration of the grain at later stages in the post-harvest system.
A late harvest, for example, can bring about losses from attacks by birds and other pests.
Insufficient drying of grain can cause losses from the development of moulds and insects.
Threshing can cause losses from broken grains and encourage the development of insects.
Poor storage conditions can bring about losses caused by the combined action of moulds, insects, rodents and other pests.
Transport conditions or defective packaging of grain can lead to quantitative losses of product.
Finally, in addition to these factors, there are others which can often be partly responsible for post-harvest losses, such as, for example: marketing practices, sectoral policies and other socio-economic aspects.
NATURE AND PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF POST-HARVEST LOSSES
NATURE DIRECT CAUSES INDIRECT CAUSES
Premature harvest Inadequate:
Poor maturation - capital
Poor threshing - professionalism
In weight Insufficient drying - equipment
Insufficient cleaning - pesticides
Bird attack - packaging
In quality Rodent attack - transport
Insect attack - organization
Micro-organism attack Constraints:
Biochemical change -social
Economic Leakage and waste -economic
Moisture content wrong -political
for storage 
Inadequate storage and
transport techniques 
It follows that if the question of post-harvest losses is to be tackled empirically, it is above all necessary to know, in each situation, the nature and number of manipulations the product undergoes, as well as the causes and incidence of losses during each stage in the process.
As an example, the following table gives estimates of the quantitative losses of rice for each stage in the post-harvest system in Southeast Asia.
STAGE LOSSES
Min. Max.
Harvest 1% 3 %
Handling 2% 7%
Threshing 2 % 6 %
Drying 1% 5 %
Storage 2 % 6 %
Transport 2 % 10 %
Total 10% 37%
In many developing countries, overall post-harvest losses of cereals and grain legumes of about 10 to 15 percent are fairly common. In some regions of Africa and Latin America, higher rates are found: up to 50 percent of the quantities harvested.
Up to now, we do not have really reliable data on the true level of post-harvest losses. There are many reasons for this information gap:
* no universal mathematical methods exist for establishing a "model";
* the extent of losses may fluctuate considerably depending on weather conditions (rainy season, etc.), varieties, locations, etc.;
* many national institutions deal negligently and superficially with the question of post harvest losses, considering it marginal in relation to the problems of agricultural production;
* it is difficult to make credible estimates of quantitative and qualitative losses, especially in situations where specific resources, strategies, and capabilities are all lacking;
* the lack of adequate permanent national organizations makes it impossible to monitor the extent of post-harvest losses.
Losses in weight
A reduction of the physical substance of the product is evidenced by a loss in weight.
Nevertheless, a distinction must be made between loss in weight and loss of product. The decrease of the moisture content brings about a lowering of weight, but this is not a food loss. On the contrary, an increase of weight by absorption of moisture, after rains on a stock in the open air, for example, can cause severe damage and thus considerable losses.
Weight losses are due mainly to the prolonged action of pests (insects, birds, rodents), or to leakage of products (perforated bags, spillage during grain handling, etc.). They can occur at practically any stage of production, but especially during the harvest, storage, and transport or handling of
Weight losses caused by pests are not apparent to the casual glance; an inexperienced buyer can thus be fooled. In order to recognize them, one should take an equal volume of clean and sound cereals, grind both samples, and weigh the flour obtained in each case. It will be observed that the damaged sample produces less flour.
This method can also be useful for avoiding potential weight frauds, since it is easy to augment weight by dampening the grain or by adding foreign bodies like pebbles, earth or sweepings.
In order to avoid any confusion, weight loss of dry matter should be stipulated.
Losses in quality
Criteria of quality vary widely and involve the exterior aspect, shape and size, as much as the smell and taste. In this regard, the cultural considerations with which diets and eating habits are imbued cannot be overlooked.
A clean wholesome product is of primary importance in marketing. By taking a handful of grain from a bag, for example, a tradesman can quickly see if it gives off a floury dust and can therefore deduce whether or not it comes from an infestation by insects. Likewise, a bad smell can lead him to suspect rodent attacks, which can be confirmed by the presence of rat or mouse excrement or hairs.
Losses in quality are thus evidenced by a decrease in the market value of the product.
These losses are quantifiable only on condition that criteria or standards of quality have been previously established.
On the basis of objective criteria, the quality of the products can be evaluated by fairly complicated tests, measurements and laboratory analyses.
Many of the criteria adopted are based on evaluation of standards related to the physical condition of the grain and to its food, nutritive and germinative values.
In various countries, quality ratings are based on the general principal according to which grain must be "wholesome, sound, of market quality and odourless".
Implicit in this definition are the chief criteria for evaluating the quality of a given batch of grain; these include:
* moisture content: suitable for the storage or further handling of the product;
* colour: homogeneous and appropriate to the type of product under consideration;
* odour: it must not hint that any biochemical change is going on;
* cleanness: the number of impurities must conform to established standards of quality;
* infestation: the absence of insects or other living organisms must be ascertained.
Generally, multiple criteria combine to define the quality of the products, and they also take into account cultural aspects related to community eating habits. In Senegal, for example, broken rice is highly prized by consumers; for this reason, the degree of breakage, as a standard of rice quality, obviously has less importance than in other contexts.
Losses in quality are mainly the result of mechanical constraints undergone by the product, the action of pests (insects, rodents) and micro-organisms (moulds), or the chemical changes produced within the grains under the effect of environmental conditions (temperature, humidity, duration of storage).
These losses can occur at any stage of production, especially during
Losses due to physical condition
These depend on the physical condition of the grain during a given stage of the post-harvest system.
The physical characteristics generally considered in evaluating the incidence of such losses are: shape and size of the grains, percentage of moisture, presence of impurities (foreign grains, grains that have germinated, are broken, deteriorated or damaged; pebbles, earth, plant residues, fragments of glass or metal, animal hairs or excrement, etc.), degree of infestation by insects or micro-organisms.
Losses due to change in food qualities
These losses, which are especially critical when the grains are intended for human consumption, result from alteration of the organoleptic features (aspect, taste, smell), from the degree of innocuity of the product (absence of toxic products such as toxins, pesticide residues, etc.), and from alteration in its content of vitamins, proteins, fats, glucides and other important nutrients.
Losses due to change in germinative properties
If marketable seeds are desired, the grain must not show altered germinative properties. These can be defined by the rate and percentage of germination, the vigour (stress resistance), the growth-rate of the seedlings and the absence of anomalies in the plants thus obtained.
The alteration of these properties brings about production losses by decreasing the capability of the grain to germinate.
Economic losses
A reduction in the quantities or qualities of grain means a corresponding commercial loss that is evidenced as a loss of money.
But beyond these direct economic losses, an evaluation of losses should also take account of some factors within the post-harvest system that can hamper the growth of production and of income. These include production systems, work schedules and methods, infrastructure, organization models, credit mechanisms etc. Some examples will illustrate this point.
For example, adoption of mechanized or semi-mechanized systems for some operations (harvesting, threshing, drying, etc.) can cut working time while, at the same time, permitting an increase in production by reducing the labour required and exploiting the land to better advantage.
Commercially, if the transport system is inadequate, the farmer may find it impossible to sell his products within the required time-limits and in the places where market prices are the most attractive. The fact of having to forgo a potential profit is beyond a doubt a loss of money.
If a farmer is not able to store products in complete security in existing storage buildings, he may be obliged to sell his production immediately after the harvest, thus becoming unable to profit by market prices when they are at their best. Once again, missing a profit is an economic loss for the farmer.
The consequences of such situations often go beyond individual losses of money: they affect production and the entire national economy.
<section>5</section>
The harvest
Definition
The harvest is the operation of gathering the useful part or parts of the plant.
It is a voluntary intervention by man, carried out at the time when all the nutrients have been developed and when the edible parts have reached the degree of maturity appropriate to the treatments to follow.
Physiological maturity
In general, the harvest takes place 10 or 15 days after the grain has reached physiological maturity.
At the time of maturity the grain has a specific moisture content and special physical characteristics.
For the harvest to take place at the most propitious time, account must be taken not only of the length of the growing cycles (which differ according to the varieties), but also of the degree of maturity of the grain.
The following table shows the degrees of moisture content considered appropriate for good harvest conditions and the characteristics permitting assurance of physiological maturity.
GRAINS MOISTURE PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Rice 22-28% The panicles bend with their own weight, yellowed hulls, full grains, neither too ripe (cracked), nor too green.
Maize 23-28% Cobs almost dry, hard and glassy kernels resistant to scoring with the thumbnail, black dot in the caryopsis.
Sorghum 20-25% Dried stems and leaves, hard grains resistant to the thumbnail, glassiness depending on variety.
Beans 30-40% Pods ripe and yellow, shells dried, skins of kernels easily detached.
Groundnuts 30-35% Leaves yellow, shells dried, skins of kemels easily detached.
Sunflower 9-10% Upper leaves dry and flower faded.
The harvest may, nevertheless, take place at a time when, because of varying weather conditions and even though it has reached physiological maturity, the grain has a moisture content higher or lower than shown above.
Clearly, the higher the moisture content of the grain at harvest time, the greater the risks of losses from moulds, insects and germination. On the other hand, the longer the grain remains in the field (to further the drying of the product), the greater the risks of losses from spontaneous fall of grain, or from attacks by birds, rodents and other pests.
Harvest operations
Harvesting can be done by hand, with simple farming implements, or by mechanized systems.
Choice of the degree of mechanization to adopt depends on the anticipated use of the machines.
Choice of the machine must be justified by the estimate of the areas to be harvested annually and by a cost-benefit analysis.
Harvesting rice
This cereal is harvested only after the grain has reached maturity, and two or three weeks after draining the rice-field.
Premature cutting of the rice keeps the grain from reaching maturity, and can cause serious losses in the quality of the product.
Furthermore, it is important to accomplish the harvest while the moisture content of the grain is acceptable. Excess grain moisture can create big problems during the ensuing treatments, by fostering alteration of the final characteristics of the rice.
On the other hand, too low a moisture content can cause the panicles to shatter at the time of cutting, leading to serious losses of product.
Hand harvesting
Harvesting by hand is done with a sickle or a scythe; the ears of rice are cut at about 2030 cm above the ground.
After cutting, the ears of rice are left to dry on the stubble for two or three days.
For guidance, about 80 to 160 man-hours per hectare are calculated as the average time required for manual harvesting of rice.
In some tropical regions, it is still the custom today to harvest only the panicles, using a knife; in this case, the ears of rice are cut 30-50 cm below the panicles.
By comparison with hand-harvesting with a sickle or scythe, this method requires about 175 percent more labour.
Mechanized harvest
Manual harvesting of rice, which is still relatively common, especially in tropical areas, is being increasingly replaced by mechanical harvesting with combine-harvesters. Combine harvesters are machines that do the cutting, threshing and pre-cleaning of the rice in one operation.
Generally self-propelling, combine-harvesters have cutting apparatus, a threshing chamber composed of a revolving threshing drum (with teeth) and a stationary counter-thresher, and devices for cleaning the paddy.
Construction of these machines is chiefly based on two designs: Japanese and western. Depending on their construction features (width of cutter), the work capacity of these machines can vary from two to 15 hours per hectare (h/ha).
Some estimates indicate yields from these machines of 350 to 800 kg of paddy an hour (kg/h), with grain losses lower than 3 percent.
Western combine-harvesters are large machines whose cutting bars may be four or five metres long.
Depending on their construction features and the harvesting conditions (well-drained paddy-fields, sufficiently long plots, etc.) the work capacity of these machines can be as much as 1 to 1.5 h/ha, for an overall employment of labour of about 2.7-4.5 hours per hectare (h/ha).
Use of combine-harvesters offers an economic advantage for harvests from a minimum of 70 hectares a year upward.
In addition to combine-harvesters, side-delivery rakes (or wind-rowers) and binders are also used for harvesting rice.
Wind-rowers are machines that cut and unload paddy only laterally.
These machines, whose theoretical work capacity varies from 4 to 8 h/ha, have the disadvantage of requiring a big labour force (100 to 200 in/ha) for manual gathering and binding of the paddy.
Binders are machines that simultaneously cut, bind and unload paddy. Equipped with a cutting bar and a gathering and binding device, these machines do good work even in harvesting lodged paddy (20°-30º angle to the ground).
Depending on their construction features (adjustability of height, width of cutter), the work Capacity of these machines can vary from 5 to 20 h/ha, with grain losses lower than 2 percent.
In any case, mechanical harvesting of rice presents some problems.
For example, machines must frequently work on muddy ground offering poor traction. For this reason, combine-harvesters are generally equipped with tracks, rather than wheels, so that harvesting can be done even on very wet ground.
