<title>Biogas processes for sustainable development. Biogas process for sustainable development</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgment
This review was initiated by Dr. Morton Satin in FAO Rome, Chief of the Food and Agricultural Industries Services in the Agricultural Service Division, as a result of many requests for information on BIOGAS TECHNOLOGY suitable for Developing Countries. The generous help and collaboration of the FAO staff during the preparation of the review and their help in contacting people in the Far East are gratefully acknowledged.
The most important of all are the researchers and technologists who are involved in the Biogas development. They are the key people to achieve the sustainable development so many people are referring to. Their work and research which is quoted in this review presents only a small portion of the important progress in Biogas technology and all my thanks are due to them.
In addition I am grateful to my colleagues in MIGAL, especially to George Ney who helped me so much in bringing this review to its final form.
<section>2</section>
Chapter one: Preface and objectives of the review
Sustainable development
There is an increased recognition, in both developing and industrial countries, of the need for technical and economic efficiency in the allocation and exploitation of resources. Systems for the recovery and utilization of household and community wastes are gaining a more prominent place in the world community. Today, a new environmental agenda is emerging, which is now forcing itself on the attention of policy-makers and the public at large. Its concerns are both practical and urgent: they address the survival of human, animal and plant populations over vast sections of our globe.
Today's issues arise from the spread of deserts, the loss of forests, the erosion of soils, the growth of human populations and industrialized animal husbandry, the destruction of ecological balances, and the accumulation of wastes. As a result, the politics needed to meet present and future challenges require a new vision and new diplomacy, new leadership and new policies. In a world that is daily more complex and economically interdependent, the economic and security interests of the Developing Countries must be understood in a broader, global context.
These acute, relatively new problems of the world stem from either poverty and excessive population growth, in the Developing Countries, or from the careless and excessive use of natural resources in the Developed Countries; with more cumulative impact on the poor countries than on the rich. While many of these problems have been recognized for some time, they demand a new policy agenda for the world. The emergence of such a new approach has been accompanied by the growing realization that the goals of environmental conservation and economic growth in both developing and industrial countries are more complementary than often depicted. A.W. Clausen, President of the World Bank, has stressed these relationships: "There is increasing awareness that environmental precautions are essential for continued economic development over the long run. Conservation, in its broad sense, is not a luxury for people rich enough to vacation in scenic parks. Rather, the goal of economic growth
itself dictates a serious and abiding concern for resource management".
Necessary goals are to achieve economic and environmental benefits through sustainable projects for resource recovery and utilization, and programs for Developing Countries. The use of anaerobic digestion in an integrated resource recovery system in Developing Countries is important to solve both ecological and economic problems.
Sustainability in waste management systems depends upon the interrelationship of policy, technique and economy. This interrelationship is particularly important in integrated resource recovery systems. This review aims to provide governments, development agencies, consultants and others with information necessary for the development and implementation of policy on waste management. It summarizes the latest developments in anaerobic digestion applicable to Developing Countries, as reported in English-language publications up to the year 1990. The review is prepared in an attempt to answer the questions of officials in Developing Countries about anaerobic digestion facilities throughout the world to provide health and economic benefits by digesting (fermenting) animal wastes, residues from harvesting, night soil and, in a number of cases, also from septage and sludges. The review summarizes the main issues of anaerobic digestion and its fundamentals in both the microbiological
and practical aspects, discusses the various products of the process and their uses, alone or in integrated resource recovery systems, in different parts of the world, provides a brief review of the economic aspect of both household and commercial plants, and gives some information on biogas programs in several Developing Countries, their advantages and drawbacks. The review also includes some technological information and a bibliography of additional sources of information, as well as a list of companies and groups in different parts of the world involved in biogas technology.
It may be asked why a new review is called for.
1. When oil prices began dropping in 1986, oil users everywhere sighed with relief, but the energy crisis did not end, in fact. More than half the world's people cook and heat with firewood, dung and field residues. For most of these people, cheap oil is little cause for celebration, while bioenergy development, on the other hand, is a realistic proposition for a better social and economic life. The new developments and technologies in this field must be distributed and incorporated into the existing infrastructure of Developing Countries.
2. Today, anaerobic digestion is widely accepted as a sound technology for many waste treatment applications, and novel reactor designs are being applied on a commercial scale. In spite of this acceptance, advances are still being made, and technological developments are concentrating on applications in Developing Countries.
3. New and already developed approaches and processes for upgrading the quality and use of the effluent from anaerobic digestion are the reason for more economical uses of bioenergy processes.
4. Effective biodegradation of organic wastes into methane requires the coordinated metabolic activities of different microbial populations. Recent results of physiological and biochemical experiments are presented, in order to explain the fundamentals of mixed culture metabolism, which influence the rate of organic degradation.
5. The enormous development of computer technology and use makes simulation and model projections of the anaerobic digestion processes possible, on the one hand, and facilitates the use of developed control systems in the processes, on the other.
6. Last, but not least, the ecological aspect: the concern for the environment has come to the consciousness of the world, and we now understand better that our environmental heritage must be protected, for the sake of the quality of our lives and those of our children. This attitude is now beginning to govern our behaviour in waste management, and is encouraged increasingly by governments in both Developed and Developing Countries.
This review is therefore intended to up-date students, practitioners and consultants concerned with Biogas technologies, and to contribute to bringing biogas systems to a more advanced stage, and thereby to achieve a palpable impact in Developing Countries.
Sustainable development
Probably the most serious source of conservation problems faced by Developing Countries is the backwardness of rural development. In the struggle for food and fuel, large areas of vegetation, trees and shrubs, are felled and stripped for firewood, cultivation and fodder. The consequence is the impairment of ecological processes in these countries, and the permanent destruction of normally renewable resources. There is an urgent need for rural development that combines short term measures for survival with long-term measures to safeguard the resource base and improve the quality of life, while ensuring the future. Unfortunately, many rural communities are so poor that they lack the economic flexibility that would enable them to defer the consumption of resources in need of restoration. Conservation measures are needed that will, at the least, maintain the standard of living of these communities, or improve it, while taking into account their own knowledge of the ecosystem,
and finding effective ways to ensure that these resources are used sustainably.
According to the World Conservation Strategy towards sustainable development (as set out by IUCN, UNEP, WWF, FAO and UNESCO), which recognizes the need for international action to implement it, and to stimulate and support national action, an integrated approach to many of the problems involved is necessary. Cooperation between nations and organizations can facilitate the deployment of the limited means available, and thereby enhance the prospects for conservation and for sustainable development. Joint international action can do a great deal towards restoring the environment, tackling environmentally induced poverty, and enabling countries to make the best use of their resources, provided that the projects so supported are environmentally sound and assessed with due consideration for the local ecology. The first objective of the World Conservation Strategy is to maintain essential ecological processes, such as soil regeneration and protection, recycling of nutrients, and
the cleansing of water, on which human survival depend. Part of this objective can be achieved, as a matter of urgency, by procedures for the rational use of organic matter, in Developing Countries, to help rural communities conserve their basic living resources, the essential springboard for development of energy and land.
One of these procedures is the production of biogas from organic agricultural wastes. These materials are destructible without proper conservation methods, but otherwise can yield a great sustainable benefit, at farm level. In order to achieve the World Conservation Strategy in this particular field, an increase in the number of trained personnel, and much wider awareness, are needed, as well as research-oriented management with the necessary basic information. Conservation and sustainable development, in rural communities whose only fuel is wood, dung and crop wastes, is all that stands between them and destruction. Biogas production combines the short-term economic needs of such communities with conservation and the end of ecological degradation.
<section>3</section>
Chapter two: Introduction and overview
Anaerobic treatment is the use of biological processes, in the absence of oxygen, for the breakdown of organic matter and the stabilization of these materials, by conversion to methane and carbon dioxide gases and a nearly stable residue. As early as the 18th Century the anaerobic process of decomposing organic matter was known, and in the middle of the 19th Century, it became clear that anaerobic bacteria are involved in the decomposition process. But it is only a century since anaerobic digestion was reported to be a useful method for the treatment of sewage and offensive material. Since that time, the applications of anaerobic digestion have grown steadily, in both its microbiological and chemical aspects. The environmental aspect and the need for renewable energy are receiving interest and considerable financial support in both Developed and Developing Countries, expanding research and application work in these directions, and many systems using anaerobic digestion have
been erected in many countries.
Anaerobic digestion provides some exciting possibilities and solutions to such global concerns as alternative energy production, handling human, animal, municipal and industrial wastes safely, controlling environmental pollution, and expanding food supplies.
Most technical data available on biogas plants relate primarily to two digester designs, the floating cover and fixed dome models. Promising new techniques such as bag, dry fermentation, plug flow, filter, and anaerobic baffled reactors should be explored to establish a firmer technical base on which to make decisions regarding the viability of biogas technology. Along with this increase in interest, several newer processes have developed, that offer promise for more economical treatment, and for stabilizing other than sewage materials - agricultural and industrial wastes, solid, organic municipal residues, etc. - and generating not only an alternative energy source, but also materials that are useful as fodder substitutes and substrates for the mushroom and greenhouse industries, in addition to their traditional use as organic fertilizers. Other benefits of anaerobic digestion include reduction of odours, reduction or elimination of pathogenic bacteria (depending upon the
temperature of the treatment) and the use of the environmentally acceptable slurry.
The technology of anaerobic digestion has not yet realized its full potential for energy production. In most industrialized countries, biogas programs (except for sewage treatments) are often hindered by operational difficulties, high costs of plants and as yet low energy prices. In most Developing Countries, expansion of biogas programs have been hindered because of the need for better economic initiatives, organized supervision and initial financial help, while in other Developing Countries, on the other hand, slow development has been observed, and a lack of urgency, because of readily available and inexpensive non-commercial fuels, such as firewood.
Biogas technology is also potentially useful in the recycling of nutrients back to the soil. Burning non-commercial fuel sources, such as dung and agricultural residues, in countries where they are used as fuel instead of as fertilizer, leads to a severe ecological imbalance, since the nutrients, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and micro-nutrients, are essentially lost from the ecosystem. Biogas production from organic materials not only produces energy, but preserves the nutrients, which can, in some cases, be recycled back to the land in the form of a slurry. The organic digested material also acts as a soil conditioner by contributing humus. Fertilizing and conditioning soil can be achieved by simply using the raw manure directly back to the land without fermenting it, but anaerobic digestion produces a better material. Chinese workers report that digested biomass increases agricultural productivity by as much as 30% over farmyard manure, on an equivalent basis (van Buren
1979). This is due in part to the biochemical processes occurring during digestion, which cause the nitrogen in the digested slurry to be more accessible for plant utilization, and to the fact that less nitrogen is lost during digestion than in storage or comporting. The stability of the digested slurry and its low BOD and COD are also of great importance. This aspect of biogas technology may, in fact, be more important than the gas produced (Gosling 1980; Marchaim 1983).
In the area of public health and pollution control, biogas technology can solve another major problem: that of the disposal of sanitation wastes. Digestion of these wastes can reduce the parasitic and pathogenic bacterial counts by over 90% (Feacham et al. 1983; McGarry and Stainforth 1978; van Buren 1979; Klinger and Marchaim 1987), breaking the vicious circle of reinfection via drinking water, which in many rural areas is untreated. Industrial waste treatment, using anaerobic digestion, is also possible.
Many planners and engineers have expressed an interest in obtaining information on anaerobic digestion and biogas technology. Application to FAO in Rome of the fundamentals of design and operation of digesters to enhance their technical and economic viability, were the main reason for this review. An additional review, which will describe more technical aspects, will be published, in order to explain the complexity of this interdisciplinary technology, which requires a broad overview of the whole program for optimal selection of size and style of the digestion system.
The present review attempts to present only very basic information on the engineering aspect, while giving some more detailed description of the biochemistry and microbiology, and emphasizing the economic and socio-cultural aspects of biogas programs and the uses of the products of the anaerobic digestion process, especially as they may be applied in Developing Countries. References cited can provide studies of given areas of interest, in greater depth. The chapter on biogas products and their uses gives an idea of the potential applications of biogas and digested slurry technologies.
This review is also intended to assist engineers and government officials/funding agencies to meet present and future challenges, and make decisions on the promotion of anaerobic digestion as an alternative source of energy, for soil conservation and enrichment, as fodder for fish and animals, for pollution reduction and other ecological benefits, such as pathogen reduction in human and animal wastes.
Current research, experimental and functional programs throughout the world, are rapidly adding to our knowledge of anaerobic digestion, and should provide increasingly efficient and useful designs to improve the quality of life everywhere. The AD meetings - The International Symposiums on Anaerobic Digestion that are held every 2 - 3 years - are a very good occasion to get up-to-date information on latest developments. The Proceedings published after each of these meetings can be very valuable to researchers, officials and economic analysts.
In order to draw conclusions about the feasibility of the anaerobic digestion process, it can be examined in one of two ways: a strictly financial approach, involving analysis of monetary benefits such as sale or re-use of products (methane, carbon dioxide and slurry, with all its applications) and the costs of constructing and maintaining facilities; or as a social assessment of input and output, including such intangibles as improvements in public health, reduced deforestation and reduced reliance on imported fossil fuels, in a social cost benefit analysis. There is no agreed methodology for quantifying these social benefits, so rigorous economic comparisons between biogas and other renewable, as well as conventional, energy sources are difficult, and must be done according to local conditions.
In assessing the economic viability of biogas programs, it is useful to distinguish between four main areas of application:
1) individual household units;
2) community plants;
3) large scale commercial animal rearing operations, and
4) municipal/industrial projects.
In each of these cases, the economic feasibility of individual facilities depends largely on whether output in the forms of gas (for cooking, lighting, electricity and power) and slurry (for use as fertilizer/soil conditioner, fishpond or animal feed) can substitute for the costly fuels, fertilizers or feeds which were previously purchased. For example, a plant has a good chance of being economically viable when the farmers or communities previously paid substantial percentages of their incomes for fuels (e.g. gas, kerosene, coal) and/or fertilizers (e.g., nitrates or urea) or peat-moss as soil conditioner for greenhouses. The economics may also be attractive in farming and industry, where there is considerable cost involved in disposing of manure or effluent. In these cases, the output can be sold or used to reduce energy costs, repaying the original capital investment. In those cases when the community is charged for treatment of the wastes, or if fines are imposed, the
process is of great financial importance. If output/products do not generate income or reduce cash outflow, then the economic viability of a biogas plant decreases; for example, when cooking fuels such as wood or dung can be collected at no cost, or where the cost of commercial fuel is so low that the market for biogas is limited.
If the broader criteria are used to evaluate anaerobic digestion, especially in countries where officials and natural strategy people are more aware of ecology, where the effects of global warming over the long term (the Greenhouse Effect) is considered, then determination of viability requires knowledge of real resource or opportunity costs of input and output. When such output as improved public health, greater rural self-sufficiency, reduced deforestation and reduced dependence on imported fossil fuels can be incorporated, the global economic analysis usually results in more positive conclusions than a purely monetary analysis.
Technical, social and economic factors, government support, institutional arrangements, and the general level of commercial activity in the construction of biogas plants and related equipment are highly interrelated. All influence the development of biogas programs. Focusing attention on any one aspect will not bring about successful results. A large variation exists in the number of digesters installed in Developing Countries throughout the world, depending on the extent of government interest and support. China, India and South Korea, have installed large numbers of units, ranging from some seven million plants in China to approximately 30,000 in South Korea. Other Developing Countries have fewer than 1,000 - usually less than 200. The relative poverty of most rural and urban people in Developing Countries, and their concomitant lack of capital, are especially powerful economic considerations. On the one hand, program growth will be slow if facilities require a relatively
large number of people to cooperate and alter their behaviours simultaneously, but on the other hand this can improve tremendously the economics of the plant and the benefits to the community.
Some of the large scale projects erected in rural area proved to be economic viable much more than the household small scale systems, which lack maintenance and efficient exploitation of the plant's products. Some very interesting activities in communal biogas operation have already been working for a number of years in Italy (De Poli 1990). Commercial and private sector interest in anaerobic digestion is steadily increasing, in conjunction with government tax policies, subsidies which alter prices of competing fossil fuels and fertilizers, and pollution control laws, all of which affect the growth of biogas programs. Institutional program structure and government policies are the primary administrative and driving forces behind biogas implementation. In many developing countries the infrastructure to disseminate information on biogas to technical personnel, policy makers and potential users does not exist. Both qualitative and quantitative assessments of ongoing activities
are needed to improve technology and adapt its use to each specific country. Generally, program coordination does not exist, except in China, between R & D projects and implementing agencies. Biogas programs which have expanded rapidly have had strong government support, including subsidized capital and tax incentives.
To summarize, biogas technology is receiving increased attention from officials in Developing Countries, due to its potential to bring an economically viable solution to the following problems:
a. Dependence on imported sources of energy;
b. Deforestation, which leads to soil erosion and therefore to a drop in agricultural productivity;
c. Providing inexpensive fertilizers to increase food production;
d. The disposal of sanitary wastes, which cause severe public health problems;
e. The disposal of industrial wastes, which cause water pollution.
With the growing significance of this process, it is appropriate to mention some the historical developments which have occurred during the last 100 years of anaerobic digestion. In many cases, this may help to clarify the state-of-the-art at the end of the 20th Century.
<section>4</section>
Chapter three: Short historical background on anaerobic digestion
Historical developments of anaerobic digestion technology
Present interest in anaerobic digestion
Historical developments of anaerobic digestion technology
The appearance of flickering lights emerging from below the surface of swamps was noted by Plinius (van Brakel 1980) and Van Helmont recorded the emanation of an inflammable gas from decaying organic matter in the 17th Century. Volta is generally recognized as putting methane digestion on a scientific footing. He concluded as early as 1776 that the amount of gas that evolves is a function of the amount of decaying vegetation in the sediments from which the gas emerges, and that in certain proportions, the gas obtained forms an explosive mixture with air.
In 1804 - 1810 Dalton, Henry and Davy established the chemical composition of methane, confirmed that coal gas was very similar to Volta's marsh gas and showed that methane was produced from decomposing cattle manure. France is credited with having made one of the first significant contributions towards the anaerobic treatment of the solids suspended in waste water. In 1884 Gayon, a student of Pasteur, fermented manure at 35°C, obtaining 100 liters of methane per m of manure. It was concluded that fermentation could be a source of gas for heating and lighting. It was not until towards the-end of the 19th Century that methanogenesis was found to be connected to microbial activity. In 1868, Bechamp named the "organism" responsible for methane production from ethanol. This organism was apparently a mixed population, since Bechamp was able to show that, depending on the substrate, different fermentation products were formed. In 1876, Herter reported that acetate in sewage sludge
was converted stoichiometrically to equal amounts of methane and carbon dioxide (Zehnder 1978, 1982).
As early as 1896, gas from sewage was used for lighting streets in Exeter, England, while gas from human wastes in the Matinga Leper Asylum in Bombay, India, was used to provide lighting in 1897. Then, in 1904, Travis put into operation a new, two-stage process, in which the suspended material was separated from the wastewater, and allowed to pass into a separate "hydrolyzing" chamber. In 1906, Sohngen was able to enrich two distinct acetate utilizing bacteria, and he found that formate and hydrogen, plus carbon dioxide, could act as precursors for methane.
On the applied side, Buswell began studies of anaerobic digestion in the late 1920s and explained such issues as the fate of nitrogen in anaerobic digestion, the stoichiometry of reaction, the production of energy from farm wastes and the use of the process for industrial wastes (Buswell and Heave 1930; Buswell and Hatfield 1936).
Barker's studies contributed significantly to our knowledge of methane bacteria, and his enriched cultures enabled him to perform basic biochemical studies (Barker 1956). Schnellen (1947) isolate two methane bacteria: Methanosarcina barker) and Methanobacterium formicicum which are still studied.
Heating digestion tanks made practical use of the methane produced by the anaerobic process. It is of interest to note that methane gas was collected in Germany in 1914-1923 and used to generate power for biological treatment of plants, as well as for the cooling water from the motors being used to heat the digestion tanks.
Numerous additional studies led to a better understanding of the importance of seeding and pH control in the operation of anaerobic digestion systems. Much of this work is still relevant today, and those who are developing biogas as an energy source would gain much from review of this earlier work.
Present interest in anaerobic digestion
There is an increased recognition, in both developing and industrial countries, of the need for technical and economical efficiency in the allocation and exploitation of resources. Systems for the recovery and utilization of household and community wastes are gaining a more prominent place in the world community. During the last years, anaerobic fermentation has developed from a comparatively simple technique of biomass conversion, with the main purpose of energy production, into a multi-functional system:
a) treatment of organic wastes and wastewaters in a broad range of organic loads and substrate concentrations;
b) energy production and utilization;
c) improvement of sanitation; reduction of odors;
d) production of high quality fertilizer.
R & D has shifted from basic studies on anaerobic fermentation of quasi-homogeneous substrates, with contents of organic solids in the range of about 5 - 10%, to the digestion of more complex materials that need modified digester designs. The main fields of R & D activities are:
a) fermentation at high organic loadings;
b) high rate digestion of diluted waste waters of agro-industries including substrate separation during fermentation; immobilization of the microorganisms;
c) fermentation and re-use of specific materials in integrative farming systems;
d) biogas purification;
e) simple but effective digested design/construction of standardized fermenters;
f) domestic waste water treatment.
Anaerobic digestion with high organic load can be performed when the concentration of methanogenic bacteria is kept at a high level. Pilot experiments, with mixtures of slaughterhouse waste water and cattle manure, succeeded in reducing retention times from about 20 to 8 - 10 days, by a specific mixing technique, which allowed the mixture from time to time to separate. By this method, the liquid phase is enriched with dissolved organic matter, which is brought into contact with solid material, containing a relatively high concentrations of active bacteria.
Dissolved organic compounds can normally be degraded much faster than solid materials in suspension. If the retention times for dissolved and suspended components can be adjusted separately, the overall process can be performed at higher rates. Similar techniques are under investigation or implementation into large scale application in most of the countries which perform biogas R & D activities and biogas promotion programs. For example, in the Netherlands intense work is done to reduce the concentration of organic matter in the digested materials, and to reduce the volume of liquid effluents of agricultural activities. In that country, with its intensive animal production, problems of soil and groundwater pollution become more and more severe - a situation similar to other countries with intensive agricultural production.
A two-step system is being developed and tested for agricultural solid wastes (greenhouse waste, organic fractions of municipal refuse, cannery waste, grass clippings). The first step is a batch type hydrolytic/acidic unit, in which percolation water is circulated. The percolation water is anaerobically treated in the second step, and recycled to the percolation unit. The retention time of the waste in the first step depends on the digestibility of the raw material, and can take several months.
Another system is being tested for treatment of the organic fraction of municipal refuse. After mixing with recirculated water and subsequent maceration, the waste is pumped into the first step reactor. Here the conditions (temperature 37C, hydraulic retention time 12 - 24 h) are such that a very efficient microbial population develops, that degrades cellulose. This population, in which ciliated play an important role, resembles the population in the paunch of ruminants. After passing the first step reactor, the mixture is mechanically drained, the liquid fraction is anaerobically treated (e.g. in an UASB-type reactor) and recirculated to the mixture tank. The solid fraction is partly forced back into the first step reactor, the remainder being discharged. To cope with water shortage and water pollution in the medium/long-term, a 6 year R & D project for water re-use and energy recovery by biogas production has been implemented in Japan since 1985, under the sponsorship of
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry ("Aqua Renaissance 90"). The object of this project is to establish the technology to ensure a low cost treatment of industrial waste water, sewage etc. to enable re-use of treated water by utilizing a big-reactor - working at high concentrations - coupled wit