<title>Bovine spongiform encephalopathy</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
The author is greatly indebted to Mr John W. Wilesmith for making available a large amount of unpublished information and for supplying some of the figures; to Gerald A.H. Wells for providing original photographs; and to both gentlemen for invaluable criticism of the manuscript. The author is also grateful to the Animal Health and Veterinary Group at MAFF, Tolworth for constructive comments and for checking the accuracy of the references to legislation.
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations
BSE
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
CEC
Commission of the European
Communities
CJD
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
CWD
Chronic wasting disease
DHSS
Department of Health and Social
Security, UK
DoH
Department of Health, UK
EEC
European Economic Community
EM
Electron microscope
FSE
Feline spongiform encephalopathy
GSS
Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome
HMSO
Her Majesty's Stationery Office, UK
MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food UK
OIE
Office international des epizooties,
France
SAF
Scrapie-associated fibrils
sip
Scrapie incubation period
TME
Transmissible mink encephalopathy
USDA
United States Department of
Agriculture
<section>3</section>
Introduction
1. Introduction to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
2. Diseases related to BSE
1. Introduction to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
BSE is a new disease of cattle. It was first recognized and defined in the United Kingdom in November 1986 by histopathological examination of affected brains (Wells et al., 1987). Over the next four years, the disease developed into a large-scale epidemic in most of the country, with serious economic consequences.
BSE occurs in adult animals of both sexes, typically in four- and five year olds. It is a neurological disease involving pronounced changes in mental state, abnormalities of posture and movement and of sensation. The clinical disease usually lasts for several weeks and it is characteristically progressive and fatal (Wilesmith et al., 1988).
The pathology of BSE immediately suggested the nature of the disease and its probable cause. Microscopic lesions in the central nervous system consist of a bilaterally symmetrical, non-inflammatory vacuolation of neuronal perikarya end grey-matter neuropil (Wells et al., 1987). This is the classical picture of the scrapie family of diseases and, on this evidence alone, it seemed highly likely that BSE was a new member of the family.
BSE was subsequently shown to be experimentally transmissible to other cattle, after very long incubation periods (one to two years) by the injection of brain homogenates from clinical cases (Dawson, Wells and Parker, 1990a). This left no doubt that BSE is caused by a scrapie-like infectious agent.
Epidemiological studies showed the vehicle of infection to be meat and bone meal that had been incorporated into concentrated feedstuffs as a protein-rich supplement. The outbreak was probably started by scrapie infection of cattle, but the subsequent course of the epidemic was driven by the recycling of infected cattle material within the cattle population (Wilesmith, Ryan and Atkinson, 1991; Wilesmith and Wells, 1991).
The average level of infection to which cattle were exposed was very low. The reason why this led to such a large number of BSE cases is that much of the United Kingdom dairy cattle population was exposed for many years. There is no firm evidence for the direct transmission of infection from cattle to cattle.
In July 1988 the British Government introduced a ban on the feeding of ruminant protein to ruminants to stop the occurrence of new infections (HMSO, 1988a). However, the average incubation period of BSE is around four to five years and, as of July 1991, there had been insufficient time for the feed ban to affect the incidence of clinical disease.
Long incubation periods are a characteristic feature of all scrapie-like diseases. There is no laboratory diagnostic test for the infectious agent in live animals, mainly because of the absence of any known immune response to infection. Infected animals can only be identified when they develop the clinical disease.
The fact that BSE belongs to the scrapie family is of the greatest importance. The biochemical nature of the scrapie/BSE agent has yet to be established but many of the biological properties of these infectious agents are well understood. There are precedents among members of the scrapie family to indicate the possible future directions of the BSE epidemic and the additional measures that might be needed to eradicate it (Wilesmith and Wells, 1991).
The epidemiological relationships between the various members of the scrapie family clearly define the circumstances under which BSE might, in theory, present a risk to public health. Knowledge of the pathogenesis of these diseases shows precisely the preemptive action that can be taken to minimize this risk (Kimberlin, 1990b; 1990c).
The advent of BSE has made a sizeable impact throughout much of the world even though few countries, other than the United Kingdom, have experienced cases. Trade has been disrupted, sometimes unnecessarily, and great fears have been aroused about the possible occurrence of BSE elsewhere in the world. However a rapid increase in the understanding of the disease over the last four years leaves few unanswered questions of major practical importance. BSE can be prevented controlled and eradicated.
TABLE 1. Spongiform encephalopathies related to BSE in chronological order of demonstrated transmissibility
Disease and occurrence Host species Date
Scrapie
Common in several countries throughout the world Sheep, goats 1936
Transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME)
Very rare, but adult mortality nearly 100% in some outbreaks Mink 1965
Kuru
Once common among the Fore-speaking people of
Papua New Guinea, now rare Humans 1966
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease(CJD)
Uniform worldwide incidence of one per million per annum Humans 1968
Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome (GSS)
A familial form of CJD; less than 0.1 per million per annum Humans 1981
Chronic wasting disease (CWD)*
Colorado and Wyoming, USA Mule deer,
elk 1983
*Experimental transmission not demonstrated
2. Diseases related to BSE
2.1. Scrapie
2.2. Transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME)
2.3. Kuru
2.4. Creutzfeldt-jakob disease (CJD)
To understand BSE requires an appreciation of some of the other diseases in the scrapie family listed in Table 1. A detailed review has recently been published (Kimberlin, 1990a). The main features of those diseases that are particularly important in the context of BSE are summarized below. Other related diseases are discussed on pages 28-30.
2.1. Scrapie
Scrapie in sheep (and goats) is the best understood member of the family. It has been endemic in the United Kingdom for over two centuries and is present in many other countries of the world.
Scrapie occurs as a natural infection of adult sheep which is transmitted maternally, from ewe to lamb. Some of this maternal transmission occurs before or at the time of parturition. But it can also occur afterwards because the incidence of scrapie in offspring increases the longer that lambs run with their ewes. Scrapie infection can also spread horizontally between unrelated sheep. With both types of transmission, the oral route of infection is one of those implicated and the placenta is one tissue known to be a source of infection. This information provides a basis for the control of scrapie using two complementary approaches.
The first control method relies on the fact that many of the lambs born to scrapie-infected ewes will themselves become infected regardless of the stage in the ewe's incubation period when they were born. With detailed breeding records, it becomes possible to cull selectively in the female line to reduce the number of sheep in the flock with a high probability of being infected.
The basis of the second approach is that a breeding ewe that is incubating scrapie will not only drop a lamb with a high risk of being infected, but an infected placenta as well. This will be a direct (through eating the placenta) and an indirect (through contamination of the lambing pasture) source of infection to other sheep that come into contact with it. The physicochemical stability of the scrapie agent means that infection can persist in the environment for a long time. Hence farmers are advised to destroy placentas as soon as possible and to keep the lambing premises clean.
Although scrapie is caused by an infectious agent, a single sheep gene (known as sip: scrapie incubation period) exerts a major influence on the length of incubation period. This gene has two alleles (sA and pA), producing three different sip genotypes of sheep. Sheep homozygous for sA are the most likely to develop the natural disease, but some heterozygotes (sApA) may succumb to the disease if the exposure to infection is high enough.
It seems highly probable that the sip gene is the same as the PrP gene which codes for the precursor of the fibril protein that forms scrapie associated fibrils (SAF) (see Evidence for infection, p. 13 and Molecular pathology, p. 35). Biochemical markers are being developed to identify the sA and pA alleles of the sip gene with a view to the possible use of selected sires (sip pApA) as an additional approach to the control of scrapie.
The relevance of scrapie to BSE is threefold. First, scrapie is the likely origin of the BSE epidemic (see p. 22). Second, scrapie provides one of the two main scenarios for the future course of BSE and indicates the type of control measures to be considered should BSE become an endemic infection of cattle (see Control and eradication, p. 55). Third, past exposure to scrapie, which has not been a risk for human beings, provides a baseline for assessing the public health risks caused by BSE (see Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, p. 6).
2.2. Transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME)
TME is a very rare disease of ranch-reared mink, but it can have devastating consequences, sometimes eliminating an entire herd of adult breeding animals. The disease is caused by an exogenous source of infection to which mink become exposed via contaminated feed. It is not uncommon for mink ranchers to include untreated abattoir waste and dead stock in mink feed.
Since sheep (and perhaps goats) are the only known animal reservoirs of the scrapie-like agents in nature, a direct link between scrapie and TME is likely even though it has not been possible to document the feeding of sheep material in all outbreaks. The same assumption can be made for BSE. Indeed, TME provides a precedent for the origin of BSE, although the circumstances of infection are different. The main differences are that TME is associated with rare, geographically localized, comparatively high levels of exposure to infection in untreated abattoir waste, whereas BSE (at least in the United Kingdom) is due to widespread, prolonged exposure to a very low level of infection in processed animal waste (Kimberlin, 1990b).
An important aspect of TME is that it is a "dead-end" disease with no natural routes of transmission from mink to mink, unless there is cannibalism. In this respect it differs markedly from scrapie and provides a precedent for the alternative scenario for the future course of the BSE epidemic.
2.3. Kuru
Kuru is associated with the very small population of Fore-speaking people in Papua New Guinea and it occurred in rather special circumstances. It may have originated from a spontaneous case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), but the practice of ritual cannibalism of dead relatives was certainly the means by which neuropathogenic strains of the agent were "passaged" within families. An equivalent situation occurred in BSE with the recycling of infected cattle material within the cattle population. This proved to be the main factor driving the BSE epidemic (see p. 25-26).
Kuru is also important because there appear to be no other routes for the transmission of infection and the cessation of cannibalism has led to the gradual disappearance of kuru. In other words, human beings are effectively a "dead-end" host for the disease. In this respect, kuru resembles TME.
2.4. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
Two other scrapie-like diseases are known in human beings, although Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome (GSS) is usually regarded as a variant of CJD (see Table 1).
CJD can occur in a familial pattern (as do GSS and scrapie) but it is typically sporadic and has a remarkably uniform incidence worldwide of about one case per million of the population per annum. The epidemiological explanation for the sporadic occurrence of CJD is uncertain but one important possibility has been eliminated.
Because of the precedent set by TME, the possibility that CJD is caused by occasional exposure to scrapie has been intensively studied ever since the transmissibility of CJD was demonstrated in 1968. A large number of investigations have failed to show any epidemiological link between scrapie and CJD. For example, the occurrence of CJD throughout the world is largely independent of the distribution of scrapie and the consumption of sheep products. In addition, several studies have analysed the incidence of CJD in relation to eating habits (e.g. brain), environment (e.g. urban or rural) and various occupations such as those of shepherd, butcher and veterinarian. These studies have also failed to establish a link between scrapie and CJD. It is clear therefore that sheep and goats are not the major reservoir of CJD infection and no other animal reservoir has been identified.
These findings are important in assessing the public health consequences of BSE. Indeed, BSE will be no more of a threat to public health than scrapie unless it is different in the particular ways discussed under The problem (p. 50).
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1
1. Geographical distribution
1. Geographical distribution
1.1 United kingdom
1.2 Other countries
1.1 United kingdom
BSE was first recognized in the United Kingdom and it is only there that a larges-cale epidemic has occurred. By the end of 1990 well over 20 000 cases of BSE had been confirmed in England Scotland and Wales. The incidence of herds with at least one confirmed case was about 10 percent and the incidence within affected herds was approximately two cases per 100 adults per annum. The overall annual incidence was four cases per 1 000 adults. In Northern Ireland, the total number of BSE cases was around 150. Table 2 gives figures up to the middle of June 1991.
The epidemic started simultaneously in several parts of the country (see Fig. 1) and cases have been distributed over a wide area and in every county ever since (Wilesmith, 1991). The disease occurs predominantly in dairy herds (see The vehicle of infect ion p. 20).
TABLE 2. Cumulative total number of histologically confirmed cases of BSE in various countries up to 14 June 1991
United Kingdom 29 907
Northern Ireland 203
Republic of Ireland 39
Switzerland 5
France 4
Oman 2*
Falkland Islands 1*
*All cases in Oman and the Falkland Islands occurred in cattle imported from the United Kingdom Source: MAFF. UK.
However, there is marked regional variation in the occurrence of BSE, with a preponderance of cases in the south and east. At the end of 1989 about half of all cases had occurred in just seven counties in the southwest.
FIGURE 1 Geographical distribution of the first suspected cases of BSE (April 1985 to December 1986)
This pattern is simply a reflection of the number of dairy herds at risk (Matthews 1 990).
The proportion of dairy herds with BSE also shows marked regional variation. In the period from November 1986 (when BSE was first recognized) to July 1989 the percentage of dairy herds with at least one confirmed case of BSE was 12.6 percent in the south, 3.9 percent in the Midlands, 2.8 percent in the north of England and 1.8 percent in Scotland (Wilesmith. Ryan and Atkinson, 1991). Figure 2 gives a more up-to-date pattern which indicates a geographical variation in the exposure of cattle to infection. Epidemiological studies have provided explanations for this variation (see The north-south gradient, p. 24).
FIGURE 2 Cumulative proportion of dairy herds with BSE in home-bred cattle (November 1986 to August 1990)
1.2 Other countries
Table 2 shows that several cases of BSE have occurred in the Republic of Ireland (Basset and Sheridan, 1989). Some of these were associated with the importation of live animals or meat and bone meal from the United Kingdom. Although scrapie is also present in the Republic, and large amounts of meat and bone meal are produced there, not much is fed to Irish cattle. It is unclear whether any cases of BSE in the country are due to locally produced meat and bone meal.
Two cases of BSE have occurred in Jersey cows in Oman (Carolan, Wells and Wilesmith, 1990). These animals were part of a consignment of 14 pregnant heifers imported from England in 1985. The heifers were born on the same farm in 1983 and investigations into their feeding history suggest exposure to infection during calfhood, before export. The herd of origin has also experienced cases of BSE (Wilesmith personal communication). Likewise BSE has occurred in the Falkland Islands in an animal imported from the United Kingdom.
The first case of BSE in continental Europe was reported in November 1990 in a six-year-old Holstein cross that was born and reared in Switzerland (Anon. 1 990a). There have subsequently been other Swiss cases (see Table 2). Meat and bone meal had been fed to these animals but its origin is not known. Switzerland has small populations of sheep and goats. Scrapie has been recorded in a goat but not in sheep.
A case of BSE in Brittany was announced by the French authorities in February 1991 (Anon. 1991a) followed by several other cases (see Table 2). A teed source of infection is suspected. The infection may have been imported or it could have originated in France, a country with a large sheep population and endemic scrapie in several regions.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2
2. Economic implications
2. Economic implications
The economic consequences of BSE in the United Kingdom have been considerable. To begin with, the only losses due to BSE were those associated with the death or slaughter on humane grounds, of BSE-affected animals. These losses were borne by individual farmers until August 1988, when a slaughter policy with part compensation was introduced (HMSO, 1988b; 1988c). As the number of BSE cases increased and more farmers were experiencing a second case, full compensation up to a ceiling was introduced in February 1990 ( HMSO, 1 990a). In 1989 over 8000 suspected and confirmed cases of BSE were slaughtered. About 70 percent of the slaughtered animals were disposed of by incineration and the rest by burial at approved sites. The compensation costs for the year were over £2.8 million and the disposal costs amounted to £1.6 million (Matthews' 1990).
Once the epidemiological studies had identified meat and bone meal as the vehicle of infection (see p. 20), the United Kingdom Government banned the feeding of all ruminant-derived protein to ruminants, in July 1988(HMSO, 1988a). This had an immediate impact on the rendering industry in terms of reduced exports and domestic sales of meat and bone meal. Another effect in the United Kingdom was to increase the costs to abattoirs of animal waste disposal. Subsequently complex changes in the economics of beef and beef products have been experienced by many sections of the community including producers retailers and consumers.
The international trade in live cattle was adversely affected when it was realized that some exported animals might have been infected in the United Kingdom before the ruminant protein ban came into effect (July 1988). The following year (July 1989) the Commission of the European Communities (CEC) banned the importation. from the United Kingdom of all live cattle born before July 1988 (CEC, 1989). A later amendment restricted these exports to calves under six months of age (CEC, 1990a) (see p. 45). Many countries outside the European Economic Community (EEC) have gone further and banned the importation of all live cattle from the United Kingdom. Some have also banned the importation of milk and milk products despite recommendations to the contrary (OIE, 1990; 1992).
BSE has also had economic consequences in the human and pet food industries. In the winter of 1989/90, the United Kingdom Government banned the use for human food of certain specified bovine offals which potentially contain relatively high titres of BSE infectivity (HMSO, 1 989b). This was introduced as a precautionary measure to ensure that the risks to public health from BSE were kept to a minimum regardless of the extent and future course of the epidemic in cattle (see p. 50). The same specified offals were subsequently banned from use in feedstuffs for all mammals and birds, including pets (HMSO, 1990b; see p. 53).
Each of the measures relating to food was tailored to achieve scientifically defined objectives, all of them precautionary in nature. However, they have not prevented several countries from banning imports of a much wider range of human and animal food products containing bovine tissues other than the proscribed offals. This has seriously disrupted the United Kingdom export trade.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 3
3. Aetiology
3. Aetiology
3.1 Evidence for infection
3.2 Nature of the infectious agent
3.1 Evidence for infection
The aetiology of BSE has never been much in question. BSE is a neurological disease with distinctive microscopic lesions in the central nervous system, exactly like scrapie (see Histopathology, p. 33). Historically, the recognition of the characteristic scrapie-like picture in other diseases led to the studies which demonstrated the experimental transmissibility of TME, kuru, CJD and chronic wasting disease (CWD) (see Table 1). It seemed almost certain that BSE would also be transmissible.
Extracts of BSE-affected brain contain abnormal fibrils very similar to SAF. These fibrils are derived from a normal host-coded protein PrP, which has undergone an abnormal post-translational modification. The fibrils obtained from BSE-affected brain are made up of the same modified host protein (see Molecular pathology, p. 35). The presence of SAF is another characteristic feature of the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies which indicated an infectious aetiology for BSE.
Because of the long incubation period of these diseases, formal proof of transmissibility came about two years after BSE was first recognized.
The transmissibility of BSE was first demonstrated in mice in which a disease very like murine scrapie developed about 300 days after the combined intracerebral and intraperitoneal injection of affected cattle brain homogenates (Fraser et al., 1988). The same material was injected both intracerebrally and intravenously into cattle and produced cases of BSE after 500 to 650 days (Dawson, Wells and Parker, 1990; Dawson et al., 1991).
Other studies showed that BSE can be transmitted to mice by feeding BSE affected cattle brain (Barlow and Middleton, 1990a; 1990b), thus reproducing what the epidemiological studies show to be the natural route of transmission in cattle (see The vehicle of infection, p. 20). Studies initiated in 1979, for reasons unconnected with BSE, provide some direct evidence for the transmissibility of scrapie to cattle by the injection of infected brain from cases of experimental scrapie in sheep and goats (Gibbs et al 1990). There is no doubt that BSE is caused by a scrapie-like infectious agent after long incubation periods.
3.2 Nature of the infectious agent
The physicochemical nature of the scrapie agent is a subject of enduring fascination and considerable controversy. From a practical point of view, knowledge of the chemical structure of the agent would be of enormous importance in providing a diagnostic test of infection. In the absence of sufficient knowledge (and a test), little can be said which is of relevance to the animal health problems posed by BSE. The following is a very brief summary of current information and hypotheses on the nature of the agent which are discussed more fully elsewhere (Kimberlin, 1990a)
Most information has come from studies of the scrapie agent. The agent is small enough to pass through bacteriological filters, thus demonstrating that it is virus-like or subviral in size. But the agent has other properties which are atypical of viruses. The first is that infectivity is highly resistant to many physicochemical treatments, such as heat, and exposure to ionizing or ultra violet radiation. It is no surprise that some infectivity can survive rendering processes (see The vehicle of infection, p. 20, and The start of the BSE epidemic, p. 22). Second, scrapie infection neither induces an immune response nor impairs the immunological responsiveness of the host to other infections. This is in keeping with the non-inflammatory nature of the central nervous system lesions and it is a major reason why there are no laboratory diagnostic tests for the infectious agent. The combination of long incubation period, unusual stability and immunological neutrality explains why
the scrapie group of agents have long been known as the "unconventional slow viruses".
There are still major uncertainties about the chemical nature of the scrapie agent. Part of the problem is that studies are critically dependent on bioassays of infectivity in laboratory animals such as hamsters and mice, with the attendant long incubation periods. But the greatest problem has been the inherent "stickiness" of the scrapie agent which has bedevilled attempts at purification and impeded its chemical characterization.
Ignorance about the structure of the scrapie agent has not prevented other research which has led to a good understanding of the biological properties of the agent, the pathogenesis of the disease and the underlying reasons for its long incubation periods.
Many different strains of scrapie can be identified by their incubation periods, under standard conditions of experimental infection, and by the severity and distribution of histological lesions in the central nervous system. About ten different strains of scrapie are easily recognized by their biological properties in mice and at least three have been identified in hamsters. Mutation of the scrapie agent is well documented in both hamsters and mice and it is clearly not a rare event.
Therefore, scrapie closely resembles other microbial infections in exhibiting strain variation and mutation. This means that the infectious agent has a strain-specific genome. On a priori grounds, the genome is likely to be nucleic acid, even though it has not yet been identified. Some authors maintain that the agent is probably a virus, however unconventional it may be.
The ultraviolet irradiation properties of the scrapie agent indicate that the putative nucleic acid genome is very small. Its estimated target size to ionizing radiation is less than a molecular weight of 100 000. This may be too small for it to code for the protein which, as studies with proteases have shown, is a necessary component of the infectious agent. This has given rise to the "virino" hypothesis which proposes that the protein needed to protect the genome is host-coded. The lack of an immune response to infection could then be explained simply by the absence of foreign antigens. Taxonomically this places virinos between conventional viruses and viroids (a class of plant pathogens which neither need nor code for proteins to be infectious).
The purification of SAF is associated with the partial copurification of infectivity. However, a large amount of modified PrP accumulates in clinically affected brains and it is not easy to prove that the association of infectivity with purified SAF is other than a fortuitous consequence of a very sticky agent. Even if some modified PrP is a component of the infectious agent, there is evidence that much of it is not.
Nevertheless, the association between infectivity and modified PrP has led to further speculation. One possibility is that modified PrP may be the host protein which, according to the virino hypothesis, protects the putative nucleic acid genome. This hypothesis is intellectually attractive because it immediately provides a basis for the interaction between the sip/PrP gene and the infectious agent in natural scrapie.
However, modified PrP is the only molecule to have been identified in preparations containing high infectivity, and another possibility, the "prior" hypothesis, is that modified PrP is itself the infectious agent.
The central issue is the nature of the scrapie genome; on this depends a diagnostic test for infection. Supporters of the virus and virino hypotheses are waiting for a scrapie-specific nucleic acid to be found. Proponents of prions need evidence to explain how scrapie strain variation and mutation can be based on a post-translationally modified, normal protein.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 4
4. Epidemiology
4. Epidemiology
4.1 Early findings
4.2 The vehicle of infection
4.3 The start of the BSE epidemic
4.4 The north-south gradient
4.5 The recycling of infection in cattle
4.6 The development of the epidemic
4.7 Spongiform encephalopathy in other animal species
BSE was first recognized in November 1986. Retrospective analysis of case histories indicated that a small number of BSE cases had occurred as far back as April 1985. As the result of extensive surveillance, about 130 cases of BSE had been confirmed in the United Kingdom by the end of 1987 (Matthews, 1990). Over 2 000 cases were confirmed in 1988, but it should be remembered that BSE became a notifiable disease in June of that year (HMSO, 1988a) and the number of reported cases increased dramatically, from around 60 cases a month to 50 to 60 cases a week, after notification had been introduced. During 1989, the first full year of BSE notification, over 7 000 confirmed cases were recorded. By the end of 1990 the total for the United Kingdom was over 20 000.
4.1 Early findings
A major epidemiological study was started in June 1987 (Wilesmith et al., 1988). Although infection was undoubtedly the cause of BSE, it was important to eliminate other possibilities, particularly as the transmissibility of BSE had not yet been demonstrated.
There was no association of the time of onset of BSE with the stage of pregnancy or with calendar month, as might occur following the seasonal use of various pharmaceutical products or agricultural chemicals. Many products were specifically excluded as causes of BSE: for example, vaccines, hormones, organophosphorus fly sprays, synthetic pyrethroid sprays, anthelmintics, herbicides, pesticides, etc. (Wilesmith, 1992).
BSE is clearly not a disease of genetic origin. It has occurred in the majority of United Kingdom dairy breeds and their crosses, in the proportion expected from their representation in the national herd (see Table 3). Analysis of available pedigrees excludes a simple Mendelian pattern of inheritance as the sole cause of the disease.
TABLE 3. Distribution of confirmed cases of BSE in dairy cattle of different breeds and distribution of dairy breeds in the United Kingdom
Breed Percentage of confirmed
BSE cases Distribution
of dairy breeds
Holstein-Friesian 91.5 89.7
Ayrshire 3.9 2.2
Channel Islands 3 7 3.4
Others 0 7 4 7
Source: Wilesmith et al, 1992a.
However, the epidemiological data neither exclude nor support the possibility of bovine genetic factors controlling the susceptibility to an infectious disease, such as occurs with scrapie (Wilesmith et al., 1988; Wijeratne and Curnow, 1990).
But two other pieces of evidence suggest that host genetic variation may not be of great importance in BSE. The first is the remarkably (compared to scrapie) uniform pattern of severity and distribution of vacuolar lesions in BSE (see Histopathology, p. 33). The second is the 100 percent susceptibility and high uniformity of incubation periods seen in a total of 16 Jersey and Holstein-Friesian cattle that had been injected with BSE (Dawson, Wells and Parker, 1990, Dawson et al., 1991). A comparable experiment with scrapie in sheep would have given variability of both incidence and incubation period.
The epidemiological studies further showed that the occurrence of BSE was not associated with the importation of cattle, the use of semen, or the movement of breeding animals between herds. In view of the subsequent evidence that infection with scrapie was the