<title>Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish. Handbook of small-scale freshwater fish farming</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Between 1979 and 1990 five booklets in FAO's Better Farming Series dealt with freshwater fish farming in ponds, pens and cages. Written and illustrated by Tom Laughlin, with technical contributions from many FAO headquarters and field staff coordinated by the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service, these booklets have been popular with aquaculture training and development staff as extension tools.
Now compiled into the Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish farming, this wealth of simply presented and illustrated information becomes available in an improved format. Pond, pen and cage location, construction and management are covered in outlines that can be modified to suit local conditions.
The handbook is primarily intended for extension workers, technicians and teachers, to help them in presenting their knowledge of freshwater fish farming to small-scale farmers. For example, the handbook can be used as a trainers' aid in conjunction with the five original booklets' which can be distributed among trainees. The simple English employed in the text lends itself to easy translation into other languages, while the diagrams can be easily reproduced or enlarged for screen projection. The handbook ends with a set of questions that could be used to test the comprehension of trainees.
Requests for permission to issue this handbook in other languages and to adapt it according to local conditions and needs are welcomed, as are suggestions for its improvement when reprinted. Correspondence on these topics and requests for further copies of
the handbook and the five original booklets in the Better Farming Series should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
What is fish farming?
Why do we raise fish?
What do you need to raise fish?
How do we begin?
What is fish farming?
1 Fish farming is the raising of fish for personal use or profit. It is sometimes called fish culture.
Why do we raise fish?
2 By raising fish we make better use of our land and our water.
3 If you raise fish your family will have more to eat. The protein in fish will keep your family strong and healthy. Fish are tasty, like chicken, sheep and goat.
4 If your family is not too big, you will have more fish than you need for food and you can sell them at the market.
5 If your family is not too big, with more food and more money you and your family can live better.
Figure 1
6 But fish farming is not easy. To raise fish needs as much hard work as to raise anything else, such as maize, rice, cassava or groundnuts.
7 You will need to learn to do many things.
What do you need to raise fish?
8 You will need a piece of land where you can build a pond, or suitable water areas to build pens or keep cages; you will need a supply of water, baby fish to begin and food for your fish.
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
9 You will need time to build a pond and to care for it regularly.
10 Pens and cages can also be used for raising fish from the time they are babies until they are big enough to eat or to sell.
11 If you have a stream, river, lake or reservoir nearby, you may want to build a pen or a cage and raise fish there.
12 If you already have a fish pond, you may want to put in a cage so that you can raise more fish than you could in the pond alone.
How do we begin?
13 If there is a fish culture station near where you live, you may be able to get help from an extension agent.
Figure 7
14 If there is no extension agent you will need to learn many things by yourself.
15 You will need to know the type of soil best for your pond, how to dig your pond, how to fill it with water and how to fertilize it.
Figure 8
Figure 9
Figure 10
16 You will need to know what kind of fish to raise, how to put the baby fish into your pond, what to feed your fish and how to feed them.
Figure 11
Figure 12
Figure 13
17 You will need to know how to take care of the pond, how to drain it, how to harvest the fish and how to use your own baby fish to start again.
Figure 14
Figure 15
Figure 16
18 This book will help you to begin good fish farming.
19 Raising fish in pens and cages is somewhat different from raising fish in ponds. This book can help you learn both.
Figure 17
Figure 18
<section>3</section>
2. Locating your fish farm
Where to put your fish pond
Water supply
Soil quality
Testing soil
Where to put your fish pond
20 You must choose a good place to put your pond.
21 Remember that a pond for fish is only one use for your land. Be careful not to build a pond on land that could be better used for something else.
22 It is best to put a pond in a place with a gentle slope or on a hillside so you will not have to dig too much soil to build it. A pond built on a slope is also easier to drain.
23 Do not build your pond in a place that is so low that it can be flooded during the rainy season.
24 Do not build your pond on a steep hill.
Figure 19
25 Choose a sunny place for your pond, close to your home so you can take care of the fish easily and so people will not come and take your fish away.
Water supply
26 Your pond must be near a good supply of water such as a spring, stream, lake or reservoir with plenty of water all year round.
Figure 20
Figure 21
27 You must be sure that you have enough water to fill your pond when it is time to fill it and to add more water when you need it.
28 Do not depend on rainwater to fill your pond. When it does not rain, there may not be enough water to keep your pond full and the fish may die.
29 Your water must come from a place that is higher than the pond so that the water will flow into the pond by itself.
Figure 22
Figure 23
30 The water should not have a bad smell, taste or colour. It should not be too muddy.
31 The water should not have wild fish in it. You do not want wild fish in your pond because they may eat your fish or keep them from growing.
32 Water from a natural spring close to the pond site is usually good and there will not be wild fish in it.
33 Water from a stream or from a lake or reservoir is usually good but it may have wild fish in it. You will have to be careful that the wild fish do not swim into your pond.
Soil quality
34 The soil where you build your pond should not be too sandy. Soil with too much sand or gravel in it will not hold water.
35 In sandy soil the water will sink into the ground and there will not be enough water for your fish.
36 If the banks of your pond are built of sandy soil, they will not be strong enough to keep the water from flowing away.
Figure 24
37 The soil where you build your pond should have enough clay in it. Clay soil holds water very well.
38 In clay soil, very little water will sink into the ground, and banks of clay will be strong enough to hold the water in the pond.
Testing soil
39 You should test the soil to see if it is good for building a pond.
40 The first test is easy. Take a handful of soil from the surface and squeeze it into a ball.
41 Throw the ball of soil into the air and catch it.
Figure 25
Figure 26
Figure 27
42 Bad soil with too much sand or gravel in it will not stick together and the ball will fall apart.
43 If the ball sticks together well the soil may be good, but you cannot be sure. Now you should make a second test to be sure that the soil is good.
44 Dig a hole as deep as your waist. Early in the morning fill it with water. Fill it to the top.
45 By evening some of the water will have sunk into the soil.
Figure 28
Figure 29
Figure 30
46 Then fill the hole with water again. Fill it to the top. Cover the hole with boards or leafy branches.
47 The next morning if most of the water is still in the hole, the soil will hold enough water to build a fish pond there.
Figure 31
Figure 32
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO LOCATE YOUR FISH FARM BEST
Locate your farm on land with a gentle slope
* where there is enough water at all times
* where there is good water
* where the soil holds water well as close to your home as possible
<section>4</section>
3. Constructing fish ponds
How large should your pond be?
How to build a 20 by 20 metre pond
Building bigger ponds
How large should your pond be?
48 It is good to start with a pond greater than 300 square metres. Such a pond will produce enough fish for food. It will also produce fish for sales and additional cash income.
49 For example, if you build a pond 20 by 20 metres, the pond will measure 400 square metres.
50 A square or rectangular pond is easiest to build, but your pond can have a different shape to fit the size and shape of your land.
Figure 33
Figure 34
How to build a 20 by 20 metre pond
51 First mark out a big square on the site you have chosen, about 26 by 26 metres. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the outside of the banks will be.
52 Clear the big square of all trees, bushes and grass and take away as many big roots as you can.
Figure 35
Figure 36
53 Take away about 20 centrimetres of topsoil from all over the square. Put the topsoil aside. Later you will put it back on the top and outer sides of the banks.
54 Now mark out a smaller square inside the big square, about 20 by 20 metres. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the inside of the banks will be.
55 The bottom of the bank in the shallow part of your pond and along the sides should be about 1 metre from the upper end and sides of the small square.
Figure 37
Figure 38
56 The bottom of the bank in the deepest part of your pond should be about 2 metres from the lower end of the small square.
57 Now mark out a third smaller area in the centre of your pond, about 17 by 18 metres We will call this the central area. Mark the corners with pegs and run a string between the pegs to show where the bottom of the banks will be.
58 Be sure that ail the pegs and strings marking the 26 by 26 metre square, the 20 by 20 metre square and the central area are set up as shown in the drawings.
59 Now you are ready to begin digging out soil from inside the central area to build the banks of your pond.
60 Ask your neighbours to help you dig your big pond. Then you can help them dig their ponds in turn.
Figure 39
Figure 40
61 Shared work is lighter work. When we work together with our neighbours, the work is easier and faster.
62 Begin digging inside the central square at the upper end of your pond. Dig about 20 centimetres deep. As you dig towards the lower end, dig a little deeper. When you get to the deepest part, at the 2-metre string marking the central area, you should be digging about 30 centimetres deep.
63 As you dig out the soil, put it between the lines marking the 20 by 20 metre square and the 26 by 26 metre square, where the banks will be. Put it nearest to where you are digging. This way, the banks will be higher and wider as you move toward the lower end.
64 When you come to roots, take away as much of them as you can and put them aside.
Figure 41
Figure 42
65 Whenever the loose soil you put on the banks reaches half as high as your knees, pack it down tightly. You can do this by beating the soil with a heavy plank, a length of tree trunk or an earth tamper.
66 When you are digging, keep the slope of the pond bottom as regular as you can. It should slope gently down from the upper end to the deepest part. The bottom of the pond should have slopes like those in the drawings.
67 Begin again to dig soil out of the central area. Dig 20 more centimetres from the upper end and 30 more centimetres from the deepest part. Put the soil on the banks and pack it down tightly as before.
Figure 43
Figure 44
68 Now begin again, for the third and last time, to dig soil out of the central area. Dig 20 more centimetres from the upper end and 30 more centimetres from the deepest part. Put the soil on the banks and pack it down tightly.
69 When you have finished digging out the central area and you have put on the banks all the soil that you have taken out, you will have a hole 17 by 18 metres with straight sides. Now it is time to shape the banks.
70 Dig the soil away from the edges of the central area to form the slope of the banks. Put this soil on top of the banks and pack it down tightly.
71 The inside of the banks should slope less steeply than the outside. The drawing shows you what the banks should look like when they are finished.
Figure 45
Figure 46
72 The top of the banks should be about 1.5 metres wide and should be straight and flat all the way around the pond.
73 Get the 20 centimetres of topsoil you took away when you began digging and put it on the top and outer sides of the banks. Plant grass on the banks. Banks covered with grass last longer.
74 The bottom of your pond should be about 1.1 metres (110 centimetres) from the top of the banks at the shallow upper end and about 1.4 metres (140 centimetres) from the top of the banks at the deepest part.
75 Be sure that the bottom of the pond is fairly smooth and regular.
Figure 47
Figure 48
76 Now dig a ditch in the bottom of the pond from the centre to the lower end. The ditch should be about 50 centimetres wide and about 20 centimetres deep. This ditch will help you drain out all the water when you empty your pond.
77 When the ditch is finished, remove all loose soil and other trash from the bottom of the pond.
Building bigger ponds
78 If you want a still bigger pond, you can build one of 20 by 30 metres 20 by 50 metres or even 30 by 50 metres The banks of ponds this size should also be 1.5 metres wide at the top, but because these ponds are bigger and deeper and hold much more water, the banks should be stronger at the bottom than the banks you built for your smaller ponds.
Figure 49
Figure 50
79 Since you will be digging bigger and deeper ponds, you will take out more soil. Put all the soil you dig out on the lower part of the banks. This will make them thicker and stronger.
80 The drawing below shows you what the banks should look like when you are finished.
81 However, if you build ponds of this size, you should build them a little deeper. They should be at least 0.75 metres (75 centimetres) deep at the shallow end and at least 1 to 1.2 metres deep at the deepest part.
Figure 51
Figure 52
82 If you live in a place where the temperature falls below 20°C, make your ponds 1.5 to 1.8 metres deep. The water will be warmer in the deepest part and your fish can go there during the colder part of each day.
Note: When ponds are side by side, you will need only one bank between two ponds. If you are building two ponds side by side at the same time, you can make the top of the bank between them 1 metre wide instead of 1.5 metres
Figure 53
Figure 54
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO BUILD YOUR FISH PONDS
The pond should
* be greater than 300 m² to produce fish for food and cash
* have a square or rectangular shape
* be shallow, with water depth from 60 cm (upper end) to 90 cm (lower end)
The banks should
* be 50 cm higher than the water on top
* have a good slope on the sides
* be built with soil tightly packed
Build your pond in successive steps:
* clear all vegetation, rocks, etc. from the area
* remove the top soil and keep it aside
* mark the limits of the inside banks at ground level
* mark the limits of the inside banks at bottom level
* dig inside these last limits by layers of 20 cm (upper end) to 30 cm (lower end)
* use this soil to build up the banks, layer by layer and tightly packed
* form the inside slopes of the banks
* form the outside slopes of the banks
* add topsoil on top and on the outside slopes of the banks
* inside the pond, dig a small draining ditch
<section>5</section>
4. Inlets to let water into the pond
Simple inlets
A better inlet
83 You will need an inlet to let water into your pond when you want to fill it.
84 You should place the inlet at the point nearest to the water supply. Most often this will be at or near the upper end of your pond.
Simple inlets
85 Your inlet can be made from a piece of heavy bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The inlet pipe should be about 10 centimetres in diameter.
86 The inlet pipe should be long enough to reach through the top of the bank from one side to the other. You will need a pipe about 3 metres long to reach through the bank at the upper end of your pond.
Figure 55
Figure 56
87 Now dig a gap in the bank where you want the inlet to be. It should be a little above the water level on the inside of your pond and a little below the level of the water that flows from the source outside your pond.
88 Put the inlet pipe in the gap in the bank and rebuild the bank over it.
89 You can also make an inlet by cutting a shallow trench through the bank to let the water into the pond.
90 If you use a shallow trench to get water into your pond, you can improve it and keep it from washing away by using a trough of roofing metal to line the bottom of the trench.
Figure 57
Figure 58
A better inlet
91 You can also build a sluice in the trench to control the flow of water into the pond.
92 This sluice has a wall on each side of the trench and a floor set into the bottom of the trench. There are slots in the walls to hold wooden boards or a screen.
93 Boards are put into the slots to keep water out of the pond or taken out to let water in. When you are filling the pond, put in a screen to keep out wild fish.
94 You can build a sluice from wood, or if you know how to build with bricks or blocks, you can use these.
Figure 59 - AN INLET SLUICE
Figure 60 - BUILDING A WOODEN INLET SLUICE
Figure 61 - HOW TO BUILD A SCREEN
Figure 62 - PARTS OF A WOODEN INLET SLUICE
Figure 63 - WHERE TO PUT AN INLET SLUICE IN THE POND BANK
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO PREPARE TO BRING WATER INTO EACH POND
Provide an inlet for each pond:
* locate it through the top of the upper-end bank
* make its bottom about 10 cm above the highest level of
* pond water
* use a pipe, a shallow trench or a sluice
Dig a small, horizontal inlet ditch to each pond inlet
Build an inlet sluice
<section>6</section>
5. Outlets to let water out of the pond
Simple outlets
A better outlet
Another kind of outlet: The monk
Improving your pipe outlet
Using a siphon to drain your pond
96 You will need an outlet to let water out of your pond when you want to empty it.
97 You should place the outlet at the bottom of the bank at the lower end of your pond at the deepest part.
Simple outlets
98 The outlet can be made from a piece of heavy bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The outlet pipe should be about 10 centimetres in diameter. The bank of your pond is much wider at the lower end than at the upper end, so the outlet pipe will have to be longer than the inlet pipe.
99 The outlet pipe should be long enough to reach through the bottom of the bank from one side to the other. You will need a pipe about 6.5 metres long to reach through the bank at the lower end of your pond.
Figure 64
Figure 65
100 If you cannot get a pipe that is long enough to go through the bank, you can join shorter pieces of pipe together using straight pieces of pipe like the ones in the drawing.
101 If you are using bamboo, you can join short pieces of bamboo together with pieces of smaller bamboo in the centre, but the smaller pieces should be at least 8 to 9 centimetres in diameter. Wrap the bamboo joints with rope and close them with tar to keep water from seeping out.
Figure 66
Figure 67
102 Now dig a gap in the bank where you want the outlet to be. It should reach from the deepest part on the inside of the pond through the bank to the outside of the pond.
103 If the outlet pipe is below ground level on the outside of the pond, you will have to dig a ditch to take the water away from the outlet.
104 Put the outlet pipe in the gap in the bank and rebuild the bank over it.
105 If you use an outlet of about 10 centimetres in diameter, it will take about 10 hours to empty your 400 square metre pond.
106 It is easier to place the outlet where you want it to be before you dig out the centre of the pond and build the banks. When you build another pond, you will understand this and you will be able to do it when you are building the banks. But now, when you are building your first pond, you should place the outlet in the way you have just learned because it is easier to understand.
Figure 68
A better outlet
107 If you use a plastic or metal pipe for the outlet of your pond, you can make it better by putting an upright length of pipe on the end of the outlet using an L or a T piece like the ones in the drawing. Close the T piece with a plug as shown.
108 Put the L or T piece and the upright pipe on the end of the outlet outside the pond, but protect it so that it cannot be reached by animals or other people.
109 The top of the upright pipe should reach about 3 to 5 centimetres above the water level of your pond. If the water rises above this level, it will overflow from the upright pipe.
Figure 69
Figure 70
110 Tie the upright pipe to a pole that has been pounded into the ground so that it will not slip down and let the water out of the pond before you want it to.
111 When you want to let out the water, untie the upright pipe and push it down. The water will then flow out of the pond.
112 There is still another way to let water out of your pond, using a siphon. You will learn how to use a siphon in items 122 to 133.
Figure 71
Figure 72
Another kind of outlet: The monk
113 You can build another kind of outlet to empty a bigger pond faster. It is built inside the bank at the deep end of the pond. This kind of outlet is called a monk. When the pond is filled, the monk will be in the water.
114 A monk is a tall box with two sides, a back, a front formed by wooden boards and a bottom. Each side has two slots to hold two rows of wooden boards.
115 Boards are put into the slots to keep water in the pond or taken out to let water out.
Figure 73
116 A monk has a screen that fits on top of the first row of boards. It keeps your fish from getting out when the pond is too full or when you are emptying it.
117 A monk also serves as an overflow, so you will not need to have an overflow pipe like the one shown in item 109.
118 You can build a monk from wood, or if you know how to build with bricks or blocks, you can use these.
Figure 74
Figure 75 - BUILDING A WOODEN MONK
Figure 76 - WHERE TO PUT A MONK IN THE POND
Figure 77 - PARTS OF A WOODEN MONK
Improving your pipe outlet
120 You can further improve a pipe outlet by placing a collar of cement around the centre of the pipe. The collar will hold the pipe in place in the bank and keep water from seeping through the bank outside the pipe.
121 The following drawings show you how to build a wooden form to make a cement collar.
Figure 78
Figure 79
Using a siphon to drain your pond
122 You will also be able to use a siphon to empty your pond. If you use a siphon, you will not need an outlet but you will need an overflow like the one described in items 172 to 179.
123 A siphon is a simple tube that runs from the inside of the pond over the bank and lies on the ground outside the pond.
124 A siphon can be made of plastic or rubber tubing at least 3 centimetres in diameter.
Figure 80
125 The siphon must be long enough to reach from the deepest part of the pond and run over the top of the bank and down the outside of the bank. You will need a siphon about 8 metres long to reach over the top of the bank from the deep part to the outside.
126 When you are ready to empty your pond, put ail of the siphon into the pond. It will fill with water. Be sure the tube is full of water from one end to the other. If the siphon is not full of water, it will not work.
Figure 81
Figure 82
127 While the siphon is still in the water, close one end of the tube with a plug and leave the other end open.
128 Leave the open end of the siphon below the surface of the water. You can use stones to hold the siphon under the water, but be sure that they are not so heavy that the water will be shut off.
129 Take the other end of the siphon, which is closed with the plug. Lift it over the top of the bank and put it on the ground outside the pond.
130 If the ground on the outside of the pond is higher than the pond bottom at the deepest part, you will have to dig a ditch so that the end of the siphon on the outside of the pond will be lower than the end of the siphon in the pond. The ditch will also take the water away when you empty your pond.
Figure 83
Figure 84
131 Now, take the plug out of the siphon. If the end on the outside is lower than the end in the pond and if the end in the pond is under water, water will start to flow through the tube and out of your pond.
132 If the end of the siphon in the pond comes to the surface, the water may stop flowing. If this happens, put the whole siphon into the pond to fill it with water and begin again.
133 It will take a lot more time to empty a pond with a siphon than with an outlet. If you use a siphon of about 3 centimetres in diameter, it will take about three days to empty your pond.
Figure 85
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO DRAIN WATER OUT OF EACH POND
Provide an outlet for each pond:
* locate it through the bottom of the lower-end bank
* make its bottom about 10 cm below the deepest point in the pond
* use a straight pipe, an L-pipe or a monk
Or use a siphon made from a flexible tube at least 3 cm in diameter
<section>7</section>
6. Bringing water to your ponds
Raising the level of your water supply
Digging a supply ditch
Digging a return ditch
Building a sluice to control the water flow
Raising the level of your water supply
134 If the stream that supplies your water is not much higher than your ponds, it may be difficult to get the water to run down when you want to fill them.
135 By building a barrage, you can raise the level of the stream so
that water will run down more easily into your fish ponds.
Figure 86
136 You can build a simple barrage using a woven mesh of tree branches like the one shown above. You can also use loose stones or rocks or logs set into the stream bottom.
137 A barrage does not hold back all of the water that runs down the stream. Depending on how it is built, some of the water will be held back and some of the water will flow through or over the barrage.
138 If the tree branches, logs or rocks are placed tightly together, the water level behind the barrage will be higher.
139 If the tree branches, logs or rocks are not placed so tightly, the water level behind the barrage will be lower.
140 If you build a barrage and too much water flows through, you can hold back more water by putting more branches, logs or rocks on the barrage.
Figure 87
Digging a supply ditch
141 After you have built a barrage and the water behind it has reached its highest level, you will need to dig a supply ditch to take the water to your ponds.
142 Begin by digging the supply ditch just behind the barrage where the water is deepest. However, dig it in such a way that the water in the stream will not flow into the ditch.
143 You can do this by starting the supply ditch about 1 metre away from the edge of the water. When you are ready to fill your ponds, you can remove this 1 metre strip and the water will flow into the ditch.
144 The ditch should run near the shallow ends of your ponds and in the same direction as the stream that supplies your water.
Figure 88
Figure 89
145 The ditch should have very little slope. You can use a straight board and a mason's level to help you dig your ditch.
146 When you reach your highest pond, the ditch should be near the inlet. Continue to dig your water-supply ditch until you reach your lowest pond.
147 When the supply ditch is past the end of the lowest pond, continue to dig it downhill for about 10 metres
148 Then bring the ditch slowly to the surface. That way, when you fill your ponds, any extra water will flow out at ground level.
149 Now dig a small ditch to connect the inlet of each pond to the supply ditch. Keep its bottom level horizontal.
Figure 90
Digging a return ditch
150 You will also need to dig one or more ditches to take the water back to the stream when you empty your ponds.
151 These are called return ditches. How you dig them will depend on how your ponds are placed and how near they are to the stream. Try to choose the easiest and shortest path to take the water back to the stream.
152 If your ponds are near the stream, the easiest way to get the water back is to dig a return ditch from the outlet of each pond straight to the stream. You can also use one ditch for two ponds.
Figure 91
153 If your ponds are not near the stream or if you cannot dig a ditch straight to the stream, dig only one return ditch along the outlet side of your ponds, which can take all the water from all the ponds.
154 Start this ditch at the outlet of your highest pond. The ditch should run past the outlet of the lowest pond and then back to the stream.
155 Now, dig a small ditch to connect the outlet of each pond to the return ditch.
Figure 92
Building a sluice to control the water flow
156 When you have built your ditches, you will need a way to control the flow of water from the stream into your supply ditch and from your supply ditch into the inlet ditches of each of your ponds.
157 To control the flow of water into your supply ditch, you can build a sluice.
158 This sluice will have three slots in each wall. Two sets of slots are for wooden boards and the third set is for a screen to keep out wild fish.
159 Build this sluice at the top of the supply ditch just behind the 1-metre strip of soil that you left at the edge of the water when you began digging the ditch.
Figure 93
161 Pack the space between the boards with good clay soil to keep the water from leaking through.
162 Do not put in the screen until you are ready to use the sluice. Put it aside so that it will not be broken.
Figure 94 - BUILDING A WOODEN SLUICE FOR THE SUPPLY DITCH
Figure 95
163 Now, remove the 1-metre strip of soil you left at the edge of the stream. The water will flow into the ditch up to the wooden planks in the sluice.
164 Later, when you are ready to fill your ponds, you will control how much water will reach your ponds by removing some planks from the sluice.
165 For better control of the water supply to each pond, you can build smaller sluices in the supply ditch at the lower corners of each inlet ditch, as shown in the drawing.
Figure 96
Figure 97
166 With this sluice you need only one set of boards. The drawing below shows you how.
167 Slide the set of wooden boards into the slot to send ail the water into a pond, or take the boards out to let all the water flow farther down the supply ditch into another pond.
168 You can also adjust the boards in each sluice so that part of the water will go into one pond and the rest will flow down to feed the other ponds.
Figure 98 - BUILDING A WOODEN SLUICE FOR A POND INLET
Summary
YOU HAVE LEARNED HOW TO BRING WATER TO YOUR FISH FARM
Build a barrage to raise the water level of the stream, if necessary
Dig the supply ditch:
* dig it in the same direction as the flow of the water supply
* bring it along the shallow ends of the ponds
* give it very little slope
Dig the return ditch
* begin from the deeper ends of the pond
* make it as short as possible
Place a sluice at the beginning of the supply ditch
* keep it closed with two rows of boards
* pack soil between them until you need water on the farm
Place a sluice at the lower corner of each inlet ditch
<section>8</section>
7. Controlling the water in the pond
Overflow
Controlling trash and fish: Screens
Overflow
169 If there is too much water in your pond, some of the water may flow over the banks. This may wash the banks away and some of your fish may get out.
170 You can use an overflow to keep the water in your pond from rising over the banks.
171 The better outlets you learned about in items 107 to 119 will act as an overflow.
172 If you use a straight pipe outlet or a siphon to let water out of your pond, you will need another kind of overflow.
173 This kind of overflow can be made from a piece of bamboo or a pipe of plastic or metal. The overflow pipe should be about 6 centimetres in diameter.
174 The overflow pipe should be long enough to reach through the top of the bank from the inside of the pond to a place far enough on the outside to keep overflow water from washing away the bank. You will need a pipe about 4.5 metres long to do this.
175 If you cannot get a pipe that is long enough, join short pieces of pipe or bamboo together (see items 100 and 101).
176 It