<title>Neglected crops 1492 from a different perspective</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Throughout history, human beings have used thousands of plant species for food, many of which have also been domesticated. Today only 150 plant species are cultivated, 12 of which provide approximately 75 percent of our food and four of which produce over half of the food we eat. This involution has increased the vulnerability of agriculture and impoverished the human diet. As a result, many local crops that have traditionally been important for feeding the poorest sectors of society are nowadays underutilized or neglected.
There can be no doubt that the use, domestication and cultivation of the most widespread plant species have to a great extent been brought about accidentally and are conditioned by the social, economic and political values of the dominant cultures. It is highly likely that, had the process been carefully planned and the species selected on the basis of the scientific data available to us today, the result would have been different. At present, new biotechnologies constitute a powerful means of halting the involution process and, consequently, of accelerating the domestication of other promising plants as well as the genetic improvement of those that have been neglected. However, the economic and political interest necessary to promote research that would benefit the poorest social strata with the least purchasing power may be lacking.
The discovery of America, which brought into contact two different worlds with their own history, cultures and traditions, at the same time formed a bridge between two ecological macrocosms. When the settlers arrived in America, as well as their language, religion and customs, they brought with them plants that were cultivated on the Eurasian continent. In return, together with tales of amazing riches, mysterious cultures and exotic customs, they took back products of the earth that were unknown in the Old World. Thus began a long-lasting exchange of plants and animals which profoundly transformed eating habits on both sides of the Atlantic in the following centuries.
In the course of this exchange, products that in the past had occupied a prominent place in the economies and food supplies of vast regions, particularly in Latin America, either disappeared or were set aside, giving way to crops from the other continent. Eventually, the change in eating habits that was triggered by the introduction of these plants, which were not always well suited to local agro-ecological conditions, created a food and economic dependence in some countries of Central and South America which, today, remains a serious obstacle to their development.
At a time when the world is experiencing an exponential increase in its population and is anxiously wondering if it will be able to bring an end to the hunger and scarcity of food that now exist in many regions without causing fresh damage to our natural environment, it would seem logical to look to the past for possible solutions in species that have fed humanity throughout its history.
Such is the aim of this book which, beginning with an analysis of the characteristics of these plants, attempts to identify possible areas of research and development in order to facilitate, where possible, their reintroduction in regions to which they had become so well adapted over the centuries. Its purpose, therefore, is eminently practical and, in cooperation with institutions active in this field and with possible donors, it aims at reawakening an interest in the efficient exploitation and distribution of these crops.
This work is also a first step towards implementing the principles stated at the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development, held recently in Rio de Janeiro, and is in keeping with FAO's continuous effort to find systems and methods of cultivation that make it possible to combine development with a respect for the environment.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Abbreviations
ARARI
Aegean Regional Agricultural Research Institute (Turkey)
CATIE/GTZ Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre/German Agency for Technical Cooperation
CEPEC
Cocoa Research Centre (Brazil)
CEPLAC
Executive Committee of the Cocoa Farming Plan (Brazil)
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIAT
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture
CIFAP
Forestry, Agricultural and Livestock Research Centre (Mexico)
CIP
International Potato Centre
CPAA
Agroforestry Research Centre of Western Amazonia (Brazil)
CPATU
Agricultural Research Centre for the Humid Tropics (Brazil)
CSIC
Supreme Council of Scientific Research (Spain)
EEC
European Economic Community
EMBRAPA
Brazilian Agricultural Research Enterprise
ETSIA(M)
Higher Technical School of Agricultural Engineering (Madrid)
IBPGR
International Board for Plant Genetic Resources
IBTA
Bolivian Institute of Agricultural Technology
ICA
Colombian Agricultural Institute
ICARDA
International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas
ICRISAT
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
ICTA
Science and Agricultural Technology Institute (Guatemala)
IDIAP
Agricultural Research Institute of Panama
IICA
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture
IITA
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
INCAP
Institute of Nutrition of Central America and Panama (Guatemala)
INIA
National Institute of Agrarian Research (Portugal)
INIAP
National Institute of Agricultural Research (Ecuador)
INIFAP
National Institute of Forestry and Agricultural Research (Mexico)
INIPA
National Institute of Agricultural Research and Promotion (Peru)
INPA
National Research Institute of Amazonia (Brazil)
INRA
National Institute of Agricultural Research (France)
INTA
National Institute of Agricultural Technology (Argentina)
IUCN
World Conservation Union
JUNAC
Cartagena Agreement Board (Peru)
MAG
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (Costa Rica)
MID/INRA
Ministry of Agricultural Development/Nicaraguan Institute of Agrarian Reform (Nicaragua)
NBPGR
National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (India)
OAS
Organization of American States
SARH
Secretariat of State for Agriculture and Water Resources (Mexico)
UACH
Autonomous University of Chapingo
UCR
University of Costa Rica
UNAM
National Autonomous University of Mexico
UNSCH
National University of San Cristóbal de Huamanga
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
VIR
N.I. Vavilov All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Plant Breeding (CIS)
Preface
Conceived as a project by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Neglected crops: 1492 from a different perspective was copublished with the Botanical Garden of Córdoba, Spain. This cooperation came about as a result of the "Etnobotánica 92" congress, convened in September 1992 by the Botanical Garden and the City of Córdoba. The contents and aims of the congress were fully consistent with the sentiment behind the planned publication which would thus serve as an initial protocol for discussion at a symposium on neglected crops, oriented towards defining priorities, designing new projects for researching and improving these crops and planning strategies to finance them.
The aim of the book is to analyse the present situation and the prospects for improving certain traditional crops that were more important in other times and have now either been completely forgotten or relegated to a marginal role. After discussing the repercussions that 1492 had on natural resources and ways of life, both in America and Spain, the discovery of America and successive eras are studied, not as historic events that gave rise to a great genetic and cultural flow but, on the contrary, as possible immediate or delayed causes of certain crops being neglected.
The concept of a neglected or "marginalized" species in agricultural terms needs to be made clear. It basically refers to cultivated crops and therefore excludes those species which, in spite of their possible ethnobotanical or economic interest, are taken directly from their wild populations. They are crops which, at other times and under other conditions, were of greater importance in traditional agriculture and in the diets of indigenous peoples and other local communities. It does not necessarily imply promising crops. This is because they have already been cultivated and because the aim of their reinstatement is not to convert them into crops for intensive cultivation or export. Marginalized crops are those whose use and productivity need to be considerably increased as a means of raising the living conditions and improving the diet of ethnic groups and populations accustomed to living in economic systems that have engaged little interchange.
How has this situation of "marginalization" come about? There have been various contributing factors: the introduction of species that supplanted traditional ones; the loss of competitiveness of these species compared with other more productive species; gradual changes in demand; economic, cultural, political or religious prohibitions; and the disappearance of ethnic groups that understood the techniques and uses of the plants as well as their cultivation methods. We need to recognize, as the present study does, that among the social. agronomic and biological reasons for the neglect of such plants, it is the social factors that predominate. In many cases this has been a consequence of the premeditated eradication of self-sufficient ways of life and their replacement by other foreign systems, based on outside interests. Thus, in the traditional societies of Latin America, a dependence on external forces developed and subsequently resulted in poverty.
Four main sections of this book basically deal with Latin America, where three areas of anthropological action are identified, corresponding to the three main centres of phytogenetic diversity and origin of agricultural experiments: Mesoamerica, the Andean region and the Amazon. In keeping with the general approach of "Etnobotánica 92" - organized to analyse the consequences of 500 years of genetic and ethnobotanical exchanges between the two sides of the Atlantic - it seemed logical to include a final section on the marginalization of crops in Spain and its possible connection with 1492.
The list of species studied has been restricted to food crops and, with a few exceptions, to those exclusively of interest as human food. This does not mean that the same phenomenon of marginalization, as defined here, has not occurred in other types of crops. Perhaps the most drastic cases are to be found among industrial crops: dye, fibre or medicinal plants that have now been replaced by synthetic products, whose cultivation is left to the poorest communities which are unable to obtain the artificial substitutes, or which survive to be used at times when, as a result of certain market contingencies, the natural product once again can claim a limited consumption.
Some chapters are monospecific while others refer to groups of crops which are taxonomically and agronomically close. With the aim of meeting the basic objective of improving agricultural species in regions where they are traditionally exploited, attention has been paid to the following points:
Importance of genetic resources. Emphasis is placed both on the direct use of new germplasm with a superior yield, quality or resistance, and its application in previous genetic improvement programmes, using more sophisticated techniques. Mention is also made of conservation programmes and germplasm banks as well as of national and international institutions that coordinate conservation activities and the use of these resources. Genetic variability or biodiversity (known cultivars, related species, wild intraspecific variability, etc.) are evaluated and the current risks of genetic erosion are assessed.
Forms of consumption. The direct causes of or factors contributing to crop marginalization include the loss - either through neglect or cultural suppression - of forms of consumption (preparation, preservation, culinary habits, alternative uses) of foods based on marginalized traditional plants. For this reason, it has been considered of the utmost importance not only to reinstate the use of these crops but also to highlight their nutritional values and forms of preparation.
Prospects for improvement and limitations. The attention of specialists has been centred on rescuing neglected crops and, therefore, on indicating the direction to be taken in order to improve them. Age-old crops must be developed while taking into account the needs of the communities which consume them. With modern technology, it is possible to put improvement programmes into practice but, for this, the starting-point must be the experience acquired by farmers themselves. Research must be carried out at various levels and should range from the study and evaluation of seed material and traditional cultivation practices to the inclusion of a biotechnology suited to farmers' practical problems.
In spite of the fact that the editors of this work laid down a very rigorous theme structure, the diverse nature of the subjects dealt with and the different approaches of specialists from more than nine countries have necessarily led to a certain lack of uniformity which has in fact enriched the work. Highly specific information is frequently provided, much of which has never before been published. Also included are value judgements, observations and personal opinions which may be of use to those who carry out field work.
The first two chapters present an overall view of the biodiversity of American phytogenetic resources and the processes that caused marginalization. This phenomenon is linked directly or indirectly to the introduction of flora from the Old World into America from 1492 onwards.
In the section on Mesoamerica, some little-known beans, gourds and other native cucurbits, custard apples and cherimoyas, prince's feather (huautli) and amaranth, sapodillas, Spanish plums and tomatilloes or husk-tomatoes are studied. The numerous lesser crops of the region have not been included because of their restricted geographical distribution.
In the section on Andean agriculture, crops are grouped into grains and pulses, tubers, roots and fruits. The grains studied include quinoa, canihua (qañiwa), love-lies-bleeding (kiwicha) and Andean lupin (tarwi); tubers include oca, ullucu, bitter potatoes and mashwa; roots include arracacha, leafcup (yacón), mace and mauka; and fruits include the mountain papaw, sweet cucumber and tree tomato.
The section dealing with Amazonian and Caribbean agriculture examines neglected crops in the Amazon region understood in the broad sense and, by extension, species of the Caribbean region and others that are subtropical in environment and origin. There is a study of the cupuaçu, peach-palm, Paullinia sp., arazá, feijoa, jaboticaba, Guinea arrowroot, Paraguay tea and yautia or tanier.
The last section examines the possible influence of American flora on the marginalization of various Iberian crops. Leguminous species (for animal feed and human consumption) and horticultural species are considered. Fruit-trees and groups of plants of separate economic interest for human consumption ought to have been included.
Many other crops have not been mentioned and perhaps only a minority of those which urgently need to be rescued have been included but it is hoped that at least a contribution has been made towards increasing awareness of such crops, thereby encouraging an exchange of available information.
What is sought now is the participation of different national and international institutions that may be able to contribute resources, technology and expertise to less developed countries where marginalized crops play an important role as a source of food.
Perhaps what should first be achieved is a change of attitude in Latin American countries themselves regarding the species and the products which are derived from them, but which are currently neglected either because of the passive or disparaging attitude of consumers, or because of the lack of incentives to promote and improve them. These efforts must be accompanied by new studies on postharvest handling, marketing channels and the publicizing of nutritional values, bearing in mind that the prime beneficiaries of this undertaking must be the farmers and consumers.
J.E. Hernández Bermejo and J. Leon
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Plant genetic resources of the new world
Introduction of flora from the old world and causes of crop marginalization
Plant genetic resources of the new world
Genetic resources
The major phytogeographical regions
Biodiversity of american flora
Cultural relationships
Distribution of genetic diversity
Changes since 1500
The challenge of conservation
Ornamental plants
Medicinal plants
The discovery of America brought about the biggest exchange of germplasm in history. Previously, only three species - one cultivated (sweet potato) and two spontaneous (bottle gourd and coconut) - were common to the agricultures of both the Old and the New World. After 1492, the exchange of cultivated species not only radically changed the diet of the majority of humankind but also led to commercial crops being developed in the tropics and a new world economic order being created. The relationship between human beings and cultivated plants affected everything from basic food and clothing requirements to the use of plants for ornamental purposes and leisure.
The first introductions into America European grains. vegetables and fruits planted in Hispaniola were unsuccessful but, a few decades later on the highlands of Mexico and the Andes. they produced yields which exceeded those of Europe. On the other hand, bananas, sugar cane and citrus fruits, among others, acclimatized easily to tropical areas. From Africa, yams and other minor crops were introduced. From America and Europe, maize, which arrived shortly after the discovery, had spread throughout the centre of the continent with in three or tour decades. Later, potatoes, tomatoes, gourds, beans and chilies were slowly incorporated into European cooking, which thereby assumed its present-day characteristics. In Africa, the cassava or manioc and the peanut were introduced, which radically changed the diet in the western part of the continent. Rice, originating in Southeast Asia and taken to America from Spain and Africa, came to constitute a staple food; on the other hand,
cottons from the New World displaced African and Asian cottons. In commercial crops, the influence of exchange was decisive: sugar cane was the first agro-industrial product of the New World while coffee from Ethiopia, introduced two centuries ago, became the main, product of Latin America, followed by the banana, originating from Southeast Asia. In the opposite direction, cocoa from Brazil has become the main commercial product of West Africa and, together with rubber from the Amazon region, an important export item of Southeast Asia. In Latin America during this century, African grasses have replaced the local species, which are few and of low yield.
The exchange of germplasm is a continuous process in agricultural diversification and genetic improvement. The tact that on both sides of the Atlantic most commercial crops are of foreign origin means that their preservation, evaluation and trade is of world interest. Germplasm losses in Southeast Asia may have more effect on tropical America than on that region itself.
Genetic resources
At present, the term "genetic resources" is being employed increasingly instead of germplasm, as it is considered to be broader and more appropriate. Interest in the preservation, documentation and intensive use of genetic resources is relatively recent. As one of the earth's many natural resources, once it is lost the germplasm of cultivated plants may never be recovered. Its concentration in countries with an incipient agriculture creates particular problems regarding its conservation and trade, although the agricultural systems prevalent in those regions tend to preserve it as seed material.
The range of the genetic resources of cultivated plants varies considerably according to the species. The first category consists of the primitive cultivars, i.e. those resulting from an initial selection made by the farmers. There is no complete list, not even for species of high economic value, by which the number of cultivars could be estimated; in some species there may be dozens, in others hundreds. Most have a restricted geographical distribution and many are grown only for family consumption.
Outside their centre of origin they produce high yields. as certain tests reveal. Their potential value consists of the set of genes resistant to very varied environmental conditions, diseases and pests and, often, their high nutritional value content. They are very prone to genetic erosion, as their populations are small and consequently easy to replace with other cultivars and, since they are used by the poorest social groups, they receive scant attention.
The second category, advanced cultivars, is limited in tropical America to a few species; they are the result of genetic improvement efforts intended to produce high-yielding cultivars that are resistant to diseases and pests or adapted to specific environmental conditions. Some crops originating from the American tropics have undergone genetic improvement in regions with advanced agricultural sectors: North America, Europe and Japan. The cultivars that they gave rise to did not, however, adapt to the prevailing conditions in tropical America.
The third category is made up of the cultivated species' wild populations which subsist in the area where the species has been domesticated. They grow spontaneously and sometimes the action of disruptive selection does not allow an exchange of genes between the wild and cultivated populations. Weeds, which are difficult to define, form a separate group. In primitive agricultural systems, there is no clear line between cultivars, weeds and wild populations because the latter two are also utilized in some cases.
In addition to the species, the cultivated or wild relatives with which an exchange of genes is possible constitute a fourth category which may have an important role in genetic improvement. Frequently, the relations of a cultivated species are used in practices, such as grafting, that require a physiological affinity. In some cases citrus fruits and ornamental orchids - the genetic resources are extended to other genera in the formation of multigeneric hybrids.
The major phytogeographical regions
The background to the processes determining the richness of the continent's genetic resources may be understood better if we consider their relationship with the distribution of the plant formations and their biodiversity, and with human factors or, in other words, cultural factors. The former is very complex in the tropical region of the New World because of the number of natural landscapes and the differences between them.
Around lat. 25°N, the arid regions of North America, including deserts and semi-deserts, come to and end and areas of greater humidity begin along the coastal areas of Mexico. Running parallel to the coast are the Sierra Madre mountain ranges, traversed by the high and wide central valleys which formed the heart of Mesoamerica. Towards the south, the mountainous areas, ranges and dividing valleys extend as far as Panama, with a break only in Tehuantepec. As far as Nicaragua, the vegetation of the ranges is predominantly of northern origin, and the first high. bleak Andean plateaus appear in Costa Rica. In the low areas there are notable differences between the two slopes. On the Atlantic slope, the rain forest begins south of Tamaulipas and continues over the coastal plains as tar as Darien in Panama, broken only in Yucatan by a low, dry forest. and in the north of Nicaragua by extensive pinewoods resulting from specific soil conditions. On the Pacific slope, on the other
hand, in areas with alternating seasons, the dry tropical forest extends from Sinaloa to central Panama, with a single break through the humid tropical forest of Osa in Costa Rica. The lowland forests are mainly of southern origin and penetrate Mexico as tar as the northern limit of the rain forests or dry forests.
FIGURE 1 Major types of vegetation in Mesoamerica, the Caribbean and South America
In South America, the tropical rain forest of the Gulf of Darien extends south through the coastal plains as far as Ecuador; it branches north and northeastwards in Colombia and Venezuela, where it borders on a dry tropical forest, similar to that of Mexico in Central America, which changes in coastal areas to semi-desert scrubland, with Cactaceae extending as far as the Caribbean coast.
The Andean ranges present a great diversity of vegetation cover, from the slopes bordering the Pacific, which are desert-like in Peru and Chile, to the vegetation of the bleak plateaus. The eastern slope is generally much more humid and forms a continuous strip from Venezuela to Bolivia (cejas and yungas). The high elevation causes areas of extreme dryness in the Andes, some of which are completely devoid of vegetation, for instance the salt marshes.
In the extreme northeast of the Andes, an area of low humidity, the Orinoco plains, extends from the centre of the continent to the Atlantic, ending in very dry forests on the coast. On the more humid ground to the east of the Orinoco River, there are dry forests and palm groves.
The centre of the continent is covered with the humid tropical forest of the Amazon Orinoco, except for the high savannah of Guyana. This forest, the most extensive in the world, can be divided into several subregions according to the types of vegetation and composition of flora, caused by the expansion of the old plant formations and by environmental conditions. What is important from a phytogeographical point of view is the Obidos breech which crosses the Amazon basin from north to south. It is a separate strip with a lower precipitation of around 1 500 mm, much less than the rest of the Amazon region receives, which divides the region into a western and eastern zone and acts as a barrier to the spread of many species. The upper Amazon, from Obidos to the Andean ranges, is one of the most interesting areas in South America on account of its wealth of flora and genetic resources - numerous crops originated here.
The decrease in humidity south of the Amazon forest gives rise to landscapes of open forest and savannah the cerrado is an enormous area in central Brazil which is relatively low, undulating or with mountain ranges which are not very high and are covered with scattered, low evergreen arboreal vegetation which is denser around water currents. The humidity is favourable to agriculture, which has recently been developed and, if chemical fertilizers are used, soils are productive.
Northeastern Brazil is for the most part covered by the caatinga, with a clear, deciduous forest predominated by palms and cacti. The area offers natural products for collection, such as carnauba wax in the extreme north, but it is a difficult area for agriculture. On the rain forest border in areas with about 1 500 mm of precipitation, there are great formations of babassu, which is an important source of oil. The cerrado and the caatinga are poor in native crops, partly because of their abundance of other natural resources and partly because of the adverse conditions for permanent agriculture.
Between the caatinga and the ocean there is a belt of high humidity with rain forest which, in Bahía, is used to a great extent for cacao, cane and other crops. The coastal rain forests are broken to the north of Rio de Janeiro by dry areas. but they continue south almost to lat. 30°.
From the southern limit of the cerrado to the Tropic of Capricorn there are several regions with different landscapes, beginning with the palm savannahs in Bolivia in the foothills of the Andes; changing to the dry forest of Chaco which is the largest of these regions: and then to the great marshland of the Mato Grosso; and ending in the mesophytic forests which extend eastwards as far as the coastal rain forests.
Biodiversity of American flora
Plant biodiversity in the American tropics comprises two aspects which have not yet been studied in full. The first is the diversity of plant types caused by adaptation to a complex, unstable environment where there is much competition. Species have responded to these conditions by forming characteristics that entail complete changes in the organism (epiphytism, parasitism), or by adapting certain organs, as is the case of lianas or floating plants which adjust to more restricted requirements.
The second aspect, the wealth of families, genera and species, has been studied more, but the inventories made in the New World only cover countries or very small regions, which does not give an idea of the complete situation. It is well known that the richness of flora increases from the lower latitudes towards the equator and that, like the diversity of biological forms, it reaches its highest level in the humid tropics. The number of higher plants in the tropical New World is estimated to be between 60 000 and 70 000. A very high percentage of these include the Compositae, Orchidaceae, Rubiaceae, Cyperaceac, Araceae and Melastomataceae families, which have few components that provide materials for consumption or industry. It is to be hoped, therefore, that there is no correlation between a region's wealth of flora and the number of domesticated plants in it. Thus, in Costa Rica, only one of about 1 0000 higher plant species has been domesticated. In Ecuador, whose wealth
of flora is unparalleled on the continent, it is surmised that only four species have been domesticated. On the other hand, the areas with the greatest richness of flora are those which offer the best prospects for future use, especially in industry.
Cultural relationships
It is obvious that neither the wealth of flora nor the diversity of the major plant formations are primary factors in domestication. On the contrary, both conditions may be negative: the first because, in a wide range of products, it is easy to find substitutes if one should become scarce; the second because the abundance of a product in a natural formation makes its domestication unnecessary.
Although there is uncertainty as to which species were cultivated in America prior to 1492, their number is estimated to be between 250 and 300. The great majority of them are still at an incipient stage of cultivation and they cannot be categorized as domesticated, if we are to follow the norms laid down by specialists who restrict this concept to those species that have undergone genetic improvement. However, if we accept that the relationship between human beings and cultivated plants has a broader sense, the development and application of cultivation practices and the invention of utilization techniques as factors in the domestication process of a species may be considered to be as important as or more important than genetic improvement.
In tropical America, the paucity of archaeological or historical evidence makes it very difficult to determine the factors which led to domestication and to establish whether this occurred in a limited period or was a long process, whether it occurred in one place or several, and whether it happened just once or recurred in different eras.
Domestication in the New World may have been due to the same causes that were believed to have operated in the Old World: scarcity of harvesting, fishing and hunting resources; population pressure; and environmental changes or cultural transformations. Secondary causes may also be mentioned, such as the convenience of having a resource close at hand rather than having to look for it in the forest, especially if it required only simple handling and propagation methods.
Once the initial stage of domestication had passed, the expansion of crops exposed species to new forces of selection and increased their diversity. Expansion was able to take place by diffusion or migration, as will be described later.
Distribution of genetic diversity
The genetic resources of cultivated plants are not uniformly distributed. A great number of species and varieties are concentrated in tropical and subtropical regions, while they are scarce or completely