<title>The use of saline waters for crop production - FAO irrigation and drainage paper 48</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The challenges of poverty and hunger remain as great and compelling as ever. The number of the world's under-nourished is still on the increase, despite the remarkable progress made in agricultural development in developing regions in recent years. Increasing food production to meet the needs of the increasing world population on a sustainable basis remains the primary goal of all nations.
In this context the importance of irrigated agriculture needs no emphasis. Currently, production from the irrigated lands, which constitute about 17 percent of the total arable lands, accounts for 35 percent of the global food harvests. Irrigation has the ability not only to increase production per unit area of land but also to stabilize production. Indeed many countries will look to irrigated agriculture as the only reliable means to increase production on a sustainable basis.
However, irrigation requires water and this is an essential commodity in increasingly short supply. There is now growing realization that an increasing number of countries are approaching full utilization of their conventional surface water resources and that the quantity of good quality water supplies available to agriculture is diminishing. What is left is water of marginal quality such as saline groundwater and drainage waters. The question that needs to be answered is: "can agriculture make use of marginal quality water such as saline water in a way that is technically sound, economically viable and environmentally non-degrading; in other words, is it a viable proposition to use saline water for agricultural production?"
FAO convened an Expert Consultation in October 1989 to seek answers to these pertinent questions. A few very select experienced and "dyed in the wool" professionals in the subject area analysed the current status of saline water use in irrigation and examined water, soil and crop management techniques relating to the use of saline water for crop production. The conclusion of the Expert Panel was that there is good potential for the safe use of saline water for crop production. The Panel recommended the integrated management of water of different qualities at the levels of the farm, irrigation system and drainage basin, with the explicit goals of increasing agricultural productivity, achieving optimal efficiency of water use, preventing on-site and off-site degradation and pollution and sustaining long-term production potential of land and water resources.
This publication, "The use of saline waters for crop production: guidelines on water, soil and crop management", is written by three experts who participated in the Expert Consultation. In preparing this publication, they have drawn heavily on the papers presented in the Expert Consultation as well as on the recommendations that came out of the Consultation. It is hoped that this publication will provide guidelines to many developing as well as developed countries in order that they may manage their saline waters for productive purposes in a sustainable manner.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This guidelines publication is an outcome of a FAO Consultation on "Water, Soil and Crop Management Relating to the Use of Saline Water" held in 1989 in Rome. A number of ideas and the conceptual framework of the guidelines were developed at this Consultation. The authors wish to acknowledge the resource persons of the consultation, namely Messrs. I.P. Abrol (India), A. Hamdy (Italy), A. Meiri (Israel) and A.H.M. Rady (Egypt) who have contributed to this publication through the Expert Consultation.
A good part of the research findings reported in these guidelines has come from the United States Salinity Laboratory, Riverside, California, and the authors gratefully acknowledge the staff of the Laboratory for their outstanding contribution.
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Mr. S.F. Scott, Chief, Water Resources, Development and Management Service, and Mr. R. Brinkman, Chief, Soil Resources, Management and Conservation Service, for their support and encouragement in the preparation of the guidelines. A number of people have reviewed the document and proofread the text; the authors are grateful to them.
Thanks are also due to Ms. C.D. Redfern for her assistance in the preparation of the final camera-ready text and to Mr. D. Mazzei for the revision of the illustrations.
It is hoped that the guidelines will be useful to the many research and extension workers and the farmers who currently use, or will use in the future, the largely untapped resource of "saline water" for agriculture in a sustainable manner.
USEFUL CONVERSION FACTORS AND FORMULAS
TDS (mg/l) » EC (dS/m) × 640
for EC between 0.1 and 5.0 dS/m
TDS (mg/l) » EC (dS/m) × 800
for EC<5.0 dS/m
TDS (Ibs/ac » ft) = TDS (mg/l) × 2.72
TDS (tons/ac » ft) = TDS (mg/l) × 0.00136
sum of cations/anions (meq/l) » EC (dS/m) × 10
for EC between 0.1 and 5.0 dS/m
log cations/anions (mmol[c]/l) » 0.955 + 1.039 log EC (dS/m)
log total soluble salts (mmol[c]/l) » 0.990 + 1.055 log EC (dS/m)
ionic strength (mol/l) » EC (dS/m) × 0.0127
osmotic pressure (atm) » EC (dS/m) × 0.40 for EC between 3 and 30 dS/m
List of abbreviations
SAR
= sodium adsorption ratio
EC
= electrical conductivity
EC[iw]
= electrical conductivity of irrigation water
SAR[sw]
= sodium adsorption ratio of soil water
dS/m
= deciSiemens per metre
mmol[c]/l
= millimol per litre
EC[e]
= electrical conductivity of soil saturated extract
TDS
= total dissolved soilds
mg/l
= milligrams per litre
BCM
= billion cubic metres
MCM
= million cubic metres
ESP
= exchangeable sodium percentage
Y[r]
= relative yield
T
= tolerant crop
MT
= moderately tolerant crop
MS
= moderately sensitive crop
S
= sensitive crop
g/m^3
= grams per cubic metre
RSC
= residual sodium carbonate
EC*[e]
= water uptake weighted electrical conductivity of soil saturation extract
p
= osmotic potential
p *
= water uptake weighted osmotic potential
adj. SAR
= adjusted sodium adsorption ratio
t
= metric water potential
= total water potential
= mean salt concentration
V[iv]
= volume of infiltrated irrigation water
V[dw]
= volume of drainage water
LF
= leaching fraction
C[iw]
= salt concentration of irrigation water
C[dw]
= salt concentration of drainage water
= mean metric water potential
f [f]
= total water potential at any given point for irrigation scheduling
kPa
= killiopascal
pCO[2]
= partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pascal Pa)
<section>3</section>
Executive summary
The primary objective of these guidelines is to facilitate the safe use of saline waters for crop production, while promoting water conservation and environmental protection. A secondary objective is to create an awareness of the degradational and pollutional consequences that result from prevalent irrigation practices and the potential to minimize these problems through the interception, isolation and reuse of drainage water for irrigation employing appropriate strategies and practices. In this publication "saline waters" refers to natural salt-affected waters as well as those resulting from human activities, such as irrigation with drainage waters and shallow groundwaters, that fall in the range of 1500 to 7000 mg/l total dissolved solids and which are not widely used for irrigation. Cropping considerations will generally require that appropriate management practices be employed to use such waters effectively over time for crop production.
These guidelines are addressed primarily to those involved with irrigated agriculture, soil and water conservation, and environmental protection. Emphasis is on the avoidance of waterlogging and secondary salinization problems (both in soils and water supplies) associated with irrigation. The basis for these guidelines is presented in terms of the principal effects of salts and irrigation practices on soils, waters and crops.
SCOPE
Chapter 1 discusses the potential to use saline waters, especially drainage waters, to increase crop production (particularly in those countries which are limited by available water supplies) while simultaneously helping to overcome environmental pollution problems associated with irrigation and drainage. Quality characteristics, sources and availability of saline waters potentially suitable for irrigation are described in Chapter 2. Examples of the successful use of various saline waters for irrigation under widely varying situations around the world are given in Chapter 3 to lend credibility to the Guidelines recommendations for such use. In Chapter 4, criteria, standards, methods and models to assess the suitabilities of saline waters for irrigation are discussed. The nature and causes of waterlogging and soil salinization, water pollution, eco-system disturbance and water-borne diseases associated with irrigation are reviewed in Chapter 5. Management principles and
practices for safe use of saline waters for crop production and environmental protection are discussed in Chapter 6.
SALINE WATERS AS A RESOURCE
There is ample evidence to illustrate the widespread availability of saline waters and a wide range of experience exists around the world with respect to using them for irrigation under different conditions. This evidence and experience demonstrates that waters of much higher salinities than those customarily classified as "unsuitable for irrigation" can, in fact, be used effectively for the production of selected crops under the right conditions.
EFFECTS OF SALTS ON CROP PRODUCTION
Salts exert both general and specific effects on plants which directly influence crop growth and yield. Salts also affect certain soil physico-chemical properties which, in turn, affect the suitability of the soil as a medium for plant growth. Excess sodium and very high pH, such as might occur with the use of saline- sodic waters for irrigation, promote the slaking of aggregates and the swelling and dispersion of clays which lead to soil crusting, loss of porosity and reduced permeabilities, especially when rapid desalinization occurs following rainfall or the subsequent use of low-salinity waters for irrigation. The major general effect of salts on plants is to reduce plant stand and growth rate. Chloride, sodium and boron may exert specific toxicity effects on susceptible crops, especially woody perennials. Plants vary in their tolerances to salts and many are sufficiently tolerant, especially after seedling establishment, to produce well when irrigated with saline
waters, especially typical drainage waters, provided appropriate cultural management practices are followed.
ASSESSING THE SUITABILITY OF SALINE WATER FOR CROP PRODUCTION
The suitability of a water for irrigation should be evaluated on the basis of criteria indicative of its potential to create soil conditions hazardous to crop growth and subsequently to animals or humans consuming those crops. Relevant criteria for judging irrigation water quality in terms of potential hazards to crop growth are primarily:
· Permeability and tilth
· Salinity
· Toxicity and nutritional imbalance
Permeability and crusting hazards are evaluated by electrical conductivity (EC[iw],) and the sodium adsorption ratio predicted to occur in the topsoil after irrigation (SAR[sw]) with reference to threshold tolerances (permissible combinations of EC[iw] and SAR[sw]) established for the specific soil in question or, in the absence of specific information, an appropriate general relation. SAR[sw] is predicted using a computer model (such as Watsuit, which is used in this publication) or, in the absence of a computer, using the SAR value of the irrigation water (SAR[iw]).
Salinity, toxicity and nutritional problems are evaluated by comparing levels of soil water salinity, concentrations of toxic ions and ratios of Ca/Mg predicted (with Watsuit) to result in the rootzone of the soil after irrigation with reference to acceptable values of salinity, toxic-ion concentrations and Ca/Mg ratios for the specific crop (s) in question. Tables of acceptable levels of salt and toxic-ion concentrations are provided for many crops and plants. Predictions of soil salinity resulting from irrigation with a given saline water can also be made without benefit of a computer by ignoring salt precipitation and dissolution reactions.
Tables and figures are provided to make such predictions along with examples of their use for assessing saline water suitability for irrigation. Uncertainties in the model predictions and insufficient knowledge of soil and crop responses to salts and toxic ions limit the exactness and quantitativeness of the assessment procedure.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF IRRIGATION
In a number of countries, irrigated agriculture has resulted in major environmental disturbances such as waterlogging and salinization, depletion and pollution of water supplies, especially groundwaters, and increased health risks. The recreational, aesthetic and habitat values of many water systems and agricultural landscapes have also been degraded by improper irrigation development and practices.
Most of the problems of waterlogging and secondary salinization prevalent in irrigated lands and of associated water pollution have resulted from the excessive use of water for irrigation as a consequence of inefficient irrigation distribution systems and poor on-farm management practices, inappropriate drainage management, and the discharge of "spent" drainage water into good-quality water supplies. These problems have occurred even where low salinity waters have been used for irrigation. This might lead one to conclude that the use of saline waters for irrigation can only increase these problems. However, this is not necessarily the case.
The use of saline waters of the levels advocated herein for irrigation will not result in excessively saline soils per se nor cause waterlogging with proper management. In fact, the interception of drainage waters percolating below rootzones and their reuse for irrigation will reduce the soil degradational processes associated with excessive deep percolation, salt mobilization, waterlogging and secondary salinization that typically occur in irrigated lands and the water pollution problems associated with their discharge to good-quality water supplies.
In considering the use of a saline water for irrigation and in selecting appropriate management to protect water quality, it is important to recognize that the total volume of a saline water supply cannot be beneficially consumed for irrigation and crop production; and the greater its salinity, the less it can be consumed before the salt concentration becomes limiting. The practice of blending or diluting excessively saline waters with good quality water supplies should only be undertaken after consideration is given to how this affects the volumes of consumable water in the combined and separate supplies. Blending or diluting drainage waters with good quality waters in order to increase water supplies or to meet discharge standards may be inappropriate under certain situations. More crop production can usually be achieved from the total water supply by keeping the water components separated. Serious consideration should be given to keeping saline drainage waters separate
from the "good quality" water supplies, especially when the latter waters are to be used for irrigation of salt-sensitive crops. The saline drainage waters can be used more effectively by substituting them for "good quality" water to irrigate certain crops grown in the rotation after seedling establishment.
MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES TO CONTROL SALINITY
An integrated, holistic approach is needed to conserve water and prevent soil salinization and waterlogging while protecting the environment and ecology. Firstly, source control through the implementation of more efficient irrigation systems and practices should be undertaken to minimize water application and reduce deep percolation. Unavoidable drainage waters should be intercepted, isolated and reused to irrigate a succession of crops of increasing salt tolerance, possibly including eucalyptus and halophyte species, so as to reduce drainage water volumes further and to conserve water and minimize pollution, while producing useful biomass. Conjunctive use of saline groundwater and surface water should also be undertaken to aid in lowering water table elevations, hence to reduce the need for drainage and its disposal, and to conserve water. Various means should be used to reclaim or to dispose of the ultimate unusable final drainage effluent.
To achieve these goals, new technologies and management practices must be developed and implemented. Efficiency of irrigation must be increased by the adoption of appropriate management strategies, systems and practices and through education and training. Such measures must be chosen with recognition of the natural processes operative in irrigated, geohydrologic systems, not just those on-farm, and with an understanding of how they affect the quality of soil and water resources, not just crop production. Some practices can be used to control salinity within the crop rootzone, while other practices can be used to control salinity within larger units of management, such as irrigation projects and river basins. Additional practices can be used to protect offsite environment and ecological systems -including the associated surface and groundwater resources.
There is usually no single way to achieve salinity control in irrigated lands and associated waters. Many different approaches and practices can be combined into satisfactory control systems; the appropriate combination depends upon economic, climatic, social, as well as edaphic and hydrogeologic situations. Thus, no procedures are given for selecting "the" appropriate set of control practices for different situations. They are too numerous. Rather, some important goals, principles and strategies of salinity management, at both on-farm and project levels, that should be considered in the selection and implementation of control practices are reviewed and discussed.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
One of the primary objectives of agriculture is to provide the food and fibre needs of human beings. These needs increase as the population increases. The world population was 2.5 thousand million in 1950; 4.9 thousand million in 1985, and 5.3 thousand million in 1990. It is expected to be 6.3 thousand million in 2000, and 8.5 thousand million in 2025 (UN 1991). The population of the developing countries, which is presently over three-quarters of the worlds total, is projected to increase by about 2.0 percent per year during the last decade of this century and to account for about 90 percent of the expected increase in global population (World Bank 1988). These growth rates will require an increase in agricultural production of about 40 to 50 percent over the next thirty to forty years, in order to maintain the present level of food intake; a 20 and 60 percent increase for developed and developing countries, respectively.
Growth in crop production can come from increases in arable land, cropping intensity and yield per unit area of cropped land. Nearly two-thirds of the increase in crop production needed in the developing countries in the next decade must come from increases in average yields, a fifth from increases in arable lands, and the balance from increases in cropping intensity (FAO 1988). About two-thirds of the increase in arable lands is expected to come from the expansion of irrigation. Thus it is concluded that the needed increases in food production in developing countries must come primarily from existing cropland, mostly irrigated land.
Irrigation has already played a major role in increasing food production over the past fifty years. The world's irrigated land was 8 million hectares in 1800, 48 million hectares in 1900, 94 million hectares in 1950 198 million hectares in 1970, and about 220 million hectares in 1990 (Jensen et al. 1990). About three-quarters of the irrigated land is presently in the developing countries. In these countries, almost 60 percent of the production of major cereals (primarily rice and wheat) is derived from irrigation. Irrigated land presently accounts for 15 percent of the cultivated land but produces 36 percent of the world's food (FAO 1988).
Expansion in irrigation needs to be 2.25 percent per year in order to meet food needs by the year 2000 (FAO 1988). However, the present rate of expansion in irrigation has recently slowed to less than 1 percent per year (CAST 1988). The reasons for this slowing down in expansion rate are many. Among them are the high costs of irrigation development and the fact that much of the suitable land and water supplies available for irrigation have already been developed; progressively more expensive and socio-economically less favourable areas are left for further expansion. Water is the limiting constraint for almost 600 million hectares of potentially suitable arable land (FAO 1988). Also, the overall performance of many irrigation projects has been less than expected due to inadequate operation, maintenance and inefficient management (FAO 1990). It is not unusual to find that less than 60 percent of the water diverted or pumped for irrigation is actually used in crop
transpiration. Furthermore, improper irrigation causes environmental and ecological problems.
Agricultural production systems are limited by the capacity of the associated ecosystems to sustain their natural properties, even though advances in agricultural technology (including use of irrigation, plant breeding, fertilizers and pesticides) have reduced our dependency somewhat in this regard. The relationship between sustainable agriculture and the environment is one of complimentarity and interdependence. In many locations around the world, strains upon the environment are occurring increasingly and concern is mounting about the sustainability of irrigated agriculture with respect to waterlogging, salinization, erosion, desertification, loss of biological diversity, water-borne diseases, adverse effects of potentially toxic agricultural chemicals upon human health and the biota of associated eco-systems (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987).
Overall, the use of sophisticated agricultural practices has had, so far, a net beneficial effect upon agricultural production, human welfare, nutrition and health. But mismanagement and overuse have the potential to overwhelm the ability of natural processes to "absorb" these practices. A critical challenge facing most countries is to halt and reverse the present extent of environmental degradation resulting from excessive exploitation of natural resources, especially those manifested in desertification, soil erosion, waterlogging, and soil and water salinization, in order to ensure the needs of future generations. Presently, 5 to 7 million hectares of arable land (0.3 - 0.5 percent) are being lost every year through soil degradation. The projected loss by the year 2000 is 10 million hectares annually (0.7 percent of the area presently cultivated). By the year 2000, productivity of about one-third of the world's arable land may be severely impaired by excessive erosion
(UNEP 1982). The future expansion of food production will be increasingly dependent upon sound irrigation and water management and upon the concurrent maintenance of the present agricultural resource base and the environment - two of the most challenging tasks facing mankind today (FAO 1988).
From the facts and projections cited above it is concluded that:
· global food needs are increasing while soil and water resources are becoming more limited and diminished in quality;
· the need to conserve water, to utilize it more efficiently and to protect its quality, and simultaneously to protect soil resources is increasing; and
· world agriculture must both expand its base of production and produce more with presently developed resources.
Because higher yields are obtained with irrigated agriculture and because it is less dependent on the vagaries of weather, it assumes special importance in this regard. Expansion of irrigated agriculture could contribute significantly towards achieving and stabilizing food and fibre needs. However, new water supplies for such expansion are limited. Irrigated agriculture is already the largest consumer of developed water resources. At the same time, drainage return from irrigated lands is one of the major causes of waterlogging (usually in lower lying regions) and of water pollution (with respect to salts, nitrates, agricultural chemicals and certain natural, potentially toxic trace elements).
Water availability for irrigation could be enhanced through judicious and proper use of saline water and the recycling of drainage waters for irrigation. Considerable amounts of such water are available in various places in the world, including Australia, Egypt, India, Israel, Pakistan, the USA, and the former USSR. Waters generally classified as unsuitable for irrigation can, in fact, be used successfully to grow crops without long-term hazardous consequences to crops or soils, with the use of improved farming and management practices. The development of crops with increased salt tolerance and the adoption of new crop and water management strategies will further enhance and facilitate the use of saline waters for irrigation and crop production, while keeping soil salinity from becoming excessive. The reuse of drainage waters for irrigation will also help to conserve water and to minimize the hazardous effects of irrigation on the environment and ecology.
The development of appropriate practices for the use of saline waters for irrigation requires an adequate understanding of how salts affect waters, soils and plants. But, the sustainability of a viable, permanent irrigated agriculture, especially with the use of saline irrigation waters, requires much more. It requires the implementation of appropriate management practices to control salinity, not only within the irrigated fields, but also within irrigation projects and geohydrologic systems. It is important to remember that most waterlogging and salinity problems presently existing in major irrigation projects throughout the world have resulted with the use of "good quality" irrigation waters. Hence, it may be argued that the major causes of salinity problems presently being generally encountered in typical irrigation projects must first be avoided, if more saline than normal waters are to be used successfully for irrigation, since such use may increase the likelihood of
salinity problems in a given field. On the other hand, reuse of drainage waters for irrigation can help reduce overall the drainage, waterlogging and salt-loading problems that occur, especially at the project or river basin scales and, hence, can result in a net decrease in the totality of irrigation-induced and salinity-related problems, including environmental pollution. In any case, it is imperative that management practices for the control of soil and water salinity at such scales be considered an essential part of the management requirements for using saline waters for irrigation. This requires the following:
· that the seriousness of salinity-related environmental problems and the vulnerability of irrigated lands to waterlogging and salination be sufficiently recognized;
· that the processes contributing to these problems and the effects of salts on soils and plants be understood;
· that the salinity conditions and trends of the irrigated lands and associated water resources be routinely assessed using appropriate measurement and monitoring techniques that provide meaningful and timely information;
· that salinity-related problems be properly diagnosed using appropriate criteria and standards;
· that future conditions of soil and water salinity be adequately predicted using appropriate prognostic techniques; and
· that the viability of the irrigated agriculture and associated water resources be sustained by implementing effective long-term control measures.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2 - Saline waters as resources
Quality characteristics of saline waters
Sources and availability of saline waters
Quality characteristics of saline waters
Definitions and Indices of Salinity Related Parameters
Classification of Saline Waters
Chemical and physical characteristics of irrigation waters are discussed in detail by Ayers and Westcot (FAO 1985). Hence, only brief descriptions of terminology, units and key parameters are given in this publication. The parameters of relevance, in this case, are restricted to those which predominantly affect crop production either directly or indirectly. The limiting values of the quality parameters vary considerably depending upon circumstances of use. Sewage and industrial effluents are not considered as the focus of these guidelines is on irrigation with drainage waters and moderately saline natural waters of various kinds. An abbreviated classification of waters in terms of salinity is given to facilitate the identification of the kinds of saline waters included in the scope of these guidelines.
Definitions and Indices of Salinity Related Parameters
The term salinity used herein refers to the total dissolved concentration of major inorganic ions (i.e. Na,
Ca, Mg, K, HCO[3], SO[4] and Cl) in irrigation, drainage and groundwaters. Individual concentrations of these cations and anions in a unit volume of the water can be expressed either on a chemical equivalent basis, mmol[c]/l, or on a mass basis, mg/l. Total salt concentration (i.e. salinity) is then expressed either in terms of the sum of either the cations or anions, in mmol[c]/l, or the sum of cations plus anions, in mg/l. For reasons of analytical convenience, a practical index of salinity is electrical conductivity (EC), expressed in units of deciSiemen per metre (dS/m). An approximate relation (because it also depends upon specific ionic composition) between EC and total salt concentration is 1 dS/m = 10 mmol[c]/l = 700 mg/l. Electrical conductivity values are always expressed at a standard temperature of 25 °C to enable comparison of readings taken under varying climatic conditions. With all its obvious shortcomings, this custom of using EC as an index of salinity
emphasizes the concept that, as a good first approximation, plants respond primarily to total concentration of salts rather than to the concentrations or proportions of individual salt constituents.
A similar usage of EC for expressing soil salinity has evolved, where the parameter of primary interest is the total salt concentration, or EC, of the soil solution. However, the content of water in the soil is not constant over time nor is the composition of the soil solution. For this reason, soil salinity is not an easily defined, single-valued parameter. In an attempt to standardize measurements and to establish a reasonable reference for comparison purposes, "soil salinity", is commonly expressed in terms of the electrical conductivity of an extract of a saturated paste (EC[e]; in dS/m) made using a sample of the soil.
In addition to total salt concentration, sodium and pH can adversely affect soil properties for irrigation and cropping. At high levels of sodium relative to divalent cations in the soil solution, clay minerals in soils tend to swell and disperse and aggregates tend to slake, especially under conditions of low total salt concentration and high pH. Whether from slaking, swelling or from clay dispersion, the permeability of the soil is reduced and the surface becomes more crusted and compacted under such conditions. Thus the ability of the soil to transmit water can be severely reduced by excessive sodicity (the term used herein to refer to the combined deleterious effects of high sodium and pH, and low electrolyte concentration on soil physical properties). Since high total salt concentration tends to increase a soil's stability with respect to aggregation and permeability, distinction is made between saline soils and sodic soils. With respect to sodicity, it is the
Certain ions in saline waters can be specifically toxic to plants, if present in excessive concentrations or proportions. Of particular concern are sodium (Na), chloride (Cl), and boron (B). While not often toxic to plants, a few solutes sometimes (though not frequently) found in natural saline waters may accumulate in plant parts at levels that ca