<title>Graft-transmissible diseases of grapevines. Graft transmissible diseases of grapevines Handbook for detection and </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This handbook is the second of a series. Like its companion volume, Grafttransmissible diseases of citrus-Handbook on detection and diagnosis, compiled by C.N. Roistacher, it aims to illustrate current methods for detecting and identifying viruses and virus-like diseases of grapevines (Vitis vinifera L., American Vitis species and their hybrids). Emphasis is placed on biological detection methods, i.e. the use of woody indicators and herbaceous differential hosts, which are still the basis for diagnosis and can readily be applied in countries with minimum laboratory facilities.
However, as many grapevine pathogens can also be detected and identified by serology, electron microscopy, gel electrophoresis and molecular hybridization, these techniques are described in detail in Part III.
Detailed further information on virus and virus-like diseases of the grapevine is available in a number of books and review articles, such as:
* Bovey, R., Gartel, W., Hewitt, W.B., Martelli, G.P. & Vuittenez, A. 1980. Virus and virus-like diseases of grapevines. Lausanne, Payot. 181 pp.
* Bovey, R. & Martelli, G.P. 1992. Directory of major virus and virus-like diseases of grapevines. Mediterranean Fruit Crop Improvement Council/ ICVG. 111 pp.
* Pearson, R.G. & Goheen, A.C. 1988. Compendium of grape diseases. St Paul, MN, USA, American Phytopathological Society Press. 93 pp.
* Uyemoto, J., Martelli, G.P., Woodham, R.C., Goheen, A.C. & Dias, H.F. 1978. Grapevine (Vitis) virus and virus-like diseases. In O.W. Barnett & S.A. Tolin, eds. Plant virus slide series, Set 1. Clemson, SC, USA, Clemson University. 100 slides, 29 pp.
In addition, readers are referred to bibliographic lists of papers on virus and virus-like diseases of grapevines to 1984 compiled under the auspices of the International Council for the Study of Viruses and Virus Diseases of the Grapevine (ICVG):
* Bovey, R. & Martelli, G.P. 1986. The viroses and virus-like diseases of the grapevine. A bibliographic report, 1979-1984. Vitis, 25: 227-275.
* Caudwell, A. 1965. Bibliographie des viroses de la vigne des origines à 1965. Paris' Office international de la vigne et du yin. 76 pp.
* Caudwell, A., Hewitt, W.B. & Bovey, R. 1972. Les viroses de la vigne. Bibliographic de 1965-1970. Vitis, 11: 303-324.
* Hewitt, W.B. & Bovey, R. 1979. The viroses and virus-like diseases of the grapevine. A bibliographic report, 1971 - 1978. Vitis, 18: 316-376.
<section>2</section>
Preface
Grapevine is widely cultivated in many countries of the world. The crop contributes to the well-being of farmers, workers, the industrial sector and the economy of countries. Demands made on the products and by-products of grapevine are constantly increasing in both local and foreign markets. This stimulates expansion of viticulture and encourages efforts toward the improvement of the quality and quantity of the produce. Such efforts necessitate the exchange of germplasm, the introduction of new varieties and the improvement of old varieties. These, if not carefully managed, could have a very negative effect upon the sanitary situation of the crop.
Virus and virus-like diseases constitute a major limiting factor to the development, quality and productivity of grapevine. Once a plant is infected, there is no cure. Therefore, the only way to secure a healthy crop is to ensure that the planting material is healthy (virus-tested) and that the factors that could contribute to reinfestation are eliminated.
Only a few institutions in the world have substantial programmes on the recovery and maintenance of healthy grapevine planting material and on detection and diagnosis of grapevine virus and virus-like diseases. Nevertheless, a wealth of relevant technology is now available. This ranges from simple methods requiring basic facilities (e.g. biological indexing) to sophisticated methods involving advanced equipment, chemicals and supplies and well-trained personnel for laboratory indexing. In both cases, the available technology could be easily transferred to those countries that intend to develop their viticulture through production, maintenance and distribution of healthy (virus-tested) planting material.
In order to make this technology universally available, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the International Council for the Study of Viruses and Virus Diseases of the Grapevine (ICVG) have cooperated in the preparation and publication of this handbook, which reflects in a simple and direct way the practical knowledge required and available for detection and diagnosis of virus and virus-like diseases of grapevine.
The handbook was compiled by G.P. Martelli, Professor of Plant Virology, University of Bari, Italy. Professor Martelli has accumulated, over the last three decades, a vast wealth of experience concerning viticulture virology and viticulture phytosanitation schemes and has had a significant role in initiating and developing grapevine certification programmes in Italy and other European countries. The other contributors to the handbook are distinguished authorities on virology from various parts of the world who have developed or contributed to the techniques reported in this publication.
I wish to express my gratitude to Professor Martelli and the other contributing scientists for their willingness to share their knowledge and experience.
FAO is confident that this publication will fill an existing gap in the literature and will significantly contribute to the development of healthy vineyards.
N.A. Van der Graaff, Chief, FAO Plant Protection Service
<section>3</section>
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank all those who have kindly supplied information and slides: A. Brun, France; B. Di Terlizzi, G. Granata and U. Prota, Italy; H. Andris, J. Clark, M.K Corbett, D. Gonsalves, P. Goodwin, M.G. Kinsey, A. Purcell, D.C. Ramsdell and A. Yen, USA; M. Rudel, Germany.
Great appreciation and thanks are also expressed to Dr M.M. Taher, FAO Regional Plant Protection Officer for the Near East, for his encouragement and many useful suggestions; to Dr L. Chiarappa, former Chief of the FAO Plant Protection Service, who promoted and fostered the realization of this handbook, devoting much time and effort to its layout; and to Dr W.B. Hewitt, Professor Emeritus, University of California, for revising and improving the manuscript.
G.P. Martelli, Editor
<section>4</section>
Contributors
A.D. Avgelis
Plant Protection Institute
Heraklion, Crete
Greece
D. Boscia
Centro di Studio del CNR sui Virus e le
Virosi delle Colture Mediterranee
Bari
Italy
M. Cambra
Instituto Valenciano de
Investigaciones Agrarias
Valencia
Spain
T. Candresse
Station de pathologic végétate
INRA
Villenave-D'Ornor
France
A. Caudwell Station de recherches sur les
mycoplasmes et les arbovirus
des plantes
INRA
Dijon
France
J. Dunez
Station de pathologic végétale
INRA
Villenave-D'Ornon
France
S.M. Garnsey
USDA Hort. Research Laboratory
Orlando, FL
USA
D.A. Golino
Dept of Plant Pathology
University of California
Davis, CA
USA
R.F. Lee
Citrus Research & Education Center
Lake Alfred, FL
USA
J. Lehoczky
Plant Protection Institute
Budapest
Hungary
G. Macquaire
Station de pathologic végétale
INRA
Villenave-D'Ornon
France
S. Namba
Laboratory of Plant Pathology
University of Tokyo
Japan
C.N. Roistacher
Dept of Plant Pathology
University of California
Riverside, CA
USA
I.Ch. Rumbos
Plant Protection Institute
Volos
Greece
V. Savino
Dipartimento di Protezione delle Piante
dalle Malattie
University of Bari
Italy
J.S. Semancik
Dept of Plant Pathology
University of California
Riverside, CA
USA
B. Walter
Station de recherche vigne et vin
INRA
Colmar
France
<section>5</section>
Abbreviations
AILV
Artichoke Italian latent nepovirus
AGVd
Australian grapevine viroid
AMV
Alfalfa mosaic virus
APS
Ammonium persulphate
ArMV
Arabis mosaic nepovirus
BBLMV
Broad bean leaf mottle nepovirus
BBWV
Broad bean wilt fabavirus
BSA
Bovine serum albumen
CarMV
Carnation mottle carmovirus
cDNA
Complementary deoxyribonucleic acid
CEVd
Citrus exocortis viroid
CMV
Cucumber mosaic cucumovirus
DAS ELISA
Double antibody sandwich ELISA
DAS-I ELISA
Double antibody sandwich indirect
ELISA
DIECA
Diethyldithiocarbamate sodium
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
dPAGE
Denaturing polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis
dsRNA
Double-stranded ribonucleic acid
DTT
Dithiothreitol
EDTA
Ethylenedinitrilotetraacetate
ELISA Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EM
Electron microscopy
FD
Flavescence dorée
GALV
Grapevine Algerian latent tombusvirus
GAV
Grapevine ajinashika virus
GBLV
Grapevine Bulgarian latent nepovirus
GCMV
Grapevine chrome mosaic nepovirus
GFkV
Grapevine fleck virus
GFLV
Grapevine fanleaf nepovirus
GLPV
Grapevine line pattern virus
GLRaV I, II, III, IV, V
Grapevine leafroll-associated
closteroviruses I, II, III, IV, V
GSV
Grapevine stunt virus
GTRV
Grapevine Tunisian ringspot nepovirus
GVA
Grapevine closterovirus A
GVB
Grapevine closterovirus B
GVd-c
Grapevine viroid - cucumber
GYSVd 1 and 2
Grapevine yellow speckle viroids
1 and 2
HSVd
Hop stunt viroid
IEM
Immunoelectron microscopy
IgG
Immunoglobulin G
IgM
Immunoglobulin M
ISEM
Immunosorbent electron microscopy
LR
Leafroll disease
MLO
Mycoplasma-like organism
OD
Optical density
PAGE
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
PAMV
Petunia asteroid mosaic tombusvirus
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
PBST
Phosphate-buffered saline Tween 20
PD
Pierce's disease
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PRMV
Peach rosette mosaic nepovirus
PVP
Polyvinylpyrrolidone
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
RRV
Raspberry ringspot nepovirus
RW
Rugose wood complex
SDS
Sodium dodecyl sulphate
SLRV
Strawberry latent ringspot nepovirus
SoMV
Sowbane mosaic sobemovirus
STE
Saline-tris-EDTA buffer
TBRV
Tomato black ring nepovirus
TBS
Tris-buffered saline
TEMED
Tetramethylethylenediamine
TMV
Tobacco mosaic tobamovirus
TNV
Tomato necrosis necrovirus
TomRSV
Tomato ringspot nepovirus
TRSV
Tobacco ringspot nepovirus
TSWV
Tomato spotted wilt bunyavirus
<section>6</section>
Introduction
Virus and virus-like diseases and other infectious diseases of grapevines (Vitis spp.) are induced by intracellular pathogens of various nature. These diseases are widespread throughout the world wherever grapevines, especially Vitis vinifera, are grown. Although their causal agents may be spread naturally by vectors (i.e. nematodes, pseudoccid mealybugs, leafhoppers), the major and most efficient means of dissemination of these diseases is through infected propagative material.
The following types of diseases are known:
TRUE VIRUS DISEASES
These diseases are induced by recognized viruses which have been isolated, identified and, in some cases, reinoculated into grapevines, reproducing the natural syndrome.
Some of the virus diseases known to date (Table 1) are caused by nepoviruses, of which two major groups can be recognized according to the geographical origin of the viruses and their nematode vectors. Notable exceptions are grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV) and its major vector Xiphinema index, which are both probably native to ancient Asia Minor but now have a worldwide distribution because of unrestricted commercial trade.
Many additional viruses have been isolated by mechanical inoculation from grapevines (Table 2), and the list is growing steadily. Some of these viruses have no economic importance, but are occasional contaminants of vines grown in specific environments.
At least six different closteroviruses have been identified in vines affected by leafroll and or the rugose wood complex. The frequency of these records leaves little doubt that closteroviruses are involved in the genesis of one or more such diseases. However, proof of cause or Koch's postulates must be fulfilled before any of these viruses can be identified as the aetiological agent of a specific disorder.
VIROID DISEASES
Viroids were first discovered in grapevines in 1984, but they are now known to have an extremely high incidence and a worldwide distribution. There are at least six viroids reported to infect grapevines in nature (Table 3). Three of these, i.e. hop stunt viroid (HSVd), citrus exocortis viroid (CEVd) and Australian grapevine viroid (AGVd), do not appear to cause diseases. Yellow speckle viroids are the only pathogenic viroids recognized so far. They may be implicated in the aetiology of the vein banding disease. Viroids are spread by grafting, by propagating material and by pruning tools.
VIRUS-LIKE DISEASES
Virus-like diseases are induced by unidentified agents that occur in the host tissues. They are perpetuated through propagative material and transmitted by grafting. As yet, no virus particles have been found associated with them. Some of these diseases are latent (e.g. vein necrosis) or semi-latent (e.g. vein mosaic and enations) in European grapes (V. vinifera) and most American Vitis species, so they can only be detected by graft inoculation to appropriate indicators. None has a recognized vector or is known to spread naturally.
TABLE 1 Virus and virus-like diseases of the grapevine
Disease Geographical distribution
Major virus diseases
Grapevine degeneration
(fanleaf) Worldwide
Grapevine degeneration
(other European nepoviruses) Europe, occasional records
in Asia and Canada
Grapevine decline
(American nepoviruses) USA and Canada
Leafroll complex Worldwide
Rugose wood complex
(corky bark, rupestris stem pitting,
Kober stem grooving, LN 33 stem grooving) Worldwide
Minor virus diseases
Yellow mottle
(alfalfa mosaic virus) Central and eastern Europe
Line pattern
(grapevine line pattern virus) Hungary
Yellow dwarf
(tomato spotted wilt virus) Taiwan
Stunt
(isometric virus transmitted by
the leafhopper Arboridia apicalis) Japan
Ajinashika
(phloem-limited, non-mechanically
transmissible isometric virus) Japan
Fleck
(phloem-limited, non-mechanically
transmissible isometric virus) Worldwide
Roditis leaf discoloration
Viroid diseases Greece
Yellow speckle
Virus-like diseases Worldwide
Enations Europe, America (USA, Venezuela)
South Africa, New Zealand, Australia
Vein necrosis Europe, Mediterranean basin, USA (California)
Vein mosaic/summer mottle Europe, Australia
Asteroid mosaic USA (California), Greece
DISEASES INDUCED BY PHLOEM-OK XYLEM-LIMITED PROKARYOTES
Two different groups of such diseases are known (Table 4), those caused by non-cultivable mollicutes formerly known as mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs), i.e. flavescence dorée and other grapevine yellows not transmitted by the leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus; and those caused by intraxylematic bacteria such as Xylella fastidiosa, the agent of Pierce's disease.
TABLE 2 Geographical distribution and vectors of viruses known to infect grapevines
Virus Geographical distribution Vector
Mechanically transmissible viruses
Artichoke Italian
latent nepovirus (AILV) Bulgaria Longidorus apulus
Longidorus fasciatus
Alfalfa mosaic virus
(AMY) Central and
Eastern Europe Aphids
Arabis mosaic nepovirus
(ArMV) Europe (Switzerland,
Germany, Hungary,
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria
France, Italy), Japan Xiphinema diversicaudatum
Broadbean wilt fabavirus Bulgaria, South Africa Aphids
Blueberry leaf mottle
nepovirus (BBLMV) USA (New York) Unknown
Carnation mottle
carmovirus (CarMV) Greece Unknown
Cucumber mosaic
cocumovirus (CMV) Denmark Aphids
Grapevine Algerian latent
tombusvirus (GALV) Algeria Unknown
Grapevine Bulgarian latent
nepovirus (GBLV) Bulgaria, Portugal,
Yugoslavia Unknown
Grapevine chrome mosaic
nepovirus (GCMV) Hungary, Yugoslavia Unknown
Grapevine fanleaf
nepovirus (GFLV) Worldwide Xiphinema index
Xiphinema italiae
Grapevine line pattern
ilarvirus (GLPV) Hungary Unknown
Grapevine Tunisian
ringspot nepovirus (GTRV) Tunisia Unknown
Grapevine closterovirus A
(OVA) Europe, Mediterranean Planococcus ficus,
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcus longispinus
Peach rosette mosaic
nepovirus (PRMV) USA (Michigan),
Canada (Ontario) Xiphinema americanum
Longidorus diadecturus
Petunia asteroid mosaic
tombusvirus (PAMV) Germany, Italy,
Czechoslovakia Unknown
Potato X potexvirus (PVX)
Raspberry ringspot
nepovirus (RRV) Italy, Tunisia
Germany Unknown
Longidorus macrosoma
Longidorus elongatus
Strawberry latent
ringspot nepovirus (SLRV) Germany, Italy,
Turkey Xiphinema diversicaudatum
Sowbane mosaic sobemovirus
(SoMV) Germany, Czechoslovakia Unknown
Tobacco mosaic tobamovirus
(TMV) Europe (Germany,
Bulgaria, Italy,
Yugoslavia, former Soviet
Union), USA Unknown
Tobacco ringspot
nepovirus (TRSV)
Virus USA (New York)
Geographical distribution Xiphineme americanum
Vector
Tomato blackring
nepovirus (TBRV) Germany, Israel,
Canada (Ontario) Longidorus attenuatus,
Longidorus elongates
Tomato ringspot
nepovirus (TomRSV) USA (California and
New York), Canada
(Ontario) Xiphinema califomicum,
Xiphinema americanum
Xiphinema rives)
Tobacco necrosis
necrovirus (TNV) South Africa Olpidium brassicae
Tomato spotted wilt
virus (TSWV) Taiwan Province (China) Thrips
Non-mechanicalty transmissible viruses
Grapevine fleck virus
(GFkV) Worldwide Unknown
Grapevine ajinashika virus
(GAY) Japan Unknown
Grapevine stunt virus
(GSV) Japan Arboridia apicalis
Grapevine leafroll-
associated closterovirus I Europe, Mediterranean, USA Unknown
Grapevine leafroll-
associated closterovirus III Europe, Mediterranean Unknown
Grapevine leafroll-
associated closterovirus III Europe, Mediterranean, USA Planococcus ficus,
Pseudococcus longispinus
Grapevine leafroll-
associated closterovirus IV USA, Mediterranean Unknown
Grapevine leafroll-
associated closterovirus V Mediterranean Unknown
Note: Three additional closteroviruses have been found which, apparently, are serologically unrelated to all the above. Of these. one is reported to be associated with corky bark and the remaining two appear to be associated with leafroll.
TABLE 3 Viroids of grapevines
Viroid Number of nucleotides Geographical distribution
Hop stunt (HSVd) 297 Probably worldwide
Grapevine yellow speckle 1
(GYSVd-1 ) 367 Probably worldwide
Grapevine yellow speckle 2
(GYSVd-2) 363 Probably worldwide
Citrus exocortis A (CEVd) 371 Spain, Australia
Australian grapevine
viroid (AGVd) 369 Australia
Grapevine viroid -
cucumber (GVd-c) not
determined USA (California)
TABLE 4 Grapevine diseases induced by intracellular prokaryotes (mycoplasma-like organisms and bacteria)
Disease Agent Vector Geographical distribution
Flavescence dorée MLO Scaphoideus titanus France, Italy
Grapevine yellows Probably MLO Unknown
(probably leafhoppers) Europe (France, Germany,
Italy, Switzerland,
Greece, Romania,
Bulgaria), Chile, Israel,
New Zealand, Australia
Pierce's disease Xylella fastidiosa
(bacterium) Several species
of leafhoppers Central and North America
<section>7</section>
Part I: Detection and identification of specific grapevine diseases or pathogens
True virus diseases
Rugose wood complex
Viroid diseases
Virus-like diseases
Diseases induced by phloem- and xylem-limited prokaryotes
True virus diseases
Grapevine degeneration - fanleaf
Grapevine degeneration - European nepoviruses
Grapevine decline - American nepoviruses
Leafroll
Grapevine degeneration - fanleaf
G.P. Martelli
CAUSAL AGENT
The causal agent of fanleaf is grapevine fanleaf nepovirus (GFLV), a mechanically transmissible virus with isometric particles 30 nm in diameter and a bipartite genome (Quacquarelli et al., 1976). GFLV populations are remarkably homogeneous serologically, so that natural serological variants are rarely found when screening is done by conventional serological techniques (Saving, Chérif and Martelli, 1985). Serological differences are detected, however, by monoclonal antibodies (Huss et al., 1987). Biological variants differing according to the symptoms induced in artificially inoculated herbaceous hosts or in naturally infected grapevines are many.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
The disease and the causal virus have been recorded from all major grapevine-growing areas of the world. The level of infection is often very high, so that cultivars grown in certain viticultural districts are totally diseased.
ALTERNATE HOSTS
No alternate host is known. GFLV has never been found naturally in any wild or cultivated plant species other than Vitis vinifera and American Vitis species.
FIELD SYMPTOMS
Fanleaf degeneration is characterized by two distinct syndromes deriving from a differential reaction of the hosts to biologically distinct strains of the causal virus. Vein banding, another syndrome traditionally thought to be caused by chromogenic GFLV strains, may have a different aetiology, perhaps viroidal, as discussed under Viroid diseases.
Infectious malformations (fanleat proper)
Distorting virus strains may cause vines to be stunted or less vigorous than normal. Leaves are variously and severely distorted, asymmetrical, cupped and puckered and exhibit acute dentations (Figures 1 and 2). Chlorotic mottling may sometimes accompany foliar deformations (Figure 3). Canes are also malformed, showing abnormal branching, double nodes, different length or exceedingly short internodes, fasciations and zigzag growth (Figures 4 and 5). Bunches are reduced in number and size, ripen irregularly and have shot berries and poor berry setting (Figure 6). Foliar symptoms develop early in the spring and persist through the vegetative season, although some masking may occur in summer.
Yellow mosaic
Yellow mosaic is caused by chromogenic virus strains. Affected vines show chrome-yellow discolorations that develop early in the spring and may affect all vegetative parts of the vines (leaves, herbaceous shoot axes, tendrils and inflorescences) (Figure 7). Chromatic alterations of the leaves vary from a few scattered yellow spots, sometimes appearing as rings and lines, to variously extended mottling of the veinal and/or interveinal areas, to total yellowing (Figures 8 to 11). In spring, affected plants in a vineyard can readily be spotted from a distance (Figure 12). Malformations of leaves and canes are usually not prominent, but clusters may be smaller than normal and may have shot berries. In hot climates the newly produced summer vegetation has a normal green colour, while the yellowing of the old growth turns whitish and tends to fade away (Figure 13).
Symptoms induced by distorting virus strains show up equally well under field and greenhouse conditions, whereas chrome-yellow alterations evoked by chromogenic strains may not develop in greenhouses.
NATURAL SPREAD
Spread at a site (i.e. within a vineyard or between adjacent vineyards) is mediated by nematodes. Two longidorid nematode vectors of GFLV are known: Xiphinema index and Xiphinema italiae (Hewitt, Raski and Goheen, 1958; Cohn, Tanne and Nitzany, 1970). The former species is by far the more efficient vector under natural and experimental conditions. Although not all X. index populations are equally efficient in transmitting virus isolates (Catalano, Roca and Castellano, 1989), this nematode is to be regarded as the major, if not the only, natural and economically important GFLV vector. It has a limited range of alternate natural hosts (e.g. fig, mulberry, rose), but these hosts are immune to GFLV. No natural virus reservoirs are known other than grapevines. GFLV persists in volunteer plants and in the roots of lifted vines that remain viable in the soil, constituting an important source of inoculum. Transmission of GFLV through grapevine seeds has been reported (Lazar, Köber
and Lehoczky, 1990), but it has negligible epidemiological significance.
Long-distance spread is passively but efficiently effected through dissemination of infected propagating material (budwood and rooted cuttings of rootstocks) (Martelli, 1978).
DETECTION
Field symptoms are often obvious enough to allow the detection of diseased vines. Difficulties may be encountered, however, even by keen and experienced observers, in the presence of tolerant varieties and/or infections by mild virus strains. Observations for symptoms should be carried out twice during the vegetating season: in midspring for growth abnormalities, deformation and chromatic alterations of the foliage; and at leaf shedding for abnormalities of the canes.
IDENTIFICATION
Indexing by graft transmission
Although none of the Vitis species used as indicators is immune to GFLV, the quickest and most typical responses are given by Vitis rupestris St George. In greenhouse indexing (chip-budding, green grafting) at 22 to 24°C shock symptoms appear as soon as three to four weeks after grafting. The symptoms consist of chlorotic spots, rings and lines (Figure 14), sometimes accompanied by malformations and localized necrosis of the tissues. These symptoms are transient. They are followed by chronic reactions that, for distorting virus strains, consist of reduced growth and severely deformed leaves with prominent teeth (Figure 15). Chronic symptoms develop within two to three months from inoculation and persist throughout the vegetating season (Hewitt et al., 1962; Martelli and Hewitt, 1 963).
Field indexing (cleft or whip grafting) reactions are slower. Symptoms appear during the first year of vegetation. They are of the chronic type for distorting virus strains but consist of various patterns of yellow discolorations, sometimes accompanied by leaf deformity (Figure 16) for chromogenic virus strains. With certain virus sources yellowing may appear in the second year after inoculation. Yellow discolorations do not usually develop in greenhouse indexing.
Indicators other than V. rupestris may react to GFLV infections with chronic-type responses. These appear in the first or second year after grafting and consist of deformations and/or bright yellowing of the foliage. The type and severity of the symptoms vary with the nature and virulence of the virus strain.
Transmission to herbaceous hosts
GFLV is readily transmitted to herbaceous hosts by inoculation of expressed sap, provided that some precautions are observed. The best inoculum sources are young, tender symptomatic leaves of the spring flush collected directly in the field or from greenhouse-grown cuttings. Young, succulent roots are equally good, if not superior, sources of inoculum. Suitable root material is readily obtained by forcing grape cuttings to root in sand in a tray or bench heated to 24 to 25°C. Old leaves collected in the field in summer or autumn. especially in hot climates, constitute a poor source of virus, even if they show symptoms. Their use may result in repeated failures to transmit the virus.
For inoculation, 3 to 5 g of tissues (either leaves or roots) are ground in a chilled mortar together with an equal volume of one of the extraction media described in Part II. Media containing nicotine are recommended when the inoculum consists of leaves, especially if they are aged, whereas ordinary phosphate buffer is quite suitable for young root tips.
The herbaceous host range of GFLV is fairly wide, comprising some 50 species in seven dicotyledonous families (Dies, 1963; Hewitt et al., 1962; Martelli and Hewitt, 1963 ; Taylor and Hewitt, 1964). Differential diagnostic hosts are:
* Chenopodium amaranticolor and Chenopodium quinoa, both reacting with occasional chlorotic/necrotic local lesions seven to ten days after inoculation, followed by systemic mottling and deformation of the leaves (Figures 17 and 18);
* Gomphrena globosa, which exhibits chlorotic local lesions about one week after inoculation, turning reddish with age, light green to yellow spots and twisting of systemically invaded opposite upper leaves (Figure 19);
* Nicotiana benthamiana, which reacts with occasional faint yellowish lesions followed by systemic mottling and deformation of the leaves in 10 to 15 days.
Whereas the above hosts are infected symptomatically by most virus isolates, many additional herbaceous indicators, such as Phaseolus vulgaris, Cucumis sativus and Petunia hybrida, are more selective in their susceptibility, being infectible by a smaller number of strains.
Presence of trabeculae (endocellular cordons)
Trabeculae are intraxylematic ribbon-like inclusions that cross tracheary elements radially. These structures are readily observed in crosssectioned basal internodes of green or mature canes. Sections made by hand with a razorblade are mounted without staining in a 1:1 mixture of water and glycerol and observed at low power undera light microscope. Freshlycross-sectioned canes can also be observed directly with a good (10 to 12x) magnifying lens. Trabeculae are more frequently found in American rootstocks than in European scion varieties. Their presence can be taken as evidence of viral infection, but their absence does not guarantee freedom from GFLV.
Serology
Immunodiffusion in agar gel is not applicable to leaf extracts of GFLV-infected grapevines, regardless of the severity of symptoms shown and the conditions under which plants are grown (field or greenhouse). Positive reactions are more readily and consistently obtained using crude sap expressed directly, without addition of buffers, from leaves of systemically invaded herbaceous hosts. Young upper leaves with strong symptoms are the best source of antigen.
ELISA. Immunoenzymatic procedures (see details in Part III) are now routinely employed for detection of GFLV in field- or greenhousegrown vines (Bovey, Brugger and Gugerli, 1980; Engelbrecht, 1980; Walteretal., 1984).Sources of antigens can be buds, roots, leaves and wood shavings, the last two being the most commonly used. Reactants can be either polyclonal antibodies or virus-specific or strain-specific monoclonalantibodies(Hussetal.,1986,1987).
The amount of plant material needed can be as low as 100 to 200 ma. However, it is customary to use 1 g of leaf tissues and 0.5 g of wood shavings. These are obtained by removing the bark and scratching, with a scalpel or a razorblade, the cortex of mature canes freshly harvested or cold-stored at 4 to 6°C (Walter and Etienne, 1987). Tissue samples, regardless of whether taken from leaves or cortex, are ground in PBS-Tween containing 2 percent PVP and 1 to 2.5 percent nicotine. Addition of nicotine is considered of paramount importance if tests are to be made from leaf tissues. No nicotine is needed if the extraction medium is made up of 0.1 M Tris-HCI buffer, pH 8.2, containing 0.8 percent NaCI and 2 percent PVP (Walter and Etienne, 1987).
The advantage of wood shavings over leaves is twofold: they can be used throughout the year without the apparent loss of efficiency that arises because of seasonal variations of antigen titre in vegetating organs; and they give low and consistent background readings. If leaves are employed, it is important, if not mandatory, to use extracts of the same rootstock or European scion variety as negative and positive controls. There is, in fact, a marked difference in background readings between American rootstocks and European cultivars and, among V. vinifera varieties, between those with hairy and those with glabrous leaves.
Immune electron microscopy (IEM and lSEM). GFLV can be detected by ISEM following the procedure outlined in Part III. Consistent and satisfactory results are obtained in spring from upper symptomatic leaves (Bovey, Brugger and Gugerli, 1980; Russo, Martelli and Savino, 1980).
Molecular hybridization
Cloned cDNA probes have been prepared to genomic (RNA-1 and RNA-2) and satellite RNAs of GFLV. These probes were successfully used for identification of GFLV infections in field-grown grapevine leaf extracts denatured with formaldehyde (Fuchs et al., 1991) and processed as described in Part III.
SANITATION
Sanitary selection and heat therapy together are powerful tools for reducing the incidence of fanleaf in newly established vineyards. Virusfree material (Figure 20) is readily obtained through conventional (Goheen and Luhn, 1973) or modified (Stellmach, 1980) heat therapy applications, micrografting and in vitro meristem tip or shoot-tip culture (Barlass et al., 1982).
REFERENCES
Barlass, M., Skene, K.G.M., Woodham, R.C. & Krake, R.C. 1982. Regeneration of virus-free grapevines using in vitro apical culture. Ann. Appl. Biol., 101: 291-295.
Bovey, R., Brugger, J.J. & Gugerli, P. 1980. Detection of fanleaf virus in grapevine tissue extracts by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immune electron microscopy (IEM). Proc. 7th Meet. ICVG, Niagara Falls, NY, USA, 1980, p. 259-275.
Catalano, L., Roca, F. & Castellano, M.A.1989. Efficiency of transmission of an isolate of grapevine fanleaf virus (GFV) by three populations of Xipizinema index (Nematode: Dorylaimidae). Nematol. Mediterr., 17: 13- 15.
Cohn, E., Tanne, E. & Nitzany, F. 1970. Xiphinema italiae: a new vector of grape 