<title>Guidelines for the Promotion of Environmental Management of Coastal Aquaculture Development</title>
<section>1</section>
Preparation of this document
The Fishery Resources and Environment Division of the FAO Fisheries Department regularly publishes technical documentation relevant for the promotion of sustainable fisheries and aquaculture development. The preparation of this document has been fostered by the FAO Aquaculture Steering Committee and the FAO Inter-Departmental Working Group on Integrated Coastal Area Management. This document is for circulation to both specialists and government officials involved in the planning and management of aquaculture development in coastal areas. Comments and suggestions for improvements of the present version would be appreciated and should be sent to the Fishery Resources Officer (Aquatic Environment), Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI), Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome.
The preparation of this document benefitted from discussions and suggestions by FAO Fisheries Department staff, in particular by A. Tacon, J. Kapetsky, H. Naeve, M. Pedini, P. Martosubroto, D. Insull, R. Willmann, and by A. Van Houtte (FAO Legal Office). Many individual experts as well as international organizations provided useful experience and guideline documentation. The continuous assistance and patient support by the staff of the FAO Fisheries Branch Library is greatly appreciated.
Distribution:
Directors of Fisheries and Aquaculture
FAO Regional Fishery Commissions and Working Groups
Aquaculture (Marine Water)
FAO Fisheries Department
FAO Regional Fishery Officers
FAO Inter-Departmental Working Group on Environment and Sustainable Development/Sub-Group on Integrated Coastal Area Management
National Environment Coordinators with the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA) and the FAO/NACA Project TCP/RAS/2253 (Regional study and workshop on environmental assessment and management of aquaculture development)
Coastal aquaculture development projects executed by FAO
Interested international organizations and institutions
Barg, U.C.
Guidelines for the promotion of environmental management of coastal aquaculture development (based on a review of selected experiences and concepts). FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No. 328. Rome, FAO. 1992. 122 p.
ABSTRACT
This document is directed to aquaculture development specialists, coastal resource use planners and government officials involved and interested in the planning and management of coastal aquaculture development within the wider context of resource use in coastal areas. It is intended to serve in the promotion of environmental management of coastal aquaculture. Guidelines are given for improved environmental management of coastal aquaculture based on an overview of selected published experiences and concepts. Potential adverse environmental effects of and on coastal aquaculture practices are addressed with consideration of main socio-economic and bio-physical factors. Methodologies are presented for the assessment and monitoring of environmental hazards and impacts of coastal aquaculture. Selected environmental management options are described for application both at policy-level and farm-level.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Definitions and Background
FAO (1990) defined aquaculture as "the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated. For statistical purposes, aquatic organisms which are harvested by an individual or corporate body which has owned them throughout their rearing period contribute to aquaculture, while aquatic organisms which are exploitable by the public as a common property resource, with or without appropriate licenses, are the harvest of fisheries."
For the purposes of this document, the geographical area covered by the term "coastal" includes the shoreland influenced by the sea, the water column and the seabed extending to edge of the continental shelf (Sorensen and McCreary, 1990). Hence, the term "coastal aquaculture" covers land-based and water-based brackish and marine aquaculture practices.
Aquaculture production is increasing worldwide, and it is expected that aquaculture activities will be expanding significantly in the near future as practices are further improved and diversified. Aquaculture production in 1990 constituted approximately 15.3% of the world's fishery production (see FAO, 1992) as compared to 14% in 1989 (New, 1991; see also FAO, 1991 a). Coastal aquaculture production in 1990 amounted to approximately 7.5 million metric tons estimated to be worth US$ 13 230 million (see FAO, 1992). Driving forces in aquaculture development are the increasing demand for aquaculture produce, generating profit and income, and the urgent need for sustainable food supply.
Aquaculture interacts with the environment. It utilizes resources and causes environmental changes. Most interactions have beneficial effects. There have been substantial socio-economic benefits arising from the expansion of aquaculture. These benefits include increased income, employment, foreign exchange earnings and improved nutrition (Pullin, 1989). It should be recognized that to date the majority of aquaculture practices have had little adverse effect on ecosystems. Nevertheless, some cases of environmental degradation in coastal areas have occurred due to, for example, intensive cage culture operations in Europe and shrimp farming practices in Southeast Asia and Latin America.
Aquaculture operations in many temperate and tropical countries still can be improved. Current aquaculture development efforts need to be strengthened to further improve the management and operation of many aquafarms to ensure their durability and environmental compatibility. Unfortunately, the planning and coordination of aquaculture development supported by an appropriate information base containing sufficient technological and socio-economic data is still an exception rather than common practice in most countries.
Although there is potential for development in many areas, aquaculture may increasingly be subject to a range of environmental, resource and market constraints. Aquaculture is competing for land and water resources, which in some cases resulted in conflicts with other resource users. Also, there is growing concern about the environmental implications of aquaculture development, comprising the adverse effects of aquaculture operations on the environment as well as the consequences of increasing aquatic pollution affecting feasibility and sustainable development of aquaculture.
During the last two decades, increasing attention has been directed toward the potential environmental hazards associated with aquaculture development. In some cases, environmental problems have resulted from conversion of wetland habitats, nutrient and organic waste discharges, introduction of exotic species, chemical usage, as well as from deterioration of water quality and decreasing availability of suitable sites for aquaculture. These problems have been repeatedly addressed at international expert consultations, for example, by the Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission (IPFC), the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC), the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), the Asian Fisheries Society, the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), the World aquaculture Society (WAS), the European aquaculture Society (EAS) and the IMO/FAO/Unesco/WMO/WHO/IAEA/UN/UNEP^1 Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of
Marine Pollution (GESAMP).
^1^ IMO: International Maritime Organization; FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Unesco: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; WMO: World Meteorological Organization; WHO: World Health Organization; IAEA: International Atomic Energy Agency; UN: United Nations; UNEP: United Nations Environment Programme.
Recommendations from these consultations repeatedly emphasized the urgent need for improvements in various fields including (i) application of appropriate aquaculture methods, (ii) sectoral development planning and management, (iii) integration of aquaculture in multi-sectoral coastal area and river basin management frameworks, (iv) legislation governing aquaculture, and (v) assessment and monitoring of ecological and socio-economic changes associated with aquaculture developments.
1.2 Purpose and Scope of this Document
This document is intended to assist in the promotion of environmental management of coastal aquaculture. It is addressed to all those who are involved and interested in the planning, development and management of environmentally-acceptable coastal aquaculture. It is also intended to serve experts pursuing environmental management and development in coastal areas.
General guidelines are given for environmental management of coastal aquaculture development based on an overview of relevant published information currently available. These guidelines, as formulated in Section 2, directly refer the reader to the relevant sections of the overview containing more specific background and guidance information (Sections 3-6). It is hoped, that, by providing relevant reference material to the guidelines presented, this document proves useful in improving formulation and implementation of appropriate country-specific approaches and actions to meet the particular ecological and socio-economic circumstances governing coastal aquaculture development.
In Section 3 it has been attempted to outline the environmental implications of coastal aquaculture development in the wider context of the utilization of coastal resources and related concomitant environmental changes. Further, main bio-physical and socio-economic factors and causes for environmental deterioration and mismanagement specific to coastal aquaculture are addressed in order to highlight possible constraints to environment-compatible development (Section 4). Methodologies are presented for the assessment and monitoring of environmental hazards and impacts of coastal aquaculture (Section 5). Selected environmental management options are described for possible application both at policy-level and farm-level (Section 6).
Much effort has been made to focus on environmental and developmental circumstances and requirements of coastal aquaculture practices in developing countries. Unfortunately, there is a substantial lack of adequate information and data related to adverse environmental effects of coastal aquaculture in developing countries. Furthermore, information available from temperate countries in most cases cannot be used to qualitatively assess or predict adverse environmental effects of aquacultural practices in tropical environments. Also, much of the concerns so far formulated on the potential adverse effects of aquaculture are still of a speculative nature, and are not borne out by scientific evidence (Pillay, 1992). The paucity of adequate research specific to the different aquaculture practices and their distinct environmental settings makes definitive judgements extremely difficult.
All guideline documentations carry limitations due to both their general character and broad scope. In view of the variety of coastal aquaculture practices and the diversity of their environmental settings found worldwide, it is likely that some of the issues addressed in this document would have needed more detailed elaboration to meet the specific and possibly differing information requirements various readers might have. The readers are therefore encouraged to comment on this document and to make suggestions for its improvement possibly by indicating the specific environmental and developmental circumstances facilitating or restricting progress in coastal aquaculture in their countries or projects.
Environmental management of coastal aquaculture development, and its promotion is a challenging task. Coastal aquaculture is very diverse in terms of the people involved, the resources used, the various methods applied, and, regarding the environmental characteristics of existing and potential sites. Thus, there are opportunities for improved adaptation and integration of aquaculture practices into coastal area development processes. It is believed that appropriate environmental management of aquaculture in coastal areas can be achieved by strengthening efforts towards increased success and efficiency in the development and management of aquaculture operations.
<section>3</section>
2. Guidelines for the promotion of environmental management of coastal aquaculture development
The ecological and socio-economic benefits and costs of aquaculture activities are potentially so significant that policies are necessary to ensure that financial gain is not at the expense of the ecosystem or the rest of society; aquaculture developments should follow established principles and policies. The following general principles and policies are proposed (adapted from GESAMP, 1991c):
2.1 General Principles
- Coastal aquaculture has the potential to produce food and generate income contributing to social and economic well-being.
- Planned and properly managed aquaculture development is a productive use of coastal areas which should be undertaken within the broader framework of integrated coastal area management plans, according to national economic objectives and national goals for sustainable development and in harmony with international obligations.
- The likely adverse consequences of aquaculture and other coastal developments on the social and ecological environment must be predicted and evaluated, and measures formulated in order to contain these consequences within acceptable, pre-determined limits.
- Aquaculture and other activities in coastal areas should be adequately regulated and monitored to ensure that adverse effects remain within pre-determined limits and to detect when contingency and other plans need to be brought into effect to reverse any trends which could lead toward unacceptable environmental consequences.
2.2 Policies
- The sound utilization of the ecological capacity of the coastal area to produce aquatic products and generate income.
- The development of policy and management mechanisms to reduce conflict with other coastal activities.
- The prevention or reduction of the adverse environmental impacts of coastal aquaculture and other coastal activities.
- The management and coordination of aquaculture activities to ensure that their adverse impacts remain within acceptable limits.
- The reduction of health risks from the consumption of aquaculture products.
2.3 Actions
(Specific background and guidance information related to the actions suggested below is provided in the overview sections 3-6. The actions are grouped below as related to these sections. The paragraphs in the overview sections are numbered. For more details on each action proposed, please see relevant paragraphs.)
There is a variety of activities which can be undertaken to promote environmental management of coastal aquaculture and to achieve its successful development. The following actions are suggested:
· Coastal aquaculture and the environment: understanding the context
(Section 3 refers)
1. Emphasize the socio-economic and ecological benefits of coastal aquaculture. Collect and provide information on opportunities and achievements in coastal aquaculture development.
(see paragraphs 2-6)
2. Enhance awareness and understanding of the potential adverse environmental effects of coastal aquaculture. Address both the bio-physical and socio-economic aspects of environmental interactions associated with coastal aquaculture activities.
(paragraphs 7-78)
3. Distinguish between the species cultured, the farming methods applied and the prevailing ecological characteristics of the aquaculture site. Most scientific evidence on adverse ecological impact due to aquaculture originates from temperate countries and cannot be applied to aquaculture in tropical environments. Encourage research on ecological interactions of coastal aquaculture.
(paragraphs 17-60)
4. Emphasize the risks of self-pollution and other negative feedback effects. In particular, address the self-pollution risks of increasing aggregation of aquafarms in coastal embayments.
(paragraphs 61-66)
5. Consider aquaculture as one of many activities in coastal areas. Multiple resource use in coastal areas in many cases results in serious pollution of coastal waters. Highlight possible threats to aquaculture due to increasing pollution in coastal areas.
(paragraphs 67-72; see also Annex 2)
6. Address potential negative social implications of aquaculture and other developments, in particular human health risks, resource use conflicts and possible marginalization of low-income groups.
(paragraphs 73-78)
· Defining factors influencing environmental performance of coastal aquaculture
(Section 4 refers)
7. Determine the factors affecting environmental compatibility of coastal aquaculture in your project or country. Specify causes of environmental mismanagement and constraints to sustainable development of coastal aquaculture. Describe ecological, biological and technological circumstances as well as socio-economic, institutional and legal conditions relevant for coastal aquaculture development.
(paragraphs 79-91; see also 215, 225; 227-229; 237-238; 254)
· Assessing environmental hazards and impacts of coastal aquaculture
(Section 5 refers)
8. Assess the capacity of the coastal ecosystem to sustain aquaculture development with minimal ecological change.
(paragraphs 93-153)
® Pollution assessment/monitoring methods
9. Promote understanding of the environmental capacity concept. Encourage application of modern scientific methodologies for the assessment of coastal pollution such as the hazard assessment approach and adequate monitoring schemes. Advocate the establishment of a cooperative early detection/warning network of fishermen and aquaculturists.
(paragraphs 95-103 and 104-113; 112)
10. Apply, where possible, pollution assessment methods which are specific to coastal aquaculture. Ensure appropriate use of these methods, based on proper understanding of their applicability and limitations. Encourage further development of assessment methods suitable to aquaculture practices and ecological conditions in tropical environments.
(paragraphs 114-143)
11. Integrate aquaculture-specific monitoring schemes into existing coastal water pollution assessment activities. Select appropriate monitoring parameters and suitable sampling stations.
(paragraphs 148-153; see also Annex 4)
12. Employ remote sensing techniques and geographical information systems (GIS) to assess large-scale spatial and temporal environmental changes due to aquaculture and other developments in coastal areas.
(paragraphs 146-147)
® Implementation of environmental impact assessment (EIA)
13. Enhance awareness on advantages and limitations associated with the implementation of environmental impact assessment (EIA) concepts.
(paragraphs 154-170)
14. Consider that assessment studies on the social and economic impact of development activities may be carried out separately or as an integral part of an EIA. Both types of impact assessments are essential when formulating coastal aquaculture programmes and projects.
(paragraphs 155-156; see also 233-236 and 240-241)
15. Select or adapt an appropriate EIA sequence according to prevalent environmental and development requirements and according to the availability of information and implementation capacities.
(paragraphs 157-167)
16. Apply the EIA process to all major coastal aquaculture development proposals. Provide information to applicants/developers on options for mitigatory and adaptive measures to be included in project proposals.
(paragraphs 157-164; see also 177-178, 181; 218-223 and 242-278)
17. Incorporate EIA into integrated coastal area management strategies.
(paragraphs 168-170; see also 206-207)
· Improving environmental management of coastal aquaculture development
(Section 6 refers)
18. Select and implement environmental management options which suit the specific requirements for environmentally-acceptable development of aquaculture and other activities in coastal areas.
(paragraphs 171-278)
® Environment protection
19. Improve/develop management processes for protection of coastal environments.
(paragraphs 173-189; see also 236 and Annex 3)
® Integrated coastal area management (ICAM)
20. Join efforts with other coastal resource managers to formulate (or improve) and implement integrated coastal area management (ICAM) plans. There is a broad array of possible institutional arrangements and management strategies to resolve coastal use conflicts and manage coastal resources. Contribute to the establishment of an institutionalized coordination office or cooperation network.
(paragraphs 190-214; see also Annex 7)
21. Encourage broad participation in development and implementation of coastal programmes and coastal area management. Aquafarmers, artisanal and other resource users, the scientific community, and non-governmental organizations should participate or be consulted, as appropriate, in ICAM activities, along with representatives of key government bureaux who have a stake in coastal management.
(paragraphs 196-197; 214)
22. Coastal aquaculture development planners should actively participate in the formulation and implementation of ICAM plans. State goals and set priorities for coastal aquaculture development. Identify existing and potential coastal resource use conflicts between aquafarmers and other coastal resource users.
(paragraphs 226, 234; 195-197)
23. Provide aquaculture-specific data for the information base required for ICAM.
(paragraphs 198-199; see also Annex 8)
24. Participate in zoning activities leading to the designation of coastal resources and space. Indicate coastal areas appropriate or desired for aquaculture development possibly based on aquaculture-specific site selection surveys.
(paragraphs 200-208; 234)
25. Communicate frequently with other coastal resource planners and managers, stakeholder, scientists and policy-makers. Use conflict resolution techniques such as facilitated policy dialogues and mediated negotiation.
(paragraph 209)
26. Help to ensure long-term funding for ICAM, through durable commitment of parties involved in aquaculture and their enforcement of aquaculture-specific regulations adopted.
(paragraphs 210-214)
® Legal framework
27. Promote the formulation of a flexible and specific legal framework in support of aquaculture development. Help to provide and enforce environmental legislation which is formulated with due account of the variety of aquaculture practices and diversity of environmental settings.
(paragraphs 215-225)
28. Environmental legislation should ensure accessibility and environmental protection of areas and resources required for coastal aquaculture development.
(paragraphs 218; see also 208, 214 and 236)
29. Contribute to the formulation of constructive environmental regulations for coastal aquaculture, where necessary, such as requirements for EIA, waste discharge limits and waste treatment specifications. Apply incentives and deterrents to reduce existing environmental degradation from aquaculture activities.
(paragraphs 219-222; see also Annex 3)
30. Adopt and apply the EIFAC/ICES codes of practice on introductions and transfers of marine and freshwater organisms. Movement of species from and to aquaculture sites should be controlled through inspection and certification.
(paragraph 223)
31. Coastal aquaculture products should conform with safety standards for seafood before they are offered for human consumption. Establish quality control measures for aquaculture products. Control the use of aquaculture chemicals such as antibiotics and pesticides.
(paragraph 224; see also 260-267; 268-278)
® Planning and management of coastal aquaculture development
32. Formulate/improve coastal aquaculture development and management plans.
(paragraphs 226-238)
33. Strengthen sectoral capacities for adequate coordination of coastal aquaculture development efforts.
(paragraph 227)
34. Co-operate with national development planners to ensure proper integration of coastal aquaculture development objectives and plans into national economic and agricultural development programmes.
(paragraph 231)
35. Emphasis should be given to compatibility of policies and plans aiming at the development of aquaculture and other sectors as well as environmental protection.
(paragraphs 233-236)
36. Help to ensure continuous and well-targeted support to coastal aquaculture development.
(paragraphs 237-238)
® Environmental farm management
37. Promote environmental management at farm or project level. Consult with aquafarmers on specific environmental problems and mitigatory measures adopted. Provide opportunities for exchange of related experiences. Provide information and training to aquafarmers on options for improved environmental farm management.
(paragraphs 239-278)
38. Improve current aquaculture practices in terms of adequate site selection, efficiency in farm operation and maintenance, and continuous monitoring of biological and hygienic conditions on the farm. Avoid over-stocking.
(paragraph 239)
39. Formulate coastal aquaculture projects which are environmentally acceptable.
(paragraphs 240-241)
® ® Use of mangrove wetland
40. Discourage, where possible, the use of pristine mangrove wetland for aquaculture. Provide instructions governing the use of mangrove wetlands.
(paragraphs 243-245)
® ® Waste management
41. Encourage the development of low-cost waste treatment technology for use in intensive land-based coastal aquaculture in developing countries.
(paragraphs 246-247)
42. Promote integrated polyculture practices to reduce waste loadings.
(paragraph 248)
43. Explore ecological and economic feasibility of site rotation.
(paragraphs 249, 251)
® ® Use of feeds and fertilizers
44. Improve on-farm feed management practices. Improve fertilization and feeding strategies. Avoid over-use of fertilizers and feeds.
(paragraphs 252-259)
45. Continue research efforts on pond metabolism. Encourage development of diets and feeding methods adapted to requirements of semi-intensive farming systems in developing countries.
(paragraphs 253-254)
46. Encourage adoption of feeding regimes adjusted to specific feeding habits and behaviour of the species cultured with due consideration of water quality and water movements in the farming unit. Monitoring of feed application and, where possible, feeding response of cultured stock is essential.
(paragraphs 255-257)
47. Continue efforts to improve physical and nutritional properties of manufactured feeds for use in both warmwater and coldwater aquaculture. Special emphasis should be given to applied research on dietary nutrient requirements of warmwater fish and shrimp species.
(paragraphs 258-259; 254)
® ® Use of chemicals
48. Avoid usage of hazardous chemical substances. Emphasize measures to prevent water-quality deterioration, disease outbreaks and pests. Detailed on-farm record keeping on chemical usage is essential.
(paragraphs 260-267; 261-262; 266)
49. Discourage prophylactic use of antibiotics. Reduce environmental risks through minimal and alternating application of drugs.
(paragraph 263)
50. Establish, where needed, aquaculture health management services to cover requirements for quarantine, diagnosis, treatment, monitoring and product quality control.
(paragraphs 264-265)
51. Control market availability of potentially hazardous chemicals through consent mechanisms, e.g., registration and licensing. Aquafarmers must be provided with comprehensive information on environmental risks and appropriate use of chemicals.
(paragraph 267)
® ® Contamination of aquaculture products
52. Promote further development of economically viable methods for depuration/sanitation of contaminated shellfish products. Monitor contaminant levels in shellfish grown in areas subject to pollution and blooms of toxic algae.
(paragraphs 268-275)
53. Prepare contingency plans for aquaculture areas threatened by events of harmful algal blooms, and advise aquafarmers on possible countermeasures to reduce risks of damage to cultured stock.
(paragraph 277)
54. Promote aquaculture production in unpolluted waters and low risk areas. Increase public awareness of the safety aspects of consuming seafood. Apply, where unavoidable, temporary bans on harvesting or marketing of contaminated shellfish.
(paragraph 278)
<section>4</section>
3. Coastal aquaculture and the environment: The context
1. Aquaculture interacts with the environment. It utilizes resources and causes environmental changes. Most interactions have beneficial effects. In this section a brief overview follows on the benefits and on the potential adverse effects of coastal aquaculture (see sub-sections 3.1 and 3.2). Coastal pollution implications for coastal aquaculture are then considered (3.3). Last, social implications of coastal aquaculture development are highlighted (3.4).
3.1 Benefits of Coastal aquaculture
2. Generally, the socio-economic benefits arising from aquaculture expansion include the provision of food, contributing to improved nutrition and health, the generation of income and employment, the diversification of primary production, and, increasingly important for developing countries, foreign exchange earnings through export of high-value products (UNDP/Norway/FAO, 1987; Schmidt, 1982).
3. Aquaculture is also being promoted for its potential to compensate for the low growth rate of capture fisheries. Stocking and release of hatchery-reared organisms into inland and coastal waters support culture-based fisheries (Larkin, 1991).
4. Sustainable development of aquaculture can contribute to the prevention and control of aquatic pollution since it relies essentially on good-quality water resources.
5. Culture of molluscs and seaweeds may in certain cases counteract processes of nutrient and organic enrichment in eutrophic waters. Conversely, productivity of oligotrophic waters may be enhanced due to the nutrient and organic wastes released from aquaculture farms.
6. Aquaculture can contribute to rehabilitation of rural areas through re-use of degraded land.
3.2 Potential Adverse Effects of Coastal aquaculture
7. After a short description of the key areas of ecological concern (GESAMP, 1991c; Weston, 1991; Gowen et al., 1990; UNEP, 1990a; Pullin, 1989; Rosenthal et al., 1988), the main potential adverse effects of the farming of seaweed, shellfish and fish are addressed (Braaten and Hektoen, 1991; Pillay, 1990; Chua et al., 1989; Baluyut, 1989; Iwama, 1991).
3.2.1 Key areas of ecological concern
Nutrient and organic enrichment
8. Many aquaculture operations invariably result in the release of metabolic waste products (faeces, pseudo-faeces and excreta) and uneaten food into the aquatic environment. In general, the recipient for soluble waste is the water column and the recipient for the organic waste is the sediment.
9. The release of soluble inorganic nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) has the potential to cause nutrient enrichment (hypernutrification) possibly followed by eutrophication (increase of primary production) of a waterbody. Related changes in phytoplankton ecology may result in algal blooms, which can be harmful to wild and farmed organisms. However, there is no evidence that algal blooms have been caused by coastal aquaculture.
10. The largest proportion of solid wastes released, which is predominantly organic carbon and nitrogen, settles to the seabed in the immediate vicinity of the farm. Organic enrichment of the benthic ecosystem may result in increased oxygen consumption by the sediment and formation of anoxic sediments, with, in extreme cases, outgassing of carbon dioxide, methane and hydrogen sulphide; enhanced remineralization of organic nitrogen and reduction in macrofauna biomass, abundance and species composition.
11. There is evidence of very localized effects of reduced concentrations of dissolved oxygen in bottom and surface waters close to farm sites which are due to the considerable biochemical oxygen demand of released organic wastes and the respiratory demands of the cultured stock.
Degradation of wetland habitats
12. Coastal wetl