<title>Ice in fisheries</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Preservative effect of chilling
Why fish go bad
As soon as a fish dies, spoilage begins. Spoilage is the result of a whole series of complicated changes brought about in the dead fish by its own enzymes, by chemical action and by bacteria. It is necessary to understand something of the way in which these changes take place in order to make the fullest use of chilling as a means of keeping them in check.
An important series of changes is brought about by the enzymes of the living fish which remain active after its death. They are particularly involved in the flavor changes that take place during the first few days of storage, before bacterial spoilage has become marked.
Millions of bacteria, many of them potential spoilers, are present in the surface slime, on the gills and in the intestines of the living fish. They do no harm because the natural resistance of a healthy fish keeps them at bay. Soon after the fish dies, however, bacteria begin to invade the tissues through the gills, along blood vessels, and directly through the skin and the lining of the belly cavity.
In addition to bacterial and enzymatic changes, chemical changes involving oxygen from the air and the fat in the flesh of species such as tuna and mackerel can produce rancid odours and flavours.
Thus, spoilage is a natural process once the fish dies, but chilling can slow down this process and prolong the shelf life of fish as food.
Effect of temperature on spoilage
There are three important ways of preventing fish going bad too quickly - care, cleanliness and cooling. Care in handling is essential because unnecessary damage can provide access through cuts and wounds for the spoilage bacteria, thus hastening their effect on the flesh. Cleanliness is important in two ways: (i) the natural sources of bacteria can largely be removed soon after the fish is captured by taking out the guts and washing off the slime from the surface of the fish; (ii) the chances of contamination can be kept to a minimum by ensuring the fish is always handled in a hygienic manner. But most important of all. the fish must be chilled quickly and kept chilled.
The speed with which bacteria grow depends on temperature. Indeed, temperature is the most important factor controlling the speed at which fish go bad. The higher the temperature, the faster the bacteria multiply, using the flesh of the dead fish as food. When the temperature is sufficiently low, bacterial action can be stopped altogether; frozen fish stored at a very low temperature, for example 30 C, will remain wholesome for a very long time because bacteria are either killed or completely inactive at this temperature, and other forms of spoilage progress only very slowly. But, even at -10°C, some kinds of bacteria can still grow, although only at a very slow rate. Therefore for long-term storage, of many weeks or months, freezing and cold storage are necessary.
It is not possible to keep unfrozen fish at a temperature low enough to stop bacterial action completely, because fish begin to freeze at about -1°C. However, it is desirable to keep the temperature of unfrozen fish as close to that level as possible in order to reduce spoilage; the easiest and best way of doing this is to use plenty of ice which, when made from clean fresh water, melts at 0°C.
At temperatures not much above that of melting ice, bacteria become much more active and fish consequently goes bad more quickly. For example, fish with a storage life of 15 days at 0°C will keep for 6 days at 5°C and only about 2 days at 15°C before becoming unacceptable.
The chemical changes that contribute to spoilage are also kept in check by reducing the temperature; therefore it cannot be too strongly emphasised that temperature is by far the most important factor governing the rate at which fish go bad.
How long will fish keep in ice?
Generally, all fish spoil in much the same way, with 4 distinct phases of spoilage. Cod, for instance, will keep in ice for about 15 days before becoming inedible, and this time can be divided roughly into successive periods of 0 to 6, 7 to 10, 11 to 14 and over 14 days. In phase 1 there is very little deterioration apart from some slight loss of natural or characteristic flavour and odour. In phase 2 there is a considerable loss of flavour and odour. In phase 3 the fish begin to taste stale, appearance and texture begin to show obvious signs of spoilage, and the gills and belly cavity have an unpleasant smell. All these changes, which in the latter stages of storage are almost entirely due to bacteria, occur at an ever increasing rate until the fifteenth day, when phase 4 begins, the fish are putrid and generally regarded as inedible.
Other species with different storage times may also have a different division between the respective phases but the spoilage pattern will be similar. Even fish of the same species may spoil differently since factors such as the method of capture, location of fishing grounds, season of the year, fat content and fish size can affect the keeping quality.
Most studies on the spoilage of fish are done under controlled conditions, therefore, the results are more specific than they would be in most commercial situations where conditions can be variable. Published data on storage life should therefore be used with discretion and in most cases assumed to represent maximum values.
Despite the above limitations, the storage life of fish has been well researched and documented and several broad conclusions have been drawn. In general, flat shaped fish keep longer than round shaped fish; red fleshed fish keep longer than white fleshed fish; low fat fish longer than high fat fish and teleost (bony) fish longer than elasmobranch (cartilaginous) fish.
There are many references in the literature to the extended storage life in ice of certain tropical fish species compared to fish from temperate or colder waters. While it is true that some fish from tropical waters can be kept for longer periods an extensive review of published literature showed that this was not universally the case. Table 1 shows storage life of various fish species. For further information on shelf life, reference should be made to the publication "Fresh fish quality and quality changes", FAO Fisheries Series No 29. The reasons for apparent anomalies, or exceptions, are still not fully understood. Another factor which makes comparisons difficult is that different criteria are used to define the limit of storage life and, since relatively few studies have been made on spoilage in ice of tropical fish, direct comparisons are not always possible.
Fig. 1 The effect of temperature on the spoilage of lean, temperate water fish
Table 1 Shelf life in ice (FAO Fisheries Series No 29)
Species Shelf life
(days in ice)
Temperate water
Marine species
white-fleshed lean
(cod, haddock, hake) 11-13
flatfish (sole, plaice) 15-18
halibut 21
fatty fish
summer herring (fatty) 2-4
winter herring (lean) 12
Freshwater sp.
trout 9-10
Tropical water:
Marine species
Bahrain(3 species) 13-25
Ghana(5 species) 19-22
Brunei(3 species) 18-28
Sri Lanka(5 species) 20-26
Seychelles (8 species) 15-24
Mexico (6 species) 21-30
Hong Kong (2 species) 30-31
India (4 species) 7-12
Freshwater spp
Pakistan (2 species) 23-27
Uganda (5 species) 20-25
East Africa (4 species) 15-28
In the absence of specific information on storage life, a simple storage experiment will serve to show how long a species can be kept in ice. All the relevant conditions pertaining to the storage period should be met. But, if seasonal changes are likely, adjustments should be made as necessary, or further storage experiments should be carried out at the appropriate time or under simulated conditions.
Although the data are limited, it is generally accepted that the overall pattern of spoilage of freshwater fish in ice is similar to that of marine species, but their storage life tends to be longer.
Definition of storage life
A wide range of terms are used in discussing storage life, such as quality, acceptability, preference, keeping time, storage time, storage life, shelf life and potential shelf life; these terms are not interpreted uniformly.
The simplest definition of the end of shelf life, or storage life, is the point at which the produce is considered to have become inedible, i.e. it is spoilt! Even this simple definition is open to different interpretations since there is no common level of unacceptability, even within small communities let alone worldwide.
At the other end of the quality scale, the "high quality life" (HQL) can be regarded as the point at which the produce retains all its characteristic properties. The equivalent definition in the EEC Labelling Directive is "retains its specific properties" and, in CODEX and US Grade Standards, the cooked product is required to have "characteristic flavours and no off- flavours".
Although HQL is more easy to define and thereby more widely acceptable, in practical terms, it may have little significance with respect to the commercial value of the product. Some personal preferences for instance, may even favour produce which exhibits "non-characteristic off-flavours".
Assessment of quality can either be done by objective or sensory methods. Again, differences in methodology may give significantly variable results.
From long experience in fisheries inspection and research, it is possible to correlate objective and sensory methods but, it is not possible to include consumer preferences in such correlations, since the "end of good or acceptable quality" is not a standard criterion which can be universally applied. Therefore, fish quality standards have to be matched to market requirements rather than absolute standards. Tables of storage lives should therefore be interpreted with caution and related to the situation and conditions which prevail for individual products.
A good deal of attention is given to TTT (time, temperature, tolerance) when compiling storage life tables but the PPP (product, processing and packaging) factors can be equally important. Thus, tables which do not specify all of these relevant conditions should be used only as a rough guide.
In summary, tables of storage lives should be used only to give rough guidance; more accurate information can be achieved by experimentation or experience when all the prevailing factors are taken into account.
Calculation of storage times
It is generally accepted that bacterial spoilage is the major reason for non-sterile unfrozen fish becoming unacceptable to the consumer. As the spoilage flora proliferates the fish become progressively spoiled.
For many years a general rule was applied, that bacterial growth, and hence spoilage rate, doubled for every 5°C rise in temperature; this can still be used as a rough guide in making comparisons. For instance, fish which have a storage life of 14 days at 0 C will have a storage life of only 7 days at 5°C. Closer studies of the effect of temperature on spoilage have been made, and it has been demonstrated that the square root of the growth rate of bacterial cultures is a linear function of temperature over a significant range up to about 1 5°C. This relationship is expressed mathematically by the following equation:
R = b (T -Tc) (1)
where R = rate of growth per unit time
b = slope of the regression line
T = absolute temperature at which growth is measured
Tc = conceptual temperature (k).
Mathematically Tc is the value of T when R = 0.
The minimum temperature at which chilled fish is normally stored is close to 0 C. Therefore, it is convenient to simplify equation (1 ) and re-define the growth rate r as the rate relative to that at 0°C. By manipulating the expression in equation (1 ) we get
r = 0.1t + 1 (2)
where r = rate of spoilage relative to the rate at 0°C
t = temperature of storage (°C)
This can then be rearranged to give: r = (0.1t + 1)2 (3)
Using equation (3) the spoilage rate at any temperature relative to the spoilage rate at 0°C can now be calculated. For example, the spoilage rate at 5°C will be:
r = [(0.1x5) + 1]2 = 2.25
This means that fish maintained at 5°C will spoil at a rate which is 2.25 times quicker than the rate at 0°C, or expressed in another way, one day storage at 5°C is equivalent to 2.25 days storage at 0°C. This differs slightly from the factor of 2 derived using the "doubling rule". A similar calculation for a 1 0°C storage temperature shows that the spoilage rate is increased by a factor of 4.
Using the relationship expressed in equation (3) and making the appropriate calculations, it is possible to predict the likely storage life of fish which have been maintained for some time at temperatures higher than the ideal 0°C. For example, if fish with a normal storage life of 15 days at 0°C are held initially at 10°C for one day, and 5°C for 2 days before being reduced to 0°C for the rest of the storage time, the likely shelf life can be calculated as follows:
1 day at 1 0°C is equivalent to 4 days at 0°C
2 days at 5°C is equivalent to 2x2.25 = 4.5 days at 0°C
The equivalent storage time at 0°C of the 3 days spent at the higher temperatures is therefore 4+ 4.5 = 8.5 days. This means that 8.5 - 3.0 = 5.5 days of the potential storage time of the fish, if they were maintained at 0°C, have been lost and the total storage time is thereby reduced from 15 to 9.5 days.
The above is a simplified example used to illustrate the significant losses in potential storage life if fish are kept at higher temperatures even for short periods. In reality, the temperature history of the fish is likely to be more complicated and, in order to work out equivalent storage times, calculations will need to be made using smaller time intervals. If the facilities are available, this calculation can be done using a computer to give storage life predictions under a wide variety of conditions.
Thus, simple integration of time and temperature functions can provide a useful indication of spoilage, provided that the storage life data at some specific temperature are available, preferably, but not necessarily at 0°C.
Instruments have also been developed to continually monitor fish temperature and perform the time-temperature integration function; one model displays the number of days of potential storage life remaining at 0°C. Time-temperature growth characteristics of spoilage bacteria vary, depending on, for instance, whether they are mainly psychrotrophic, as would be the case in temperate waters, or mesophilic, in tropical waters. Time-temperature integration instruments therefore need to be programmed for the particular fish species and situation under consideration.
Why cool fish with ice?
Ice as a cooling medium for fish has a great deal in its favour; it has a very large cooling capacity for a given weight or volume, it is harmless, portable and relatively cheap. It is especially valuable for chilling fish, since rapid cooling is possible. When fish are being cooled with ice, heat transfer is achieved by direct contact with the ice, by conduction through adjacent fish and by melt-water flowing over the fish. Cold melt-water takes up heat from the fish and when it flows over ice again it is recooled. Thus, intimate mixing of fish and ice not only reduces the thickness of the layer of fish to be cooled but also promotes this convective cooling interaction between ice melt-water and fish.
As soon as ice is put on warm fish, heat flows from the fish to the ice and melts it. Heat keeps on flowing until there is no difference in temperature between the fish and ice, provided sufficient ice is present. Any further melting that occurs is due to heat from other sources, such as the warm surrounding air during the subsequent storage period.
Ice is its own thermostat and, since fish are mainly water, ice maintains fish at a temperature just slightly above the point at which they would begin to freeze; the point of equilibrium for sea fish, iced soon after catching, is near to -0.5°C, since the mixture usually includes some salt and blood.
Why not use other methods of cooling?
There are other ways of chilling fish besides using ice. For example, they can be immersed in chilled water or cold air can be blown over them. Sea water, cooled by mechanical means, Refrigerated Sea Water (RSW) or by the addition of ice, Chilled Sea Water (CSW), is a suitable alternative means of rapidly chilling large quantities of small whole fish, especially on board a fishing vessel: the use of RSW and CSW is discussed in detail in chapter 7. The use of cold air is less satisfactory, except for some applications relating to prepackaged fish which are also discussed in Chapter 7.
When cold air alone is used, as in a chillroom, the heat taken from the fish will rapidly warm the air. The warm air rises and is cooled by contact with the coils of the cooler and then moves by natural convection or fan circulation back to the fish. It does not take much heat to warm the air; it takes 10,000 times as much heat to melt a given volume of crushed ice as it does to warm the same volume of air from 0 to 0.5 C. Thus, it is important to remember that for air cooling to be effective, a good circulation of cold air must be blown over the fish. However, even when a fan is fitted in a chillroom it is difficult to achieve the rapid cooling rates possible with ice and chilled sea water (Fig. 2).
Another disadvantage of air chilling is that, without the use of ice, the fish becomes dry. Continuous air movement evaporates water from the fish surface and deposits it as frost or condensate on the coils of the evaporator. In addition, the air in some parts of the chillroom will be colder than in others. Fish in the cold spots, for example close to the evaporator, may in time become partially frozen, even though the thermostat is set above freezing point at another location within the chillroom. Slow freezing of the fish can be detrimental, since appearance, flavour and texture of the fish may be affected.
Fig 2 Fish in chillrooms still need ice
<section>2</section>
2. Nature and properties of ice
In order to understand why ice is so useful for chilling fish, it is first necessary to consider the nature and properties of ice, as well as to understand the simple principles and technical terms detailed in chapters 11 and 12.
Fig. 3 Ice melts at 0°C
When water freezes at a temperature of 0°C it experiences a phase change from a liquid to a solid, familiar to all as ice. A quantity of heat has to be removed from the water to turn it into ice, and the same amount of heat has to be added to melt it again. The temperature of a mixture of water and ice will not rise above 0°C until all the ice has melted (Fig 3). A given amount of ice always requires the same amount of heat to melt it; 1 kg of ice needs 80 kcal to change it into water, thus the latent heat of fusion of ice is 80 kcal/kg (Fig 4). This amount of heat is always the same for ice made from pure water, and is very little different for ice made from fresh water from almost any commercial source. Ice needs a large amount of heat to melt - it has a large reserve of "cold" - and this is one reason why it is widely used in the fishing industry as a means of chilling fish.
Fig. 4 The quantity of heat needed to melt ice
Ice is ice is ice!
There is often argument about whether ice made at one port is better than another, whether natural ice is better than artificial ice, freshwater ice is better than seawater ice, or new ice is better than old ice. In addition there are arguments about the merits of the type of ice, crushed, flake, tube, slush and so on.
The differences between freshwater ices of different origin are so small, that they are of no significance to those using ice for chilling fish. Ice made from tap water has the same cooling power as ice made from distilled water, and ice three months old is as effective as newly-made ice.
There is, however, one very important thing to remember; if some of the ice has turned to water, much of its value will have been lost, and a slushy mixture of ice and water should never be compared with an equal weight of ice alone. Remember too, that comparisons between different types of ice should be made between equal weight; what may appear to be the same amount of ice may be an equal volume, but 1 m³ of flake ice, for instance, has far less cooling capacity than say 1 m³ of crushed block ice (Fig. 5).
Within limits, when ice is intimately mixed with fish, the size of particle in any one type of ice makes little difference to either the rate at which it melts or the speed at which it chills. If block ice is used in the form of larger lumps, cooling times are likely to be longer due to the poor contact between fish and ice. Ice which has different shaped pieces due to the method of manufacture can also have somewhat different characteristics. Differences in the properties of crushed block ice are discussed later.
Ice made from hard water has the same cooling properties as ice made from soft water, although particles of ice made from hard water sometimes tend to stick together more during melting than pieces made from soft water.
Fig. 5 Equal weights of ice give equal cooling
Seawater ice
The effectiveness of seawater ice, in comparison with freshwater ice, is a little more in dispute. Depending on the method of manufacture, seawater ice may be less homogeneous than freshwater ice when newly made. Brine will also leach out of seawater ice during storage, so that the ice does not have a precisely fixed melting point. For this reason, fish kept in seawater ice may sometimes be at too low a temperature and become partially frozen, or the fish may possibly take up some salt from the ice.
However, where the choice is between not enough ice and plenty of seawater ice, then there is little doubt that seawater ice can, and should, be used for chilling fish that would otherwise spoil more quickly. Manufacture of seawater ice is of particular advantage on board ship for augmenting port supplies on a long voyage, or in coastal communities where fresh water is so scarce and expensive that to make ice from it would be prohibitive. It is important to remember, however, that seawater for making ice must be uncontaminated; all too often the quality of coastal or harbour water makes it unsafe for use with food.
To sum up, equal weights of ice, not equal volumes, have equal cooling capacity, no matter what the source. No single type of ice is significantly better than another when it comes to the amount required to chill a box of fish.
<section>3</section>
3. Quantity of ice required
It is possible to calculate the ice requirement if the operational conditions are known. These conditions are often variable and unrepetitive. Only a series of tests, under operational conditions, will establish the correct fish to ice ratio to be used to cool the fish and maintain chilled temperatures during the entire storage period.
Calculated values of ice usage can provide valuable information at the planning and design stages, and also promote a better understanding of the relative effect of the various elements which influence the rate of ice meltage. In addition, by considering all possibilities and calculating ice requirements, a more rational judgement can be made when selecting equipment and procedures to be used.
To determine the ice requirement, it is necessary to calculate the quantity of ice to cool the fish and also the quantity of ice required to maintain the fish at a chill temperature throughout the storage period. In addition, allowance has to be made to allow for losses and other contingencies in order to determine the ice manufacturing requirement.
Calculation of the ice requirement for cooling fish
The mass of ice needed to cool fish from the initial temperature to the final holding temperature can be calculated from an expression, which equates the heat taken up by the ice, on the left side of the equation, with the heat lost by the fish, on the right side of the equation.
(Mi) (Li) = (Mf) (Cpf) (ts-tc) (4)
Where
Mi= mass of ice which melts (kg)
Li= latent heat of fusion of ice (80 kcal/kg)
Mf= mass of fish (kg)
Cpf= specific heat of fish (kcal/kg°C)
ts= initial temperature of fish (°C)
tc= final temperature of fish (0°C)
From equation (4) the ice requirement will therefore be:
The specific heat of lean fish is approximately 0.8 kcal/kg C and this value should be used if there is a species mix or if there is a possibility that at times all the fish are of a lean species. The specific heat value, however, may be refined to take account of variations in the oil content of the fish and this refined value may be used if the fish composition is reasonably consistent.
Cpf = 0.5 XI + 0.3 Xs + 1.0 xw (6)
Where
Cpf = specific heat of fish (kcal/kg)
Xl = mass fraction of lipids (oil)
Xs = mass fraction of solids
Xw = mass fraction of water
To illustrate the effect of oil content on the quantity of ice required for chilling the following comparison is made between lean and fatty fish. Example (1) - 100 kg lean fish with 1% lipids, 19% solids and 80% water at an initial temperature of 20°C:
Cpf = (0.5 x 0.01) + (0.3 x 0.19) + (1.0x 0.8) = 0.862 kcal/kg°C
Example (2) - 100 kg of fatty fish with 21% lipids, 19% solids and 60% water at an initial temperature of 20°C.
Cpf= (0.5 x 0.21 ) + (0.3 x 0. 19) + ( 1.0 x 0.6)= 0.762 kcal/kg°C
The refined calculation for fatty fish shows only a small reduction in ice requirement and, since with most species the oil content is variable, it is advisable to treat all fish as if they were lean fish.
Calculation of the ice requirement for the storage of fish
Even if you are concerned with only one batch of fish held in identical containers, there are likely to be variations in ice meltage rates, which make it difficult to calculate the ice requirement accurately. If, for instance, the containers are stacked, then ice meltage may be different in containers located at the top, bottom, sides and within the stack.
In spite of the obvious difficulties and likely inaccuracies, a calculation of the ice meltage rate can still be useful at a planning stage to enable comparisons to be made between different options, and to allow preliminary estimates of quantities, costs and equipment to be made.
It would be difficult to identify containers which would eventually be located at more favourable locations within a stack. Therefore, all containers should be treated equally and the assumption made that each container is fully exposed to the surrounding air.
As a first step, heat transfer may be calculated using the following simple expression:
q = A.U. (t[o] - t[c]) kcal/day (7)
Where:
q = heat entering the container (kcal/day)
A = surface area of the container (m²)
U = overall heat transfer coefficient kcal/day m² °C)
t[o] = temperature outside the container (°C)
t[c] = temperature inside the container (0°C)
This overall calculation of heat transfer may require to be done in parts if, for instance, the lid or base of the container is made of a different material or has a different thickness. The heat transfer through the various areas are then added together to give the total heat transfer.
The heat entering melts the ice, therefore it follows that:
q = Li . mi kcal/day (8)
Where
q = heat required to melt ice (kcal/day)
Li = latent heat of fusion of ice (usually taken as 80 kcal/kg)
mi = mass of ice melted (kg/day)
In order to develop a mathematical expression for ice meltage rate during the storage period we suppose that ice meltage inside the containers is only due to heat transferred from the surrounding air. In this steady state approach, quantities (7) and (8) should be equal, therefore it follows that:
L[1] m[i] = A.U. (t[o] - t[c]) (9)
Thus, the ice requirement will be:
If the fish containers are exposed to direct sunlight during the storage period, the above calculation, which is only based on the conductance of heat due to the difference between the internal and external temperatures, will result in a under-estimation of the ice requirement. To include the element of ice meltage due to radiated heat will make the calculation extremely difficult. Therefore, if the containers cannot be protected from direct sunlight or any other radiated heat source during the storage period, the calculated values for the ice requirement should be upgraded or used with caution.
Ice meltage tests
Calculation of ice meltage rates will seldom give an accurate indication of the ice requirement, since reliable data on both materials and conditions is often not readily available. Irregularities in the construction of containers, for instance, can greatly affect the containers "effective heat transfer coefficient". Variations in ambient conditions during the storage period make it difficult to calculate the ever changing ice meltage rates, even when the data are reasonably accurate.
More accurate calculations of the ice requirement can be made if meltage tests are used to determine the overall heat transfer coefficient of the container. This type of ice meltage test may be done using ice only, and the results will be equally valid for fish/ice mixtures.
Containers should be filled with ice and weighed accurately before commencing the test, which should be done with a constant surrounding air temperature. This may not be possible over the entire test period, but reasonably constant temperatures may be achieved for shorter periods between weight loss measurements and an average used in the calculations. Significant differences will be observed between containers completely within the stack and those on the periphery with exposed surfaces.
Some of the initial ice meltage will be the result of cooling the container and, depending on the container material, some melt-water may be absorbed so that it will not be a measurable weight loss. If the weight of the container and ice is frequently checked during the test period the weight loss pattern may be similar to that shown in Figure 6, which shows a fairly constant rate of weight loss after the initial cooling period.
To ensure that the ice meltage measurements relate to heat ingress, only the time interval between "X. and "Y" in Figure 6, during which the rate of weight loss is constant, should be considered for ice meltage calculations.
Fig. 6 Ice meltage during storage
The relationship between ice meltage and heat ingress was given above by equation (9):
Li . m[i] = A.U. (t[o] - t[c]) (9)
This expression can be rearranged to give the overall heat transfer coefficient U as follows:
Where
U = overall heat transfer coefficient kcal/day m² °C)
L[i] = latent heat of fusion of ice (80 kcal/kg)
m[i] = ice meltage per day (between "X" and "Y", Figure 6) (kg/day)
A = surface area of the container (m²)
t[o] = temperature outside the container (°C)
t[c] = temperature inside the container (0°C)
Note: If m, is measured over a period other than one full day then the rate per day can be calculated as follows:
Where:
m[i] = ice meltage rate (kg/day)
(M[x] - M[y]) = weight lost due to meltage between "X" and "Y" (kg)
(x - y) = time interval between "X" and "Y" (hours)
In such ice meltage tests, steps should be taken to ensure that all the melt-water is drained from the container before each weighing.
A final check on whether the correct quantity of ice is being used can be done at the end of each storage period, by noting the quantity of ice remaining in each container. It is important that not only should there be ice in every container, but that this ice should be uniformly distributed, so that all fish in each container are still being cooled. A more elaborate check is to monitor the temperature of the fish. It is often possible to identify the fish likely to be most vulnerable, such as those on the outside of containers which are located on the outside of a stack and thermometers can be located at these positions. However, during handling and transportation/he relative position of containers may change with respect to their vulnerability to heat ingress, and only random temperature checks and a series of tests will finally indicate the quality of the icing practice.
If there has to be any modification in the ice usage at this stage, it can only be achieved by changing the fish to ice ratio and consequently the number of containers necessary to hold the required quantity of fish.
Saving ice
The amount of ice needed to keep fish fresh is economically more important in tropical countries, since the warmer climate means that ice meltage rates are higher.