<title>Banking for the environment</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Maintenance of a sound environment is a matter which concerns all mankind. To a greater or less extent all people have a role to play in ensuring that the resources of planet Earth are utilized in a manner that protects the interests of those as yet unborn.
There are some in the population whose work responsibilities make them particularly important in this process. Politicians, planners, developers, farmers all come to mind as being in the forefront of this process. Alongside these persons, and equally important in their own way, are bankers. It is to bankers, and especially to those responsible for rural investment lending, that this publication is directed.
Investment has a vital role to play in correct resource management. The banker is very frequently in a position to significantly influence the direction of such investment. Consequently he or she needs to be sensitive to the issues involved, and to have access to the specialized knowledge required in order to make sound lending decisions.
This AGS Bulletin aims at bringing environmental concerns to the attention of bankers. It also suggests ways in which banks could establish appropriate methodology in order to cope with the additional responsibilities involved.
Hartwing de Haen
Assistant Director-General
Agriculture Department
<section>2</section>
Chapter I - Introduction: the challenge of rational environmental management
The role of financial institutions
The heart of the problem - forest clearances and agricultural intensification
There is growing awareness that agriculture in the broadest sense of the word (crop and livestock production, agroindustries, forestry, and aquaculture) has had, and continues to have, a major impact upon the environment of our globe. Thus, tropical ecology has become of vital concern not only for the inhabitants of the developing countries, but also for the urban dwellers in the northern hemisphere. As concern has increased about rapid deforestation, rising levels of "greenhouse" gases ^1, rising atmospheric temperatures and loss of bio-diversity, attention has focused upon strategies to conserve and protect what is increasingly recognized as a fragile, interdependent world ecosystem.
^1 Global warming has been a subject of intense study both in the academic and policy making communities. A good summary of the issues and some of the policy approaches to controlling greenhouse gas emissions, such as a carbon tax (Poterba and Whally and Wigle) and alternative technologies (Barbier, Burgess, and Pearce) is found in Rudiger Dornbusch and James M. Poterba, editors, Global warming: Economic Policy Responses, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1991.
It is only in recent years that the scientific and lay communities have come to understand the interrelationship of the world's ecology and the necessity for a planned, rational, sustainable use of these resources for development. Fundamental to this understanding that the economy is not separate from the environment in which we live is the realization that there is an interdependence both because the way we manage the economy impacts on the environment and because environ mental quality impacts on the performance of the economy. ^2 When society consumes its "natural capital", it impairs its ability to sustain income, and perhaps even society itself, over the longer term.
^2 Pearce, D., A. Markandya and E.B. Barbier, Blueprint for a Green Economy. Earthscan Publications Limited, London, 1989.
This process of trying to develop rational responses to deforestation, flooding, desertification, environmental pollution, rising ocean levels, atmospheric warming and loss of bio-diversity, has focused a spotlight on the rural sector and upon agricultural banking practice. One of the driving forces in agricultural change and development are certainly credit and investment policies. These policies, if properly conceived and directed, can help channel economic investment into environmentally benign or even beneficial projects. If the environmental concerns are ignored, the effect of these capital flows could be to encourage further destruction.
The role of financial institutions
The concern in the international financial community has produced a far reaching reevaluation of the basis upon which projects are evaluated and financed. For example, one of the principle sources of capital for projects in the past that have had adverse environmental impacts, the World Bank, has recently reversed many of its past practices of financing the exploitation of forest resources. The new forest policy paper is an almost complete reversal of previous policy. It states:
"There has been a substantial increase in the world's understanding of and concern about the forest sector of the developing world. [These] forests and woodlands play an even more important economic and ecological role than had earlier been recognized ... in protecting biological diversity [as well as] their role in the world's carbon cycle and climate change." ^3
^3 World Bank, Forest Policy Paper Washington, 1991, p.1.
At the national level there is similarly rising concern about the impact of financing environmentally damaging projects. Both governments and banks in the developing countries are questioning past policies and lending practices. In many countries, the Philippines and Brazil to mention only two, governments and national financial institutions have acted vigorously to change macroeconomic policies and redirect lending so as protect remaining biological resources. The results of past projects are being reappraised in the light of the new environmental consciousness and their successes reevaluated, not exclusively on their financial rate of return, but also in light of their environmental impacts.
The crucial role that national financial institutions could potentially play in protecting, conserving and rationally exploiting the natural capital cannot be overestimated. The importance of these institutions resides in the fact that they are the principal organized source of development capital. This capital is generated through domestic savings, sovereign lending by international banks, or private sector investments. It is to these institutions that falls the task of evaluating, and often overseeing, the implementation of, new loan financed development projects. Because of this, they have a significant responsibility for protecting and preserving the environment and for financing projects that utilize the natural capital in a sustainable manner.
The heart of the problem - forest clearances and agricultural intensification
In recent years, there has been growing recognition that the natural resource base, especially the tropical moist forests (TMFs) and, to a lesser degree, the tropical dry forests (TDF's), can no longer be viewed as a resource to be exploited or even destroyed for private gain by stripping these forests off for fuel, fodder and exports, or for livestock and crop production. The clearance of the forests, as well as the extension of human agricultural activities into them has accelerated in recent decades.
With increasing knowledge, these forests have come to be recognized for the important environ mental services that they perform for the globe. They:
-provide habitat and livelihood for forest dwellers;
-shelter over half the world's known species plus numerous species yet to be named and researched;
-protect soils and watersheds;
- provide wood and forest products for present and future use;
- help regulate global climate through evapotranspiration and carbon sequestration. ^4
^4 Forest clearance end its effect on carbon sequestration have been the subject of sustained debate in recent years. While deforestation is an important source of "hot house" gases and subsequent global warming, it is important to keep the contribution of forest clearances in perspective. The amount of carbon, principally in the form of carbon dioxide, arising from forest clearances and the burning and decay of the cleared plants is relatively small. It is variously estimated as 0.4 to 2.5 billion tons per year. (Here a billion is one thousand million.)
This compares to about 100-115 billion tons absorbed by the oceans and only a slightly smaller amount given off by them to the atmosphere due to some retention in the form of fecal pellets and calcium carbonate shells that sink to the bottom. Air and oceans are largely in balance.
Photosynthesis by green plants removes about 100-120 billion tons of carbon dioxide per year from the air, fixing most of it in plant tissue. However, of this amount, 40-60 billion tons are released in metabolic activities with a net of about 60 billion tons per year retained. About 45 billion tons are stored in trees and 15 billion tons in shrubs, grasses and other plants. By comparison, topsoils store about 1.2 to 1.6 trillion tons of carbon. (A trillion is here a thousand billion, or a million million)
Human activities, such as use of organic fuels and industries such as cement, which cooks carbon out of limestone, release between 5 and 6 billion tons of carbon per year. The effects of deforestation produce a net increase in global carbon levels in atmosphere. The estimates range from a low of 0.4 billion tons to a high of 2.6 billion tons per year. Although small in relative terms, the loss of forest has a two fold effect. It removes the storage area for future carbon sequestration, as well as adding carbon dioxide to an environmental carbon cycle increasingly unbalanced due to human activities. By analogy, it is rather like a small error of navigation multiplied by the distance of travel by a ship. The magnitude of the error increases with time.
Data from Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Environmental services Division.
Managing, conserving and preserving these resources as part of a global effort to modify agricultural production systems, both to produce the required food and fuel for a growing population and to protect the world's environment from the consequences of the past patterns of uncontrolled exploitation of these resources, requires the intimate and ongoing involvement of national financial institutions. It is their role to evaluate lending in the light of the impact upon the environment's capacity to continue to supply these "environmental services."
Likewise, intensification of agriculture on existing grazing and crop land has contributed to environmental degradation. Intensive cropping brings as a consequence erosion of soils left unprotected against wind and water as well as against intensive spray regimes that both destroy beneficial in sect populations and endanger the health of people exposed to these chemicals. The heavy use of machinery all too often produces soil compaction and is frequently characterized by the "mining" of the soil's organic matter and nutrients through abandonment of crop rotation and fallowings. Intensive livestock and poultry production and processing produces large quantities of material that prove toxic to the environment if not treated. Tropical product processing industries produce waste products and waters that can, if untreated, produce lethal effects in the environment.
In order to understand how developing countries can ameliorate the environmental situation, Chapter II will first synthesize the principal sources of environmental degradation, especially deforestation and agricultural intensification. Chapter III will explore the economic forces that provoke this degradation. Chapter IV outlines some of the methods currently in use to evaluate environmental degradation and presents a brief summary methodology which financial institutions can use to evaluate the environmental consequences of their lending programs. Chapter V explores the economics of banking and the internal structural factors that may militate against developing environmentally beneficial lending programs. Chapter VI argues that these constraints are not as severe as they first appear and that there are sound and compelling reasons for banks to develop environmentally beneficial lending programs. Chapters VII and VIII present the institutional framework for environmentally
sustainable lending programs and a method of institutionalizing this program within the present operating procedures of the banks. In Chapter IX, the informal sector's importance as a non-institutional source of agricultural credit is explored. Chapter X outlines a paradigm to permit a societal response to this flow of funds to agriculture in order to preserve, protect and rationally exploit environmental capital and existing agricultural land.
<section>3</section>
Chapter II - Sources of environmental degradation
Land clearance or land "reclamation"
The sources of land clearance
A case study in tropical deforestation: the "push-pull" effect in Dumoga Bone, Indonesia
Land clearance or land "reclamation"
Land Clearance or Land "Reclamation" is the first and perhaps the most irreversible form of environmental degradation. Once the bio-mass is stripped off, especially in the tropics, economic and social con sequences are severe and usually immediate. Loss of habitat can lead to the extinction of species and the disappearance of indigenous groups dependent upon forest resources for the survival of their culture and livelihood. Exposed soils, especially in the tropics, erode rapidly, and, in many cases, are subject to declining fertility and desertification; they also degrade the water quality of downstream communities, often contributing to flooding and silting of rivers and dams. Land clearance often extends to the coastal regions and into the sea itself. In Sri Lanka, for example, state sponsored development projects such as harbours and sea walls are reported to interfere with natural forces. Extensive damage has arisen from coral and sand mining and the exploitation of
dugong for meat and turtles for meat and eggs, while coastal swamps have been destroyed for firewood by the local population.
The seriousness of the environmental degradation arising from land clearance can be seen from the fact that the developing countries already have lost approximately one half of their forests in this century. Worldwide, some 11 million hectares of tropical forests (moist and dry) were being cleared annually in the 1980's. By -the 1990's, satellite observations suggest that the annual clearance rate had risen to around 17-20 million hectares per year, of which about 2.0 million hectares were in Asia. ^5 The total forest inventory of Asia and the Pacific area is about 800 million hectares. If present estimates are correct, the clearance rate is about 2.5% per year or 25% per decade.
^5 World Bank, Forest Policy Paper, June 1991.
The consequence of these clearances in human terms is, according to the still controversial Gaia Theory, that:
By early next century, we could have destroyed 70 per cent of the forests and the remaining 30 per cent would not be enough to sustain the ecosystem. It would go to desert and there would be a refugee and famine problem the like of which we have never seen. ^6
^6 James Lovelock, Financial Times (London), August 17/18, p. 14.
The sources of land clearance
The Sources of Land Clearance and subsequent deforestation are not simply driven by the profit motive. While it is in someone's financial interest to clear or "reclaim" land, it must also be understood that there are often a number of socio-economic factors that are influential in the process. In some cases, it is population pressure that drives people off marginal lands and onto forested areas. This shift is frequently aggravated by declining opportunities to earn a living on existing agricultural lands, because of diminishing fertility arising from misuse of the land or because cyclical or depressed tropical commodity prices force farmers to seek other income producing opportunities on newly cleared land. All too frequently, demand in- the developed countries for the products of the tropical forests creates new markets that attract loggers, farmers and ranchers to the forests. Thus, local peoples are both pushed into the forest by the expanding population and the
contraction of opportunities to earn a living in the traditional way and pulled by new markets for forest products, frequently in developed countries.
Forest encroachment has often inadvertently been encouraged by infrastructural developments, especially roads, which have opened the forest frontier. These are promoted by government sponsored settlements involving land grants (Indonesia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka) or unrealistic government policies that under-price logging concessions. By setting very low stumpage fees or agreements that do not require environ mental remediation, such as reforestation, profit margins are increased and harvesting activities further encouraged. Both the laying down of roads and the logging of areas encourages subsequent settlement by farmers and therefore the conversion of forest land to farm land.
Sri Lanka provides a concrete example of population pressure, export oriented economic growth, and poorly thought out government policy which drives this deforestation. G. M. P. de Silva argues convincingly that forest clearances in Sri Lanka arise from poverty, monocultures of tea, rubber, and coconuts, most of which is exported, and development with little regard for the environment. He further reports that the rate of deforestation is accelerating. Sri Lankan forests covered about 70% of the 64,000 square km. surface in 1900. The population that year was estimated at 3.5 million. By 1953, the forest cover was reduced to 50% and the population had risen to 8.1 million. In 1982, only 25% of the surface was left in forests while the population had nearly doubled to 15 million.
Thus, from these figures, one can determine that between 1900 and 1953 the population increased by 4.6 million while the forested area shrank at an average annual rate of about 24,000 hectares per year from some 4.48 million hectares ( 70% of the 64,000 Sq. Km. or 6.4 million Ha.) to 3.2 million Ha. Between 1953 and 1982, the forested area declined from 50% to 25% of the surface at an annual average clearance rate of about 55,170 hectares per year. The targeted annual rate of reforestation is only 8,000 hectares, producing net forest losses in excess of 47,000 Ha per year. ^7
^7 G.M.P. de Silva "Lending Policies Geared to Sustainable Agriculture and Forestry - Case Study of Sri Lanka," Paper prepared for FAO, Rome, 1991.
In Thailand, the situation is equally stark. In the early part of this century, forests covered about 70% of the country's surface. By the 1960s, the portion under forest had fallen to 5060% and to about 40% in the mid-1970s. Today, only about 30% of the forests remain. Initially, Thai forests were clear felled in order to be able to export teak wood. In the decades following 1910, most of the deforestation was brought about by population pressure. The increasing population slashed off forests in order to be able to engage in subsistence agriculture.
"Forest depletion in Thailand occurred because it was privately profitable. Private return to land clearing for commercial and/or subsistence production was sufficient to underwrite a large expansion in the area under cultivation. The expansion was, of course, in part fueled by rapid rates of population growth. Private returns drove clearing in both lowland and upland areas, both for settled and shifting cultivation. Growth in domestic and foreign demand (decreasingly important over time) made timber cutting and the harvesting of forest products privately profitable, especially when public forest resources could be exploited for only nominal fees.... These processes were facilitated by [lax] law enforcement of existing legislation, the exemptions and provisions in the legislation itself [as well as inefficient] administration of forest lands in Thailand."^8
^8 David Feeny, "Agricultural Expansion and Forest Depletion in Thailand, 1900-1975" in John E. Richards and Richard P Tucker, World Deforestation in the Twentieth Century, Duke University Press, 1988, p. 127.
A case study in tropical deforestation: the "push-pull" effect in Dumoga Bone, Indonesia
A Case Study in Tropical Deforestation: The "Push-Pull" Effect in Dumoga Bone, Indonesia
The dynamic interaction between the economic forces that "push" people into forests and those that "pull" them and government policy can best be understood within-the context of an example from Indonesia. While there are literally hundreds of such projects, this one was selected because it clearly illustrates how the three factors interact and cumulatively can produce major environmental impacts and unanticipated human consequences within the framework of a policy that pursued laudable goals of improving the lot of rural people, but that failed to assess the damage that it could produce to the environment.
The Dumoga Valley is in the northern: part of the island of Sulawesi. It has until recently not been subjected to population pressures due to isolation and the high incidence of malaria in the surrounding swamps. The heavy forest cover on the steep hills framing the valley has been able to absorb the monsoon rains, slowly releasing them into streams. Farming in the valley was based mostly on small plots of rain fed rice.
In the 1970s, a government program to create a "pole of growth" in this formerly remote area was launched. A settlement project with a new road and irrigation system was constructed. This was coupled with a government resettlement program to move people from more densely populated regions to this less densely populated valley. This resulted in massive land clearances, not only on the valley floor, but also on the hillsides. The irrigation scheme sponsored by an international bank resulted in the speculative clearing of additional lands in anticipation of higher land prices. The result of these policies was that, within a decade, a substantial part of the forests was cleared, most being burned in situ to open the land to agriculture, principally rice production. These clearances threatened both flooding and water shortages for the irrigation system if they were not halted.
With the land clearances came the inevitable damage to the endemic flora and fauna of the region. The Royal Entomological Society expedition discovered hundreds of previously unknown species.
As a result of a policy providing economic incentives to leave heavily populated areas-deeded land to those who cleared it and government services-this new economic opportunity "pulled" new settlers into the formerly forested region.
Many of the original inhabitants however were "pushed" out of the valley and onto the steep hillsides. Some former residents were persuaded to sell their land when a speculative boom in anticipation of further growth dramatically increased the price of land served by the irrigation project. Finally, when the government intervened to prevent the complete deforestation and destruction of this uniquely biologically rich valley, many of these original inhabitants, already marginalized, were finally evicted as part of a program to protect the remaining biological resources in a newly created park.
The footnote below relates to the material in the above case study. ^9
^9 This account is largely based upon Judith Gradwohl and Russell Greenberg, Saving the Tropical Forests, The Island Press, Washington, D.C. 1988.
<section>4</section>
Chapter III - The economics of environmental degradation
The theory of land degradation
Land degradation
Erosion
Flooding
Reduced economic viability
Intensification of farming practice
A case study: agricultural intensification in a banana export industry
The theory of land degradation
In economic theory, land clearance or land reclamation involves a market failure. The market does not value naturally occurring resources in the production process. Nature's "capital" is not assigned a value by the market. The externalities that lead to private individuals cutting trees and the real economic costs and benefits to the nation of doing so arise because some of the biosphere's products, especially environmental protection functions, are neither produced goods nor do they have clearly defined ownership. As a consequence, they are regarded as free goods.
Destruction of forested areas, wetlands, grasslands and bodies of water arises because of the difference between the discount rate of the individual and the society as a whole. Poor people, who are responsible for a significant share of the losses because of their pressing current need for fuel, fodder, water and land for cultivation--assign a higher discount rate to these resources than does society as a whole.
The private interests of poor people and the social interests of the broader society diverge. The interest of poor, local people in using these lands and water resources is intense, immediate and focused--food, fuel, fodder, crop land, and irrigation water. They will (often unknowingly) incur almost any social cost to permit the immediate exploitation of these environmental resources to sustain their livelihood. The interests of loggers, commercial farmers, builders and others who exploit the forests, range and grasslands and water resources are equally intense, but driven more by immediate profit considerations, not by the need to survive.
Society, as a whole, traditionally, has not placed a monetary value on the benefits derived from these resources, as such benefits are not marketable. When society has recognized these resources as having value, it has assigned a diffused, nonspecific value to them and has not translated that assigned value into market signals, i.e., financial incentives for preservation or disincentives for destruction of these land and water resources embodied in the nation's legal and administrative system. Thus, the intense, focused private interests are permitted to discount the value of environmental resources to the detriment of the longer term benefits to society of investment in these areas because these resources have neither been given market values, nor a legal, enforceable means of translating value into market signals. The Costs of Land Clearance arising from the exploitation of natural resources for financial gain highlight the problems involved all too clearly, since these
resources provide a myriad of functional processes which go beyond the clearly tangible areas of providing food and products for commerce. These functional processes are not merely essential to a sound ecological balance and, therefore, ideologies advocated and imposed on society by conservationists; they are naturally occurring systems, on which the economic wellbeing of societies at local, national and international level depend.
Land degradation
Forested areas are especially sensitive to population pressure and commercial exploitation. At a local level, once the trees are felled, the highly productive potential of that region is immediately threatened, since the quality of the soils is generally poor. It is in the mass of vegetation that the nutrients essential to fast growth are stored so that, if the vegetation cover is removed, organic breakdown is almost immediate and nutrients are quickly washed away. When large gaps in the forest canopy occur, the microclimate of the area is also likely to be changed and the forest floor becomes exposed to direct sunlight. Consequently, both air and soil become dry, to the direct detriment of the land's productivity. Because of these factors, not only has the forest's capacity to provide fuel, food, fodder and shelter been removed, but so has the land's capacity to regenerate them. Degradation is further increased through soil erosion.
Erosion
Around a quarter of a million tons of topsoil are washed from the deforested mountain slopes of Nepal alone each year. On a global scale, about eleven million hectares of arable lands are annually lost through erosion, desertification and toxification; processes which are greatly encouraged by poor resource management. ^10 It is human activity that causes natural erosion rates to increase many times over. Steep slopes are cultivated without terracing, irrigation projects are poorly developed and livestock overgraze grassland.
^10 N. Meyers, The Gaia Atlas of Planet Management, Gaia Books Limited, London, 1985.
Flooding
The socio-economic impact resulting from a decline in productive capacity due to ecological interactions does not remain localized, especially when forest cover is lost in a watershed. The soil's water retention capacity is lost and the release of rainfall becomes erratic; periods of floods followed by droughts become the norm. Farmers in the valley lands of Southern Asia are particularly vulnerable as rivers such as the Ganges, Brahmaputra and the Mekong no longer supply regular amounts of irrigation. Flooding in the Ganges Plain provides a graphic example of the associated costs of deforestation. As the foothill forests are cleared for agriculture, the 500 million people in the valleys become more vulnerable to flooding. During the 1978 monsoon, India suffered losses of $2 billion and hundreds of people drowned. ^11
^11 Ibid.
The impact of watershed degradation even extends into urban areas. In the hinterland of Panama City and Manila, deforestation has caused so much injury to the effective functioning of watersheds that domestic water supplies are being threatened, bringing risk of contamination and pandemics. Once the forests have been clear felled, the reduction or elimination of resultant flooding may require very heavy investment in compensatory measures such as channeling, damming, and diking. These measures to reduce the natural patterns of flooding have the potential to damage replenishment of alluvial soils and recharges of soil moisture. They may also damage the vegetation and wildlife on the floodplain, as well as riverine fisheries.
Reduced economic viability
The erratic flow of rivers coupled with the problems of erosion is effectively undermining the potential of irrigation projects, as is so evident in the Sri Lankan Mahaweli program. Several large dams were constructed for the generation of energy, as well as for irrigation and flood control downstream. However, the tree cover reduction in the relevant watershed areas has jeopardized the steady supply of water to the reservoirs, on which the success of the project is dependant. Projects are further undermined by siltation, a process that not only causes river basins to silt up (thereby reducing storage capacity), but also chokes hydropower dams and adversely affects coastal fisheries and sensitive coral formations.
Intensification of farming practice
Intensification of agriculture takes two forms. Clearly, the most destructive is putting former grass and marsh lands to the plow. These activities have dramatic and far reaching effects, both on biodiversity and on human communities. Animal and plant species may become extinct if deprived of the environment in which they survive. Human communities are affected by the removal of flood control areas and the land itself is subject to erosion and soil depletion, if not carefully managed.
Intensification on existing agricultural lands can and often does produce significant environmental degradation. For example, the conversion of grazing land into crop production often results in the expulsion of the grazers and their livestock into environmentally sensitive areas, in habitat reduction for wildlife species that coexist with grazing stock, in the felling of the remaining trees and the clearing of land for processing facilities. The introduction of machinery often produces a compaction of the soil, reducing its capacity to absorb rain water, thus speeding up runoff. Unless newly cultivated lands are carefully managed, erosion accelerates and the runoffs of agricultural chemicals contaminate waters. Frequently, when grazing lands are denuded of grasses, wind erosion begins. Soil salinization may result from inadequate irrigation practices. The destruction of adjoining areas is necessary to create the required infrastructure to support intensive agriculture
(dams, roads, and plants for processing the product).
Large-scale production and processing of many tropical crops has an impact on the environment with the release of untreated toxic wastes. Tea, sugar, cocoa, coffee, rubber, oil palm and fibers such as cotton, require specialized processing facilities which produce effluent t