<title>A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy which met in Nairobi Kenya in August 1981, adopted the "Nairobi Programme of Action". The Programme provided a framework for concerted action in the development and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy to meet future overall requirements, particularly those of the developing countries. The Conference identified five broad policy areas for action: energy assessment and planning; research, development and demonstration; transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies; information flows; and education and training.
In August 1991, almost exactly ten years after the Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, an Intergovernmental Expert Group Meeting was convened in New York to assess the results of the initiatives undertaken in pursuit of the objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action (by national, regional and international organizations) and to recommend priorities for future actions.
The Expert Group Meeting was organized by the Committee for the Development and Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of Energy, created by the 1981 Nairobi Conference to guide and monitor the implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action. The Committee entrusted FAO with preparation of a review of the activities carried out on fuelwood and charcoal during the past decade. This publication is the output of the FAO review.
Prepared by a team of international experts (H. Stassen, P.J. Svenningsson and M.J. Demante), coordinated by FAO Senior Forestry Officer M A. Trossero, the paper affirms that the policy areas identified by the Nairobi Plan of Action were and continue to be valid; but despite the fact that activities aimed at increased production and improved efficiency in use of wood fuels have received a great deal of support, the results achieved have not met expectations. Many of the activities undertaken in the early 1980s in the context of high international fossil fuel prices proved economically untenable and were abandoned when oil prices started to fall in the second half of the decade. Inadequate institutional structures were also a major constraint to the realization of many wood energy activities at the national level.
The review confirms that fuelwood and charcoal will continue to be the main source of energy for most developing countries during the current decade, and therefore merit renewed attention. Moreover, the report emphasizes the potential of forest biomass as an environmentally sound source of energy in the developed countries. Perhaps most importantly, the report stresses that wood energy challenges cannot be resolved from an energy or forestry point-of-view alone. They require a holistic approach in which activities are tailored to the specific and multi-faceted needs of the region, country or community involved, including socio-economic and environmental aspects.
This paper is recommended to all those involved in activities concerned with wood-based energy as a valuable contribution to the more effective development of the sector.
C.H. Murray
Assistant Director-General
FAO Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi programme of action
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Forest biomass still remains the main source of energy for the poorest sectors of developing countries despite all the efforts of the international community within the framework of the Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA).
The wood energy situation is now better understood after a decade of quite intensive work in this field. However, the political scenario in which the life of the world and the energy situation in particular are evolving looks very different for the decade to come from what it was in the 80's.
The first part of the 80's was characterized by the Iran-Iraq war. At the same time, the "cold war" was the dominant factor of the political scene. Oil prices were high, and there were uncertainties in oil resources and supply, whereas the 90's are starting with relatively low oil prices and abundant oil resources. At the political level, the "cold war" is over and the world is seeking more global cooperation to alleviate the needs and problems of the human beings on the planet.
The NPA has proved to be an excellent framework for the development of activities aimed at tackling the major wood energy problems identified. Most of the problems mentioned in the programme have actually been addressed, and some activities have been undertaken in every one of its specific objectives.
Today, there is no abundance of flourishing energy plantations, nor are there millions of improved cooking stoves, or thousands of gasifiers generating electricity under decentralized units in rural communities; but considerable national and international capabilities have been created and a critical mass of experts have been trained since the NPA.
This situation is in part due to the fact that many of the activities undertaken during the first part of the decade were seriously affected by the reduction of international fossil fuel prices which occurred in the second half of the 80's. Thus, when oil prices started to fall, many of the new and improved fuelwood and charcoal technologies which had been developed became less competitive and were abandoned.
The impact of the wide variety of actions, projects and activities undertaken to improve the wood energy situation in developing countries has been insufficient for the magnitude and the importance of the problems to be solved.
Fuelwood and charcoal are and will remain for the decade to come a major source of energy for developing countries. It is a delicate, complicated and important subject which is part and parcel of the problem of poverty and underdevelopment affecting third world countries.
Wood energy can therefore not be analyzed from an energy or forestry point of view alone. It requires a wider approach in which the solutions should be tailored to cope with the specific needs of the region, country or community involved.
The main achievements within the NPA can be summarized following the main specific areas of action adopted by the programme:
Assessment and planning
The wood energy situation is now better understood thanks to the amount of information and statistics gathered in the last 10 years of continuous operational work. The main protagonists of the wood energy systems, both on the side of supply and demand, are clearly identified and their roles are now better defined than in the past. In addition, forest resources are beginning to be assessed and evaluated in a more systematic way, as prescribed by the NPA.
At the beginning of the 80's, during the "oil crisis", the use of wood fuels by poor people was seen as the cause of deforestation and desertification. It is now recognized that factors other than the fuelwood and charcoal are the chief causes of the deforestation process such as farming, forest fires and industrial use of forests for which it is not always poor people who are responsible. It is also recognized that very often woodfuels are only a by-product, to pay, at least partially, for land clearance operations. Isolated wood energy activities without the proper adjustment of energy or forestry institutions may not therefore be sufficient to tackle the problem of forest destruction.
Unfortunately, the quality of figures and data available for woodfuel production/consumption is too inadequate for the preparation of a detailed sectoral review. The lack of accurate information leads to controversial interpretation of the energy situation in developing countries and hampers the correct identification of solutions to be undertaken. This situation has to be changed in the future.
Considerable progress has been achieved in creating national capabilities. Most of the activities undertaken were focused on strengthening particular areas of work on research, training, education and wood fuel surveys. However, additional efforts are required to create multidisciplinary groups capable of mastering the subject and to incorporate the active participation of NGO's in the planning and implementation of wood energy projects.
Unfortunately, energy policies and planning have not taken due consideration of fuelwood and charcoal aspects and in the cases where they have been incorporated, the actions undertaken and priorities received have not been given the importance they deserve.
Gender analysis and women's participation are other types of subject that have not received the attention required.
Research, development and demonstration
Research on high-yield species and more productive wood energy plantations using indigenous and exotic species is one of the areas which has received a great amount of attention for energy and forest plantations. Today, there is a considerable amount of experience and information in this area of work.
The development of efficient cooking stoves for household use, as well as improved techniques for charcoal making, have also been given considerable attention in the first part of the decade.
Technologies for the use of producer gas as engine fuel for power and electricity generation in rural communities, for the use of ligno-cellulose residues, and for briquette and pellet production, are now, from a technical point of view, well developed. However, the wide dissemination of these technologies is considerably affected by the present low price of fossil fuels.
Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies
Activities in tree plantation using extension, agroforestry and community forestry schemes have received great support during the decade. On the contrary, the management of existing forests, as suggested in the NPA, has not received all the assistance required. The experience gained in this field, particularly with agroforestry and community forestry, is relevant and very important for the implementation of future activities.
The dissemination of improved cooking stoves and charcoal production techniques received a great deal of support. Unfortunately, the results achieved have not met expectations and new approaches for the work in this field have to be developed. Activities on health and environmental aspects of using woodfuel in households should be given more attention.
Very little has been done on the utilization of woodfuels for thermal energy in cottage, medium and large-scale industries and enterprises which constitute one of the major sectors for fuelwood and charcoal consumption. It has been realized that the use of wood fuels in these industrial, commercial and public sectors of developing countries is an important area to be stressed in further activities due to the implications for economic (income generation) and social (job creation) aspects of rural areas.
The substitution of fuelwood and charcoal by alternative fuels using New and Renewable Sources of Energy (NRSE) and fossil fuels, which has in the past been promoted in the poorest sectors of urban areas, does not appear to have had any great impact on the solution of fuelwood and charcoal shortages.
Information flows
This area received considerable support in the first part of the 80's but less in the second half. Even where a good number of bulletins and newsletters as well as various cooperative networks, have been established since NPA, it is still an area which offers great potential for development within the framework of TCDC, North-South and South-South cooperation.
Education and training
Many people from developed and developing countries have taken part in a wide variety of meetings and training activities, not all of which have received the required follow up, but enough to create a critical mass of experts able to deal with wood energy matters. Of course, it is an area which still deserves more attention and efforts for its further development.
Areas for special consideration
Adequate institutional mechanisms at national and international levels were highly recommended in the NPA for the mobilization and coordination of all the resources required for the adoption of sound wood energy policies and their implementation. Unfortunately, the inadequacy of existing institutions has been one of the main constraints in the realization of many wood energy activities. It is now clear that no single institution can cope with wood energy aspects. Considerable work therefore remains to be done in this field.
The Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) constitutes an excellent tool for the sectoral review, assessment and monitoring of wood energy activities. Therefore, a more active participation in TFAP exercises for the identification of wood energy problems and the involvement of different public and private sectors is envisaged to improve the awareness of national and international authorities on fuelwood and charcoal and to develop more coordinated action.
The Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE which was created to guide and monitor the implementation of the NPA, even though it has had an active role during the decade, has proved to be insufficient to achieve the goals set by the Nairobi Conference. Therefore, an ad hoc "Working Group" on Wood Energy is essential within the Committee for the Development and Utilization of NRSE to provide inter-agency coordination, interdisciplinary and cross sectoral programmes and to monitor progress on wood energy matters.
PRIORITY AREAS FOR FUTURE ACTION
Wood fuels will remain the main source of energy for most developing countries for the coming decade. Furthermore, taking into consideration the environmental concern raised by the international community on unbalanced CO[2] emission from the massive combustion of fossil fuels, forest biomass is again called upon to play an important role in reducing the greenhouse effect and acid rain for developed countries.
It is under these two aspects: as an energy source in the poorest sectors of developing countries and as a sound environmental source of energy to fight against greenhouse and acid rain effects in developed countries that forest biomass has to be developed in the future.
Consequently, the MAIN OBJECTIVES of the NEW PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR WOOD ENERGY to be initiated are:
a) to promote concerted action by the international community to assist developing countries in their energy transition, in which their forest biomass plays a key role in fostering their economic development and improving the welfare of their populations.
b) to develop sustainable wood energy systems for developed and developing countries to meet the energy needs of the communities as a way of reducing the unbalanced emission of CO[2] and so fight greenhouse and acid rain effects.
The POLICY AREAS for concerted action in the future can be categorized according to the NPA scheme which is still valid.
<section>3</section>
1. Nairobi Programme of Action for woodfuels
1.1 Background
1.2 Objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action
1.1 Background
The progressively widening gap between the consumption and the supply of energy, as well as the severe economic changes created by large oil price increases, caused serious concern to most countries of the world in the 1970's. The developing countries were particularly hard hit by the high oil prices, and faced great difficulties in obtaining enough energy for their needs. This concern, and the recognition of the finite nature of conventional energy sources, induced many countries to place more emphasis on the utilization of new and renewable sources of energy (NRSE). In view of these conditions and of the prospects that were thought to be made possible by technological advancements, the United Nations convened the Conference on NRSE in Nairobi, from 10 to 21 August 1981. The programme of action adopted by the Conference came to be known as the "Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA) for the development and utilization of NRSE.
Almost ten years have passed since the NPA was adopted. The Committee on the Development and Utilization of NRSE, the most important UN organ established as a result of the Nairobi Conference, decided at its fifth session in March-April 1990 to convene an Intergovernmental Expert Group Meeting, scheduled for August 1991, to assess and review the process of implementation of the NPA, and to make concrete recommendations on future actions in the field of NRSE.
1.2 Objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action
1.2.1 General objectives
A discussion of the implementation of the NPA has to be based on what was actually decided at the time of the Nairobi Conference as summarized in the NPA, and various technical papers presented at the conference. A general outline of the NPA is given below, using the words of the NPA itself.
The fundamental objective of the NPA is to promote concerted action in the context of the energy transition, the development and utilization of NRSE with a view to help meet future overall requirements, particularly those of developing countries.
The specific objectives are as follows:
(a) To strengthen international cooperation for the promotion and intensification of research and development of technologies related to NRSE: to facilitate the transfer and adaptation of technology from developed to developing countries, and the exchange of technology among developing countries;
(b) to stimulate the mobilization of additional and adequate financial resources from developed countries, international financial institutions and other international organizations, the private sector, etc.;
(c) to provide, through international cooperative efforts, for the exchange of information and manpower training, particularly in the developing countries;
(d) to provide and give support to:
- the attainment of national objectives and priorities established by developing countries in the field of NRSE, related to the strengthening of their national capabilities and institutional infrastructures, for the effective incorporation of NRSE into national policy and planning processes;
- the drawing up and implementation of NRSE programmes and projects in the context of overall energy plans by all countries, particularly by developing countries;
(e) to provide, as requested and as appropriate, assistance and support for cooperative efforts among developing countries;
(f) to specify measures to increase international awareness of the advantages, potential and economic viability of NRSE.
In order to achieve the above listed objectives, the conference identified five broad policy areas for concerted action with the support of the international community according to national plans and priorities. The policy areas are as follows:
(a) energy assessment and planning;
(b) research, development and demonstration;
(c) transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies;
(d) information flows;
(e) education and training.
1.2.2 Specific actions on fuelwood and charcoal
With reference to fuelwood and charcoal, the following specific actions were identified:
(a) Assessment and planning:
Assess and evaluate forest resources in order to estimate their present and future sustainable yield of fuelwood to identify deficit areas and areas in which reafforestation is both urgent and practicable.
(b) Research, development and demonstration:
Intensify and/or establish basic and applied research on more productive species;
Support and promote work aimed at improving the efficiency of stoves and cooking utensils, develop low-cost stoves and promote their widespread use, taking into account social and cultural acceptability;
Improve the preprocessing of fuels, including those presently wasted such as twigs, branches and dry leaves, for use in direct combustion and other processes and improve the conversion efficiency of charcoal making;
Develop promising fuelwood and charcoal substitutes or supplements utilizing other NRSE.
(c) Transfer, adaptation and application of mature technologies:
Improve and/or establish forest management practices;
Increase and/or establish reforestation and afforestation programmes with selected and tested species;
Promote and support programmes, projects and activities to establish large-scale plantations, including afforestation in deficit areas and wood lots, establish distribution, control and pricing policies and improve conversion and utilization technologies (charcoal production, gasification, kilns, ovens, etc.).
<section>4</section>
2. Wood energy situation
2.1 The general energy situation
2.2 Regional and national fuelwood situation
2.3 Rural/urban fuelwood and charcoal supply/demand
2.4 The environmental aspects
2.5 Social, economic and cultural considerations
The oil crisis in the seventies awakened interest in NRSE globally. The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries were more concerned initially about energy security, but recently more about environmental considerations, whereas energy shortage and its socio-economic and environmental repercussions were the issues of prime concern for the developing countries. This interest has continued over the years, marked by various activities to develop and apply NRSE. In this chapter, the energy situation in general, and in particular, regarding fuelwood and charcoal in the developing countries in the last decade, 1980-1990, is described.
Then the environmental, socio-economic and cultural aspects of the situation are discussed. These discussions are aimed at following the changes that have occurred in the situation and the way they are perceived, and thereby setting the stage for the review of the activities of donor organizations in the next chapter.
2.1 The general energy situation
By the beginning of the decade, during the second energy crisis, the total energy consumption of the developing countries (including China) was about 1 740 million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE), which was 24% of the total world consumption (Figure 1). The growth rate of the commercial energy consumption decreased sharply from 7.8% between 1965-1980 to 4.6% between 1980-1988 for the low-and middle-income countries (WB, 1990). Thus by the end of the last decade, the energy consumption of the developing countries showed only a marginal increase to 2 560 MTOE - 29% of world total - as against the dramatic increases projected in 1981. The growth rate in the energy consumption of the OECD countries also decreased: from 3.0% between 1965-1980 to 1.0 % between 1980-1988. The per capita energy consumption of the developing countries was generally low compared to that of the OECD countries. This can of course be explained by the low GNP per capita of the former countries; in
general, the energy consumption of countries is linearly correlated with their per capita GNP. Figure 1 also shows another distinguishing feature of energy consumption in developing countries: only these regions of the world show considerable reliance on forms of energy other than conventional (commercial) energy; 20% of the energy needs of the developing countries in 1990 were met by traditional, erroneously called noncommercial energy sources, mostly woodfuels.
The energy consumption of developing countries in 1988 is shown in Figure 2 by region and energy type. Sub-Saharan Africa consumed the least total energy, 120 MTOE, whereas Asia consumed the most, 1 350 MTOE. Europe, the Middle-East and North Africa (EMENA) consumed 650 MTOE and Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) consumed 700 MTOE. The available estimates on consumption of traditional fuels, such as fuelwood and charcoal, crop residues and animal waste indicate that they constitute 60% of the total energy consumption in Africa (WB, 1989), 40% in Asia (ADB, 1989),10% in EMENA and 30% in LAC (PFE, 1989) (Figure 2). In many of the individual countries, the proportion of traditional energy consumption is much higher.
Figure 1. World Energy Consumption in 1980 and 1990. Source: Data from CEC, 1990
The drop in energy consumption growth rate of the developing countries is due to a combination of factors, the most important being the increase in oil prices. Oil prices increased nearly 10 times in the period 1970 to 1981. This presented different kinds of problems to individual developing countries. The oil exporting countries were faced with the problem of managing their huge additional resources well enough to stimulate desired growth which many of them failed to achieve. The oil importing countries on the other hand faced acute financial difficulties with increased import bills for oil, a situation that caused considerable deterioration in their balance of payments situation and contributed to heavy debt burdens in subsequent years. The economic situation of most of the developing countries greatly worsened in the last decade with many of them plunging into recession. This recession is marked by weak growth in the productive sector, poor export performance, mounting
debt, deteriorating social conditions, environmental degradation and the increasing decline in institutional capacity (WB, 1989), all of which contribute to decreased energy consumption growth rates. The energy problems of these countries must therefore always be seen against this socio-economic background.
Nonetheless, some of the developing countries fared better, and some much better, than the grim picture painted so far. Notable among these are some of the Asian countries that have achieved considerable economic growth. This is reflected in their energy consumption patterns (see next section for information on individual countries) by the doubling of per capita energy consumption for the Asian region as a whole from 0.225 TOE in 1973 to 0.408 TOE in 1987. In the 1970s the region experienced high energy costs with high energy consumption (annual growth rate: 7.3 %) against a moderate economic growth of 5.3 % on the average. The region performed differently during the second oil shock period since 1979/80, experiencing low energy consumption growth (5.0%) against high economic growth of 6.7%. However, with lower energy costs after 1985, the region has again been experiencing increased energy consumption (6.2%) with a high economic growth of 7.5% (ADB, 1989).
Figure 2. Regional Energy Consumption in Developing Countries in 1988. Source: Data on commercial energy (excluding woodfuels), World Bank 1990; traditional energy (woodfuel and biomass) data are from various sources.
2.2 Regional and national fuelwood situation
The fuelwood situation regarding supply and demand at the beginning of the 1980s decade was comprehensively reviewed by FAO which presented the results in a map (FAO, 1981), as a contribution to the UN Conference on NRSE, Nairobi, 1981. A more detailed report was later prepared on the subject (FAO, 1983).
The FAO report described the fuelwood situation in the developing countries. In 1980, of the 2 000 million people, (75% of the population of the developing countries) who depended on fuelwood, 100 million (5%3 were living in a situation of acute shortage and were unable to obtain the adequate fuelwood to meet their minimum energy requirements. More than half of these people - 1 050 million were in a deficit situation and could provide for their minimum energy requirements only by over-cutting of the wood resources which was to lead to their depletion with disastrous ecological, environmental and socioeconomic consequences. Sixty-three out of 95 developing countries were faced with inadequate supplies of fuelwood (WRI, 1985).
Another major study that dealt with the fuelwood situation around 1980/81 period was the energy assessment carried out by the World Bank and UNDP for sixty developing countries. The results of the study for thirty countries were summarized in a report (ESMAP, 1984) and the supply/demand data for fuelwood and charcoal and their proportion in total energy mix are presented in Table 1.
The data demonstrate the enormous importance of fuelwood on a regional and country basis, of the 30 countries listed, 28 relied heavily on fuelwood. In 19 countries, fuelwood contributed 50 to 95 % of the total energy, and in 9 of the countries between 20 and 50% of the total used. In many other countries not included in the survey, fuelwood also made up a high proportion of total energy used; for example, 32% in India, 30% in Thailand, and 40% in the Philippines. Even in countries that were net exporters of fossil fuel, fuelwood still made up a significant proportion of the total energy used: in Bolivia, 42 %; Indonesia, 34 %; Nigeria, 59 % and Peru, 26 %. (Gregersen et al., 1989). Again, with this body of information, deficit situations were predicted for a number of countries.
It was quickly perceived by the international aid community that this was another energy crisis: the fuelwood crisis. There was response to the urgent needs in the way of aid activities to address the problems. The individual developing countries were initially sluggish in responding to the problem because, unlike the oil crisis, the problem did not immediately ring warning bells in the form of balance of payment deficits and fuel shortages affecting the vital arteries of transport and industry (Munslow, 1988). The rural people themselves did not perceive the problem then and have not done so to date.
The FAO analysis is regarded to have underestimated the woody biomass material obtainable around the villages. It was demonstrated that if the wood obtainable from fallow land and other factors were considered, a wood fuel deficit would not be deduced for most rural areas (Foley, 1987). It is now realized that there was in fact no woodfuel crisis, although there are clear problems of deforestation and desertification caused chiefly by other activities such as farming, grazing, forest fires, industries, etc. of which woodfuels are a by-product used to pay, at least partially, for land clearance operations.
The FAO survey was a good starting point but more studies need to be carried out to really determine the fuelwood position in various localities. This is why no effort is made in this document to conduct a woodfuel balance survey, in order to see the changes that have occurred over the years in the deficit situation pointed out earlier. Instead, it has been decided to merely look at the way in which regions and individual developing countries have progressed with respect to woodfuel resources, supply and demand.
The FAO woodfuel supply statistics (FAO, 1991) over the years have suffered from a number of drawbacks. Nonetheless, they should give an idea, or at least an order of magnitude, of the minimum available woodfuel supply potentials. The data for the different regions are given in Figure 3. Fuelwood production by developing countries was over 80 % of the total world supply throughout the decade. Both developing country and world production decreased only slightly during the middle of the decade, but are now rising at a low growth rate.
Fuelwood and charcoal demand and consumption data are scanty. The few scattered data available have been obtained from different types of studies: national energy balances, national household expenditure surveys, national household energy surveys and local micro surveys (Leach and Gowen, 1987). The data are of varying reliability and leave scope for improvement. The readily available data are tabulated in Table 1 for the thirty countries studied by World Bank/UNDP around 1979 to 1980. More recent data are also included in the table.
There is diversity in the energy consumption patterns of the countries. Therefore, for a meaningful analysis, it is useful to classify the countries on the basis of relevant energy and energy mix indicators. The indicators selected are the per capita energy consumption, and the percentage of biomass consumption in the energy mix. In Table 1 the countries have been arranged according to increasing per capita total energy consumption and four main categories may be discerned. These are the low and high energy consumers which consume less and more than 600 kgoe per capita respectively, and under these categories are the high and low biomass consumers which consume more and less than 50% biomass respectively. The countries in the various categories are listed in Table 2 according to region and for 1979-1982 and 1987.
Most of the biomass requirements of all the countries were met by fuelwood and charcoal except a few countries, notably Ethiopia, which depended more on other forms of biomass such as dung. The majority of the countries