<title>Key aspects of strategies for the sustainable development of drylands</title>
<section>1</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
Preface
The drylands of the world have for long been recognized as requiring special attention. They occupy at least 20 million square kilometres of the developing world and support, often in an impoverished state, nearly half a billion pastoralists and small farmers, who attempt to wrest a livelihood from these fragile environments.
The many issues involved in drylands development were examined by the FAO Drylands Development Working Group, and a number of key aspects, which are summarized in this document, were identified. This exercise drew upon a number of earlier initiatives by FAO, of which two in particular deserve mention. In 1987 a drylands development paper was prepared for the FAO Committee on Agriculture, and in 1989 an International Cooperative Programme Framework for Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development was launched by FAO. The publication of this work is timely, as the United Nations Conference for the Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro during 1992 gave high priority to the development of these areas.
The task of coordinating the preparation of this document was delegated to the Farm Management and Production Economics Service in FAO. The actual drafting of this document was undertaken by Messrs. D. J. Pratt and G. Knowles, who faced the challenge of synthesizing the rich and diverse experience of drylands development in different parts of the world.
This document makes available to developing nations a synthesis of the key aspects of strategies for sustainable development of dryland areas. This summary is intended to be used as a checklist when assessing the adequacy of existing strategies, or during the formulation of new strategies. It should be recognized, however, that piecemeal, uncoordinated development actions have little chance of alleviating poverty and controlling natural resource degradation in these areas. The sustainable development of the drylands demands, instead, concerted and systematic effort along the lines advocated in this document.
H de Haen
Assistant Director General
Agriculture Department
Executive summary
The objectives of this document are to bring to bear on the drylands of the world the attention and the inputs needed to replace increasing degradation and deprivation with more sustainable and secure forms of land and resource utilization. The drylands, defined as those areas with fewer than 120 growing days per year, extend over at /east 20 million square kilometres and are inhabited by a population which approaches 500 million.
This summary of the key aspects of a strategy is derived from the policy paper 'Improving Productivity of Dryland Areas' presented to the FAO Committee on Agriculture during 1987, and is a further step in elaborating the 'Long-Term Strategy for the Food and Agriculture Sector' presented at the FAO Conference during 1989.
This document is intended to guide national bodies in the assessment and revision of strategies for the sustainable development of drylands. Only at the national and sub-national levels can strategies be formulated which are appropriate to local circumstances and that focus inputs and actions in an effective way to safeguard natural resources and help alleviate poverty.
This approach emphasizes institutional reform before technological solutions. The evidence shows that, in most instances, technology alone cannot control dryland degradation - improved management and institutions are essential features of successful dryland development.
The key aspects, or components, of improved drylands development strategies are as follows:
Preconditions for Development
* Relief of population pressure
* Political commitment
* Marketing and rural infrastructure
Organization and Targeting of Development
* Organizational and staff efficiency
* Community participation
* Security of tenure
* Research
* Development planning
Food Production and Range Resource Management
* Drought and food security
* Soil and water conservation
* Livestock and range management
* Fuel and agro-forestry
These key aspects are not listed in order of priority but according to extent of applicability. For instance, range management may appear low on the list, considering that less than 10 per cent of the drylands are cropped. However, a large part of rangelands is extremely arid, and no more than 10 per cent of the total dryland population are pastoralists. It is for national authorities to establish priorities among these elements, whilst bearing in mind that all aspects on the above list are potentially important and that a systematic approach is essential.
A central precondition for development is the assignment of a high priority to drylands improvement, in keeping with the prevalence of poverty and the extent of natural resource degradation in these areas. The opportunity cost of the redeployment of resources, in terms of the other zones and sectors that thereby receive less attention, must be weighed against the cost of not taking action - of increasing food aid, declining productivity, desert encroachment and even social and political unrest.
The most costly precondition for drylands development is undoubtedly the provision of the rural infrastructure which is required to ensure the delivery of the necessary inputs and services. Even with cost-effective designs, substantial external support may be needed for the establishment of this infrastructure. The relief of population pressure on natural resources is the remaining precondition for the development of most drylands, which should be considered in the context of national plans for other zones and sectors. If action to reduce population pressure on dryland resources is not taken now, the ultimate cost will be much higher and the effectiveness of other development inputs will be limited and shortlived.
The key aspects relating to the organization and targeting of development do not necessarily require heavy investment, although an overall expansion of the drylands development effort may well require additional resources. The general principles which should guide agricultural development in favourable areas also apply to development efforts in the drylands such as focusing on the needs Of specific areas and communities, operating a unified extension service, ensuring community participation, giving research a farming systems perspective and designing incremental and flexible development programmes - and may even save money. Moreover, governments should not underestimate how much can be accomplished by the effective leadership and motivation of existing institutions.
Improved development planning, starting with a national strategy for drylands development and focusing thereafter on specific zones and communities, is essential. Adequate time must be allowed for securing effective participation of local communities in the planning process. Sound planning also requires improved information and early warning systems. Another key aspect of a strategy is ensuring appropriate tenure - particularly adequate security - for small-holders and pastoralists. The strengthening of dryland agricultural research, with a farming systems research and development approach, is a final aspect of the organization and targeting of dryland development activities. The costs of these elements will depend on the overall time frame and scope of the drylands development strategy.
More specific inputs to food production and range resource management require, for full effectiveness, prior action in the fields already noted. First priority needs to be given to inputs that arrest land degradation and improve food security. This implies more than the better organization of food aid and the strengthening of drought strategies. It also calls for adaptive research and extension related to livestock, range and crops, including agroforestry, which combine efficiency of water use with other attributes needed for present and future food security, such as soil and water conservation and the provision of fuel and fodder.
Improvement in pastoral areas requires a long-term perspective and coordinated, phased inputs. There is little scope for introducing more productive grazing techniques until an effective grazing management system has been established with local pastoralists; and such new techniques may be of little value in the absence of complimentary marketing and veterinary services. Long-term research and development plans are needed which take into account the certainty, but unpredictability, of both good seasons and droughts. Mobility has been a fundamental necessity for survive/ in many range/ends, and thus sedentarization requires careful planning if it is not to accentuate deprivation and land degradation.
The responsibility for action rests mainly with national authorities, though active community participation should be sought in planning, managing and implementing development actions. In formulating and implementing dry/ends development strategies, authorities need to ensure complementarity with development strategies for other zones and sectors. Recognizing the need for balanced development, plans for non-dry/and areas and nonagricultural sectors should take into account the inhabitants of the drylands; and, finally, it is maintained that the drylands warrant substantially more attention than they have normally received in the past.
Introduction
The present document reflects concern for the pressures being placed on the drylands of the world--and particularly for the resulting human and environmental degradation -- and a felt need for a framework to prioritize and coordinate action by national and international authorities. The characteristics of the drylands are described more fully in the Annex, but in principle they are considered to be those lands with less than 120 growing days per year.
A succession of reviews of needs, issues and development experience in the drylands has been produced over the past 20 years. FAO has contributed to this process from the outset, by participating in the formulation of UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere programme and later in UNEP's desertification conference ( 1 977), and by organizing the 1974 consultations and subsequent programme on the Ecological Management of Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands (EMASAR). More recently, following reviews of development experience by the World Bank and others, FAO placed before its Committee on Agriculture (COAG) during 1987 a policy paper on 'Improving Productivity of Dryland Areas'. This COAG paper is reasonably comprehensive and was taken as the starting point for this examination of dryland development experience.
The present document recognizes the constraints and development actions identified in the COAG paper, and identifies 12 key aspects of strategies, grouped in three categories, for the sustainable development of drylands. With the exception of identifying several preconditions for development, priorities are not indicated among the key aspects since their relative importance will depend on country circumstances and ongoing programmes. Instead of prejudging priorities, it is considered more useful to indicate the who and how of actions. Also, the proposed action areas are discussed in terms of their relevance to international agencies, regional bodies, national authorities and local entities.
Although the document builds upon the COAG paper, it is also one step in the elaboration of the 'Long-Term Strategy for the Food and Agriculture Sector' which was considered at the FAO Conference during 1989. This Conference document recognized the different issues and needs of high and low potential lands. In as much as low potential lands are predominantly drylands, the present document addresses the needs of the low potential lands. The emphasis is placed on the agricultural sector, but with concern also for identifying points of contact and inter-dependencies with other sectors.
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
<section>2</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
Scope and objectives
These key aspects of dryland development strategies are intended to guide and stimulate sustainable agricultural and rural development in the drylands of the world, particularly in areas where people are poor and land is degraded. The aim of such strategies is to encourage forms of land use and resource utilization that are both sustainable and helpful in the short-term in alleviating poverty and arresting or reversing processes of land degradation.
Specifically, the presentation of these key aspects of dryland development strategies seeks to improve the effectiveness of development, by removing political and organizational constraints, providing a social and economic environment conducive to development, improving community participation and delivery systems, and providing the data and understanding necessary for effective development planning. There is emphasis on food crops and livestock production, and on other means of improving food security, but with attention also to resource management and to conserving the ecological and genetic diversity of remaining natural ecosystems.
Drylands are chosen for attention because of the low level of priority and inputs that these areas generally receive in relation to their size, population and need. In order to focus on the main areas of need, both commercial ranching and major irrigation schemes are not considered. This is not to imply that such enterprises are to be excluded from drylands development, but that opportunities for new schemes are limited and that requirements for their development are documented elsewhere. Indeed, the approach followed in this document assumes that development will be planned within a national framework that ensures complementary development between areas and enterprises. Certainly carefully planned irrigation schemes can contribute greatly to development in neighbouring drylands.
This document is intended for use by governments and international organizations, to guide and encourage them in the preparation of their strategies for drylands development. The target is principally developing countries, where the need is greatest, but other drylands are not excluded. Countries with diverse conditions may find it necessary to produce distinct though complementary regional strategies for different areas in order to reflect the specific development needs of different areas.
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
<section>3</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
Key aspects
Preconditions for development
Organization and targeting of development
Farm production and range resource management
The key aspects of dryland development strategies which are described here cover the principal elements that need to be addressed when assessing or formulating strategies for these areas. Such strategies should meet the immediate needs of dryland populations, especially in respect of poverty alleviation, and secure longer term improvement in the management of cropland and rangeland resources. Each key aspect needs to be considered to ascertain its importance for the particular setting, and if relevant, to ensure that it will be addressed in the dryland development strategy or within other national strategies. It should be noted that training and manpower development is not given the status of a separate element, but should be considered where relevant under each key aspect.
The key aspects are grouped in three categories. The preconditions for development are especially important to dryland development and so are explicitly stated. Their importance lies in the fact that drylands, despite degradation and difficult living conditions, are often low on the scale of political priorities. This may not apply in countries that are wholly or mainly dryland, but elsewhere dryland development needs seldom determine national policies and priorities; more usually, drylands are considered problem areas, warranting a small share of social services and agricultural budgets and rising on the political agenda only at times of famine or civil strife.
The second group of key aspects relates to the organization and targeting of development, and again addresses issues that are not unique to drylands. However, they assume specific forms in the drylands context. The emphasis throughout is on targeting designated areas and communities. This involves change both in normal government procedures and organization, and in project and programme design, substituting locally-targeted incremental development for ambitious and fixed term projects. Central to the whole theme is community participation in the development process, and the gathering of adequate information for sound development planning.
The components grouped under farm production and range resource management relate specifically to drylands and cover issues and inputs arising from the seasonality, fragility and insecurity of that environment. The focus lies on the resource base and technical interventions to improve and sustain farm and range productivity, within the context of the institutional improvements identified above. These aspects could be expanded to cover nonagricultural sectors -- including wildlife conservation and tourism, mineral exploitation and industrial development -- but these are considered too specialized for inclusion here. They do, however, offer local employment opportunities (among other benefits) and so can contribute to relieving pressure on drylands as well as generating income. Certainly such dryland strategies needs to link with those for other areas and sectors.
Preconditions for development
Relief of Population Pressure
Rapid population growth in recent decades has overloaded the drylands beyond their capacity, even under improved agriculture. Population growth has a fundamental bearing on food and agriculture world-wide and, in most developing countries, sustainable agriculture will only be feasible if population pressure on natural resources is reduced. Each area of land under a subsistence form of land use has a maximum population support capacity, and if that capacity is exceeded then the land is over-exploited and degradation results. In the case of the drylands, where the environment is especially fragile, the human support capacity is low and the chances of over-exploitation are greater.
Unless there is commitment to reducing population growth, at both government and community level, then any strategies implemented to alleviate poverty and increase production will only be short-term and unsustainable, leading ultimately to further degradation of resources by pressure of agriculture and increasing livestock numbers.
Family planning may not always be immediately acceptable and, even where it is, it may take years for the effects to be substantially realized. Nonetheless, it has a central role in reducing the future difficulties of the drylands. It is therefore a matter of urgency that governments accelerate the implementation of national family planning programmes. Both commitment and sensitivity are needed to overcome the array of religious, social and technical obstacles that face effective family planning and to design programmes adapted to local conditions. In the drylands, where families are often remote from services and dependent on a large family labour force, it may well be essential to link rural services for family planning to health clinics and dispensaries.
The provision of health and education services is generally inadequate in the drylands, and especially so for pastoral populations because of their low population density and mobility. This general deficiency in health, education and social services warrants early attention, with consideration in pastoral areas for special arrangements such as mobile health clinics and schools (even if such mobility incurs extra expense). The education of children will encourage emigration to higher potential areas. Even basic adult education can be expected to facilitate adoption of improved agricultural practices; and, in the case of women, to lower the risk of infant mortality.
Resettlement, on the other hand, facilitates the provision of such services at reasonable cost, but is not always easy to implement. Few countries have vacant land readily available, so resettlement often depends on irrigation development. Nonetheless, where over-population is acute there may be no alternative to resettlement, and the option certainly needs careful study as an integral part of national development planning.
The main responsibility for programmes addressing the population issue rests with national authorities. However, local community participation is essential for successful implementation. The international community can contribute significantly with advisory and material support.
Political Commitment
A lack of political commitment to rural development, particularly to drylands, has sometimes been observed. Many governments give first priority to national defence and security, or to political reform or basic infrastructure, and these are exclusively national decisions. Nevertheless, in situations where the majority of a country's population are subsistence farmers, national security and social amenity have little meaning if the rural population is not able to produce the food it needs to survive. Thus, the political attention and the resources given to agriculture and land use management in the drylands should be proportionate to the developmental problems located in these areas.
Political will is a prerequisite. If the development of dryland areas is a high priority, then the formulation and implementation of an effective development strategy if feasible; and the key aspects of dryland development enumerated below become relevant. Without the requisite political will to develop dryland areas, progress is impossible and the prospect is one of worsening resource degradation and human deprivation. An essential corollary is that political will must be translated into enabling legislation and the provision of necessary resources. It is also fundamentally important that developments initiated should be sustainable, not only ecologically but organizationally, socially and financially.
Adequate planning data are needed to guide political decisions. There are few opportunities for quick-fix solutions in the development of drylands and, although such prospects have political appeal, politicians should ensure that decisions are taken only after adequate planning based on sufficient reliable data. Time and resources need to be given to planning, as well as to policy formulation and the implementation of development.
Legislation, as well as resources, may be needed to translate political decision into action. Sometimes the need is over-stated -- and lack of legislation can be more an excuse than a reason for inactivity at ground level--but at least basic land use legislation is required to limit destructive practices and to enable the establishment of local organizations with legal powers and responsibilities for the management of land and other resources.
Responsibility for action lies with national authorities. International agencies can provide advice and assistance for improving land use data and planning capacity.
Marketing and Rural Infrastructure
Inappropriate price policy, particularly for animal products, and lack of effective input and marketing services are major constraints to improving productivity of drylands. There has been, of course, considerable attention to 'getting prices right' during the past decade of structural adjustment in many developing countries. This issue assumes special significance in the drylands which often suffer high transportation and servicing costs, yet have often lacked the political influence to attract substantial subsidies.
The terms of trade for dryland products are a major determinant of production levels. In principle, policies should be adopted which encourage the free operation of agricultural input and product markets in order to provide appropriate incentives to producers and to encourage investment in farm and range improvement. In some countries this implies finding other means for supporting the urban poor than through cheapfood policies which tax dryland producers. At the same time, care is needed not to subsidize dryland producers and thereby to encourage the extension of cropping into marginal areas where it cannot be sustained or, through subsidized animal feed or water, the maintenance of excessive livestock numbers that are destructive of rangeland.
Efficient input and product markets are important but they are only one factor in a package including research, extension and other essential rural services. Among essential services are storage, marketing and market information, transport and supplies of inputs as well as credit and banking facilities. The support to the development of rural service centres is one option in the process of improvement of the drylands.
Action required is as follows:
* Efficiently functioning agricultural input and product markets should be seen as a means of improving the performance of the agriculture sector, without encouraging deleterious land use.
* Rural service centres are often an important component of rural development, and in the drylands, where population is generally widely dispersed, they assume even greater importance. The provision of centres might include:
* facilities for the off-take and marketing of crops and livestock, including grain stores and livestock holding grounds;
* access to these facilities assured by a programme of upgrading or construction of roads;
* input services for the supply of fertilizers, seed, pesticides and stock medicines, and for the servicing of transport and water supply points;
* banking and rural credit facilities which recognize the generally weak economic position and special needs of producers; and
* mobile units, where economic, to ensure that essential services are available in outlying areas.
* Consideration should be given to consolidating at these service centres all appropriate health and extension services and involving the communities in their design and management.
* Agricultural cooperatives and other forms of local farmers' and pastoralists' organizations play an important role in increasing local participation in the development process. Governments should ensure that training and guidance in the formative stages are freely and readily available, and that access to finance is assured. Where such organizations exist, they should be encouraged to take management responsibility for the operation of rural service centres.
* High priority should be given to securing donor funding and private investment for the establishment of rural service centres, including commercial services such as banking, marketing and supply services. The location of such centres should take into account the tendency for the concentration of human and animal populations to lead to degradation in the vicinity of the centres.
Main responsibility lies with national governments, with substantial involvement by local communities in identifying local needs and in ensuring successful implementation of the initiatives taken. International donor assistance will be necessary in funding of storage, markets and access, but the private sector should also be encouraged to undertake at least some of these ventures.
Organization and targeting of development
Organizational and Staff Efficiency
One constraint to dryland development is the lack of technical and administrative staff to ensure changes in drylands, and poor reward systems, living conditions and career prospects in rural areas. Some major agencies have noted the existence of a wider and deeper malaise in public administration than simply a shortage of trained staff. In essence, the problem is that many institutions and staff are ineffective, due variously to imprecise mandates, counter-productive staffing procedures and inadequate guidance, facilities and motivation. The problem is magnified in drylands in so far as postings in these areas are often regarded as punishment stations.
Actions required, in total or in part depending on country or organizational circumstances, are as follows:
* Government departments should be organized to ensure a comprehensive service appropriate to each production zone. Adequate status for drylands development will require the establishment of a drylands department or an authoritative policy and coordinating body to service this area. Departmental mandates should be defined in accordance with expected functions and results.
* Rural service centres should be maintained at the local or community level in order to provide a focal source of advice and inputs.
* Staffing policy and conditions of service should attract and retain quality staff in rural areas as well as at headquarters, and should reward merit and assist non-productive staff to leave the service. Arrangements should be considered to allow technical staff to be seconded to the service of local organizations.
* Accountability should be introduced at all levels in the service. Departmental heads should be provided with training in leadership and field staff with training in rural appraisal and farming systems analysis. Universities and other institutes of higher learning (particularly those concerned with public administration and the agricultural sciences) should be encouraged to provide a grounding in systems research and development approaches.
Main responsibility in the areas listed rests with national authorities, though international agencies and bilateral and other donors can help in providing organization and management expertise and training courses.
Community Participation
It is essential to involve the community and local leadership in designing and maintaining development efforts. In reality, it is participation in the development process that is required, not just consultation; it requires a positive approach to building farmers' groups and community organizations that can exercise increasing influence on land management and development.
Action required is as follows:
* Local bodies need to be identified or occasionally created, and supported, which are representative of the people at the level at which development is to be implemented. These are required as points of contact in development planning and as recipient bodies and partners in development, within which management capability and responsibility can be fostered.
* The bodies so identified or created should be involved from the outset in dialogue and decision-making regarding the whole of the development process. As great a degree of management responsibility as is possible should be vested in the local bodies concerned, and special efforts should be made to give training in required management skills to individuals nominated by the community, as well as ensuring a broad level of understanding throughout the community concerning the development envisaged. A position of trust and cooperation needs to be established between local bodies and government representatives.
Main responsibility for initiating community participation in the development process rests with national authorities, but non-governmental organizations can assist with implementation. Other agencies can help by making available to national authorities external experience in the formation of corporate organizations at the local level. The precise nature of these organizations will vary between pastoral and agricultural situations, and according to the focus of development and the political system to which the country concerned adheres.
Security of Tenure
A lack of security of land tenure is a constraint which calls for policy decisions. Access to land and other resources is a major primary determinant of rural incomes and welfare, and those who do not have security of land tenure are deprived both of security of subsistence and of opportunity to improve their lot. Normally adequate security of tenure implies allocation (or re-allocation) of land under government licence or title. This also has the advantage of allowing government to oversee and encourage better land management by the user.
Land redistribution and tena