<section>a</section>
contents next
Preface
Nutrition education is an essential factor for the improvement of the nutritional status and people's wellbeing. The International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), jointly organized by FAO and WHO in December 1992 with the participation of 159 countries has again recommended nutrition education as a priority. This Guide is written as a methodological and practical tool for the promotion and development of nutrition education particularly in developing countries.
The Guide was prepared by Michel Andrien, a nutrition education specialist, jointly with two FAO divisions, the Food Policy and Nutrition Division, Nutrition Programmes Service, and the Information Division, Development Support Communication Branch. This collaboration has proved to be invaluable for the development of this Guide and enunciated the fact that in the field of nutrition education the role of nutritionists and communicators are not only complimentary but cannot be separated.
The contribution of many researchers and field workers in nutrition education in developing countries has been valuable in building the methodology suggested in the book. We would particularly like to mention the Nutrition Education Network in Africa for their contribution and the meeting of experts on nutrition education held in FAO in 1991 for their recommendations. Also a number of practical experiences in nutrition education carried out throughout the world have allowed us to illustrate the guide with concrete examples.
The Guide is aimed at all those involved in planning and implementation of activities of nutrition education and communication. They are the nutritionists, the communicators, the technicians of health, agriculture and education, all concerned with the subject and often working in teams to develop programmes in nutrition education at local and national level.
A systematic description of planning an intervention programme in social communication in nutrition is provided in the Guide.
In each chapter, a theoretical component is presented along with many examples of field activities. Technical files detailing a know how for implementing a method is given. The idea is to provide the users with the technical skills and practical examples so that all of them will find some useful information for their work according to their responsibility. A selected bibliography is also provided.
Nutrition education is currently the matter of an intense methodological debate and is in a state of perpetual evolution and all the keys for a successful programme have not yet found. This is the first edition of this guide. We plan to revise it after a period of its use in the light of experience gained. We would appreciate your comments and suggestions on the usefulness of the guide and your concrete proposals for its improvement.
contents next
<title>Social communication in nutrition: A methodology for intervention</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
Part I: Overview
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 A global approach to nutrition education
There has been a complete revision of the concepts, strategies and methods of nutrition education in the 1 980's.
Typically, nutrition education consisted of little more than "talks" given at health centers. Today, this approach is considered largely ineffective unless it is fully integrated into a broader program of nutrition education with well-defined strategies for communication.
The reasons for failure of "conventional" nutrition education have been the subject of numerous in-depth analyses. The "conventional" approach is limited because it excludes analysis of the causes of malnutrition, it makes use of only one isolated channel of communication (an interpersonal channel between the health worker and the population) and ineffective educational methods. It is based on weak unsupported theories of "behavioural psychology".
During the last two decades, interdisciplinary teams in collaboration with persons involved in nutrition education field activities have developed new approaches to nutrition education. The approach presented in this manual is based on work carried out by RENA, a network for nutrition education in Africa. The approach makes use of certain elements of a theoretical framework from the literature.
First, it is necessary to clarify the frame of reference for the approach to be presented.
In nutrition education, there are two distinct situations, namely, patient education and public education.
Patient education occurs during personal contact between the health worker and his patient. This is person-to-person communication during which the health worker communicates with an individual in order to improve the parents' or their child's nutritional status. This approach fails outside the domain of this guide.
Public education consists of interventions for improving the health of the general public. Nutrition education is concerned with modifying social communication to bring about middle or long-term changes in the common behaviour of the population. When interpersonal communication forms part of the proposed strategy, it has a complementary role, reinforcing other activities aimed at changing the behaviour of an entire social group.
A global approach to nutrition education
What is social communication?
It is defined here as that set of norms which determines how individuals of the same culture interact.
The modification of these norms is the ultimate aim of nutrition education directed at the general public. Nutrition education consists of interventions into the realm of social communication with the aim of changing undesirable nutrition-related habits.
Family practices at mealtime are determined by tacit rules which vary from culture to culture. In one culture, we will find that children normally eat at the same table with their parents; in another, they do not. In one culture, the best portion of meat is given instinctively to the child, while in others it is given to the grown men. These are examples of implicit norms for behaviour. The sum of these norms constitutes "social communication".
To achieve this goal, a project must be based on a thorough study of behaviour, attitudes and the practices of the social groups concerned. A considerable effort must also be made in the field of communication. Only multimedia strategies, utilizing several chapels of communication, can meet such a formidable challenge. Nutrition education can, thus, be defined as follows: it is that group of communication activities aimed at achieving a voluntary change in nutrition-related behaviour to improve the nutritional status of the population.
1.2 Characteristics of the proposed approach
Community participation
The participation of the population in the effort to resolve problems concerning them, is today recognized as a necessity by most development specialists. This is particularly important in nutrition education, because it aims at modification of behaviours which are deeply entrenched in the fabric of socio-cultural life.
Participation can be obtained by involving representatives of the target population in the planning committees, by their systematic involvement at all stages of planning and in surveys as well as programme evaluation before all interventions.
A programme to prevent Vit A deficiency in Thailand was recently inaugurated. The program organizers decided to promote the production and consumption of squash which is particularly rich in Vitamin A. This decision was made only after discussions with the representatives of the communities concerned. In-depth interviews were held with mothers, leaders of the community and health officers. The implementation of these communication activities was left to well-recognized groups and institutions in the community. For evaluation of this programme, volunteers working on this project as well as members of the local communities were called upon (1).
Global action for development
Nutrition education interventions should not be developed in a vacuum, but should form part of a wider program aimed at improving health and 10,5 nutritional status, within the context of socioeconomic development. Nutrition education should be part of a strategy for development and not an end in itself.
In the Iringa project in Tanzania, communication was the needed catalyst in projects developed by community members. The nutrition promoters made important contributions not only because of their work in nutrition but also very crucial was the social communication on nutritional themes which resulted in a tremendously successful project. This aspect of nutrition communication lead to successful realization of the local projects - an improvement in health conditions, access to potable water, agricultural production, etc - all of which contributed to a sharp decrease in the prevalence of malnutrition in the Province of Iringa (2).
Intersectoral and interdisciplinary considerations
Nutrition education is an activity which requires the involvement of specialists from different areas: Education, Communication, Agriculture, Horticulture, Public Health and Nutrition. The analysis of the causes of malnutrition reveals that a multiplicity of factors conditions malnutrition. Even at the levels of the village community, an interdisciplinary effort is needed (for example, collaboration between the teacher, agricultural and the health worker).
Interdisciplinary work requires intersectoral collaboration because it is rare to find specialists in all the disciplines needed in any one ministry. The multimedia approach in itself requires intersectoral action as the use of several channels of communication generally implies the participation of several ministerial departments.
Intersectoral and interdisciplinary considerations
The adoption of a rational course of planning
Many interventions in the fields of agriculture, health or nutrition aimed at changing habits, have failed because of inappropriate planning. More development agents now insist on planning by objectives for their projects. Nutrition education is effective only when it is based on an in-depth analysis of nutritional problems and a clear concise definition of objectives and the methods of communication. Continuous evaluation is necessary and beneficial as a basis for redefining strategies and actions during the course of the project.
Chapter 2: Planning an intervention in social communication in nutrition
2.1 The logic of planning
The scheme for planning nutrition education is based on a theoretical framework (3), and consists of four phases: conceptualization, formulation, implementation and evaluation.
The logic of planning
Conceptualization
The first phase of the process of planning is analysis. The problem to be addressed must be analyzed in order to identify the determining factors to be dealt with during the intervention. Indeed, this is a commonly-held view among promoters of nutrition, and health education projects. It is based on a method called causal analysis which has proven useful in nutritional diagnosis (4). It involves drawing up a network of factors affecting nutritional status in a given context. This is a hypothetical model on which the team responsible for the implementation of the project will rely, in selecting the objectives for the intervention.
In this model invariably, there are human behaviours, on which nutrition interventions can be focused. The intervention is thus considered educational. It will therefore be necessary to study carefully the factors which influence these behaviours and the habits one wishes to modify. This is the stage identified by Green et al. (5) as the educational diagnosis. It reveals clearly the factors on which actions must be taken, in order to modify the behaviours in question.
Finally, at the end of this phase of conceptualization, it will be necessary to identify the channels and media for communication, the reference and support groups and the social networks through which the messages for nutrition education will be disseminated.
Formulation
To plan a strategy, it is necessary first and foremost to define clear objectives: general, specific and operational objectives. This is a fundamental step.
These objectives must be defined for each target group and even for the target segments within the target group.
The conceptualization phase and the determination of the factors affecting the behaviours to be modified, greatly facilitates the design of messages and materials. The messages and the materials have to be field tested using methods that require community participation.
Support materials cannot be designed until the various media have been selected. Selection of the media is another crucial step in the planning process. It is based on the results of the analysis of potential channels for communication carried out during the conceptualization phase in order to develop optimum synergy between the channels.
A multimedia plan is then carefully formulated. In such a plan, all communication activities are integrated with each other.
Implementation
The support materials designed during the formulation phase are now commercially produced. Difficulties lie in obtaining the optimum balance between quality and price. It is always necessary to use support materials, whatever the scope of the project, as they serve to reinforce person-to-person communication.
Training the "change agents" is yet another vital stage. To ensure that all persons involved in the various communication activities carry out adequately their roles in their respective sectors, training and retraining is necessary. These agents, whether they are health workers, teachers, agriculture promoters or other persons from a diversity of sectors, must be very familiar with the message content as well as the techniques to effectively communicate these messages. They must also be well informed of their individual roles in the entire strategy.
Communication with the population can then begin, strictly adhering to the modalities defined in the preceding stages.
Implementation
Evaluation
Evaluation must be considered as a necessary support activity, an instrument for refining or restructuring communication activities.
To this end evaluation must be participatory. It will bring together the principal players in the intervention: the promoters of the intervention (meeting through a planning committee), the communicators, the sponsors and the population itself (through community representatives).
The evaluation must respond to two fundamental questions:
Have the objectives been met?
Has the implementation process satisfied the various persons involved in the intervention and, above all, the population concerned?
2.2 Scheme for planning
2.3 How do we manage the planning?
The first activity would be concerned with establishing a planning committee to bring together the representatives of all the parties concerned.
What will be the role of this planning committee?
路 To attend to all the stages of planning of the program.
路 To ensure the translation into action of all operations from the conceptualization to the evaluation of the intervention.
路 To recruit technicians to carry out the operations.
路 To ensure that the communication intervention is well integrated into development programs in the country, the region, and the district.
Who should be on this planning committee?
The composition of the committee will vary with professional level of members depending on whether the intervention is being implemented at the national, regional or local level. Whatever the level, however, the sectoral composition remains the same.
* At the national level, one can think of a committee composed of a representative from the Ministry of Planning, of technicians representing the Ministries already active in nutritional education, NGOs working in the country, certain private companies (e.g. the companies concerned with production and/or the marketing of food stuffs) the sponsors, as well as recognised representatives of the population. The selection of committee members must result in a multidisciplinary team: it must include at least a nutritionist and a specialist in communication. It is also necessary that at least one participant is trained in social communication in nutrition who can act as the principal resource person throughout the planning process (this participant may be an international expert from another country).
* At the local level, intersectorial and interdisciplinary representation will be assured by the presence of the teacher, the health officer, the agricultural promoter, representatives from local womens' groups and NGOs. The presence of recognised representatives from the population will guarantee a mechanism for participation, in the decision making process. It is also necessary to have at least one person trained in social communication in nutrition to facilitate the process.
* The regional level is an intermediary level. There is the possibility of forming a planning committee based on the same model described above.
An intervention can take place at several levels at the same time. It will, therefore, be advantageous to have the planning committees functioning at these different levels, thus ensuring coordination between them.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
Part II: Conceptualization
Chapter 3: Defining the nutrition problems (Phase 1 - Conceptualization)
Any nutritional intervention must begin with the clear identification of the nutrition problem which is to be addressed.
What is this problem? How is it manifested?
What population is affected?
What is its impact on the social, economic and cultural life of the population concerned?
Is it a priority public health problem?
The extent and the magnitude of a nutritional problem, groups affected, its socio-economic importance and prioritization as public health problems is determined by nutrition workers on the basis of assessment of nutritional status of the population.
The assessment of nutritional status usually involves a single or a combination of direct and/or indirect methods depending on the objective of the assessment.
Direct methods are:
Dietary survey
Clinical signs
Laboratory tests
Biophysical methods
Anthropometric measurements
Indirect methods are:
Assessment of health statistics
age specific mortality rates cause specific mortality rates nutritionally relevant infections
Assessment of the ecological factors socio-economic factors sanitation and water supply coverage of health services geography and climate cultural factors
People dealing with the design and the implementation of the nutrition communication intervention are generally not required to be involved in this exercise and, therefore, not discussed in this book. Only an outline is provided. Interested readers will find detailed discussion in (6).
To recall the principal nutritional problems in developing countries: these are protein-energy deficiency, disorders linked to iodine deficiency, vitamin A deficiency and iron deficiency anaemia. A growing number of countries are confronted with new health risks linked to diet. These were until recently the diseases of affluence, namely cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity and cancers (7). Evidently, the causes of these different nutrition-related problems are not identical in all countries. Consequently, the possible solutions vary especially in that of giving advice to the population. Beyond the universal messages ("Eat, balanced diets! Exercise"), there are characteristics unique to each theme of nutrition education. It is therefore important to define very precisely the nutritional problem at which the intervention is to be directed.
The next step involves an analyses of the causes of the nutritional problem, which should be carried out in an intersectional group setting.
Conceptualization
Chapter 4: The causes of the nutritional problems
4.1 How is causal analysis carried out?
Since some time, it is known that causal analysis is absolutely necessary for the successful design and implementation of nutrition education. Why is this so? It is because nutritional problems are the results of an interaction between complex and multiple socioeconomic, biological and environmental factors.
In all nutritional interventions, educational or otherwise, the promoters must first determine the causes of the problem which have been identified.
Beghin et al. (4) have redefined a procedure for the analysis of the factors influencing nutritional status (relative to the specific problem identified). The product of this analysis is a network revealing the most direct and even the indirect factors that affects nutritional status of the population.
How is causal analysis carried out?
The steps in the procedure are as follows:
1. Establish an interdisciplinary and intersectorial group including representatives of the population. This group can be the same as the Planning Committee for the project. It can also be larger, but it should then include all the members of the Planning Committee.
2. Once assembled, the members of the group establish a list of the factors known or presumed to affect nutritional status in the population (examples: the factors affecting general nutritional status of children from 6 to 36 months, the factors contributing to anaemia in pregnant women).
3. The group proceeds to construct a chain of causality with linkages formed progressively, and organised into a hierarchy- the result- a network of factors affecting nutritional status. This network is a hypothetical model which will evolve during the preparation and implementation of the programme.
4. The group identifies, on this model, the factors which need to be acted upon. This choice is made, in relation to criteria defined by the group (for example, the feasibility, the acceptability, the presumed efficiency, the cost, the sponsor's specifications, etc.).
5. Among these factors, the group identifies those which seem to be amenable to education: the factors linked even partially to human behaviour. A more detailed discussion is provided in Beghin et al (4) and Andrien and Beghin (3).
An example of causal analysis:
In 1990, the Department for prevention of malnutrition in Ministry of Public Health in Morocco, carried out a causal analysis prior to the implementation of a nutrition communication program (6).
This analysis was carried out to determine the intervention which the Department ought to undertake for promotion of breast-feeding and growth monitoring. A three day seminar gathered about twenty participants. The composition of the group was intersectoral although the Ministry of Health was better represented than the other departments.
In the first phase of the analysis, the participants agreed to consider factors which directly influence the nutritional status of children from 0 to 5 years; the food consumption of the child and the biological utilization of foods. Following this decision, the participants proceeded to an analysis of these two factors at the first level.
Figure I shows the branches which influence food consumption.
The group then chose to act on the breast-feeding which intervenes on both branches of the tree. The result of causal analysis on initiation and duration of breastfeeding are given in Figures 2 and 3.
Figure 1: Causal analysis of nutritional status
To facilitate group-work, a few rules for construction of the causal model are given as follows:
1. The construction of the model progresses from top to bottom, from the effect to the most immediate cause.
2. Each element is broken down into at least two others at the next lowest level.
3. The elements in the model expend on the factors; for the majority of these, indicators can be generated (e.g., family income); for others, it is impossible or difficult to provide indicators (e.g., family support).
4. No effort must be spared in identifying every intermediary factor between two elements in the same causal chain.
5. The interaction between two factors situated on the same horizontal line is not represented.
6. When a factor occurs in several areas of the model, one repeats the factor rather than drawing in the lateral links.
7. The circles of retroaction (the cause becoming an effect and vice-versa) can not be shown in this model.
8. The participants in this analysis decide in advance the level at which they are going to work; that is whether to consider the problem on an individual or collective level.
9. The participants must reach a com promise between rigour and the inclusion of all possible factors in the model on one hand, and simplicity end economy on the other.
10. The participants should agree on when work on the model is to stop.
4.2 How to identify the behaviour in question?
The stage which is of most interest to communicators is the identification of the behaviour in question. Green et al. (5) call this stage "behavioural diagnosis".
All group members assembled to carry out the causal analysis must pay particular attention to the causes linked to behaviour. Only those factors will be amenable to an educational approach.
Whatever the type of intervention decided on, it is unlikely that the group would have included an educational component. This is because human behaviour is often implied in nutrition, whether the behaviour is linked to production, conservation, food consumption or even individual health. The communication thus serves as a basic strategy for integrated programmes (e.g., Joint Program for Applied Nutrition in Iringa, Tanzania).
In certain cases, however, only behavioural factors will be the subject of the nutrition intervention. Certain projects carried out in accordance with the principles of social marketing, as in the Indonesian Programme for Improvement of Nutrition (8), have shown that it is possible to influence favourably the nutritional status of children via educational programs directed at their parents.
In all cases, the group responsible for causal analysis must try to identify the behaviour linked to the factors which form the object of the intervention. In the work carried out in Morocco, the practice of breast-feeding was the object of a complementary analysis carried out by the same working group. As we will see below, this second phase of the analysis allows for the identification of factors which influence breast-feedding in Morocco.
How to identify the behaviour in question?
Breast-feeding consists of two elements: initiation of breast-feeding (indicators: whether breast-feeding has been initiated or not and the time interval between birth and initiation of breast-feeding) and duration of breast-feeding (indicators: duration of exclusive breast-feeding, duration of supplemented breast-feeding).
An example is provided in Figures 2 and 3
Figure 2: Causal analysis of breastfeeding different causes that influence initiation
Figure 3: Causal analysis of breastfeeding different causes that influence duration
Chapter 5: Establishing the educational framework
5.1 What are the issues?
Factors determining behaviour
Once the various behaviours to be changed have been revealed, it is necessary to analyse a little deeper in order to identify the determining factors. External factors may be economic (e.g. revenue), social (e.g. legislation), climatic (e.g. rainy season) or geographic (e. g. the nature of the soil).
Internal factors have been analysed by different authors. According to Leclercq (9) human behaviour is determined by five factors: motivation, knowledge, self confidence, decision and skill (knowledge of what to do and how to do).
The first factor is motivation. It is the motivated individual who considers modifying his usual conduct.
This motivation arises out of a person's perception of the gravity of the problem and the perceived consequences of maintaining or altering his behaviour. (Example: a mother becomes aware of her child's poor health because he is undernourished; she becomes cognizant of the importance of modifying the child's diet).
The second factor is knowledge. When the problem is perceived and there is enough motivation to make a change, it is even more important to know what change is to be made. (Example: a mother convinced of the need to modify her child's diet, knows what to do to improve food intake by ensuring that the child consumes from the correct food groups and increasing the number of meals per day).
The third factor is self-confidence. This factor is now of primary importance to health educators. They now realize that it is very difficult for people lacking self-confidence to make a change in health-related behaviour (example: although a mother might know the correct meals to give to her child, she should also feel that she is capable of preparing them).
The fourth factor is decision, a function of a person's system of values. The person must, choose from among several possibilities, what suits him best (example: a mother who is quite confident in herself might not change her behaviour simply because of other priorities. She may decide not to devote the time needed for preparation of meals for her youngest child. This may not be a priority. Out of the many situations proposed to her, she will select those which are most in keeping with her system of beliefs and values and that of her reference group.
The fifth factor is skill (faculty of knowing what to do and how to do it). When a person decides to make a change, he tries it out first, but its adoption will depend on try a new recipe to prepare her child's meal will judge from the result of the meal when it is cooked. If the result is positive, she will continue using the recipe but if it's negative, she may become doubtful and abandon the new idea the success or failure he meets. Skill is needed here (example: a mother who decides to try a new recipe to prepare her child's meal will judge from the result of the meal when it is cooked. If the result is positive, she will continue using the recipe but if it's negative, she may become doubtful and abandon the new idea.)
Leclercq's (9) model does not really take external factors into account. It is evident that these external factors do influence behaviour patterns.
In nutrition, external factors are of primary importance: food availability, access to health services, and family income are only examples which may prevent or encourage adoption of a behaviour.
Among the factors influencing a course of action, those which depend on the people concerned and those which are, unfortunately, out of their control. must be underlined. The latter may be such that any attempts to alter a course of action without taking them into consideration would certainly fail (example: In the case of a famine due to drought, it would be rather difficult for the people to maintain a balanced diet since the food required would not be available).
In any event, it is crucial to understand why people behave the way they do. In general, people have valid reasons (in their opinion) for behaving in a certain way. It is important to discover what these reasons are before trying to make any changes in their habits.
Channels of Communication
The second issue to be addressed in an educational diagnosis concerns the channels of communication. In nutrition, communication occurs through a multitude of channels, be they interpersonal or mass-media based.
The questions to be raised are as follows:
In the community concerned (which may be very large - the entire country, perhaps or very limited a village) what are the networks of communication? What are the relays, the influential people and institutions? There will be general answers to these questions but those specific to the field of nutrition are particularly important. Various people or institutions may, in fact, play a greater role in communication for nutrition than in other areas (e.g. a mother-in-law often has great influence on infant feeding, but less on food purchase).
5.2 How to conduct an educational diagnosis
There are several methods that can be used to obtain a rapid appreciation of a existing situation. Among those available are rapid participatory rural appraisal or the Rapid Assessment Procedure and the Rapid Ethnographic Assessment. It is a matter of selecting the method most appropriate to the situation being dealt with.
The methods proposed may be used in a variety of situations regardless of the programme. When used together as part of an overall assessment for an educational diagnosis for the population at risk, they can provide a very clear picture of the reality of life of the people.
5.3 Five methods f