<title>FESLM: An international framework for evaluating sustainable land management</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This working document has been prepared as a focus for future work on the development of an International Framework for the Evaluation of Sustainable Land Management (FESLM).
The Framework is designed as a structured, logical pathway for making decisions on whether or not a carefully defined form of land management is likely to prove sustainable in a defined situation over a defined period of time. The logical pathway approach was selected because our knowledge of sustainability will always be imperfect. This approach assists us in making decisions that can be substantiated without having to wait for all the final data.
The development of the Framework and the preparation of this document have been guided by an international working group for this purpose. Membership in this working group is: J. Dumanski (Agriculture Canada), Chairman; M. Latham (IBSRAM), Secretary; C. S. Ofori (FAO); R. Hanson (TROPSOILS), H. Eswaran (USDA-SCS), P.K. Thornton (IFDC); and A.J. Smyth (Private). This working group has been ably assisted from time to time by J. K. Syers, E. Pushparajah, M. Mausbach and R.L. Sawyer. This document represents the collective wisdom from this entire group.
This document makes no attempt to review the rapidly expanding range of literature on sustainability but is based on four seminal documents and on discussions in Working Groups organised by the International Board for Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM) at Chiang Rai, Thailand in 1991; Nairobi, Kenya in 1992; in Washington DC, USA in 1992; and in Lethbridge, Canada in 1993. The documents that have shaped the current form of the FESLM are:
o Public Advisory Committees to the Environmental Council of Alberta. Alberta Conservation Strategy: Framework for Action: A Draft for Public Discussion. Edmonton. 1990.
o Dumanski, J., Eswaran, H. and Latham, M. Criteria for an International Framework for Evaluating Sustainable Land Management. International Workshop on Evaluation for Sustainable Development in the Developing World. Chiang Rai, Thailand. IBSRAM Proceedings 12, Vol. 2, Bangkok. 1991.
o Dumanski, J., Eswaran, H., Pushparajah, E. and Smyth, A. (eds.). Evaluation for Sustainable Land Managements in the Developing World. Vol. 1: Towards the Development of an International Framework. IBSRAM Proceedings 12, Vol. 1. Bangkok, Thailand. 1991.
o Dumanski, J. and Smyth, A. The Issues and Challenges of Sustainable Land Management. International Workshop on Sustainable Land Management for the 21st. Century, University of Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada. 1993.
The document that follows, prepared and revised by A. J. Smyth and J. Dumanski at the request of FAO, with specific contributions from M. J. Swift (Biological factors), P.K. Thornton (Economic factors) and G. Spendjian (Social factors), draws together the ideas expressed in these sources with some additional connecting material and very valuable constructive comments received orally and in writing at and between the various meetings of the Working Group. All these contributions, too numerous to list, are most gratefully acknowledged.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Issues of sustainable land management
Challenges for the future
Objectives of the report
Issues of sustainable land management
Perceived wisdom in the approach to evaluation, use and management of land resources is changing rapidly and dramatically. Past emphasis on land 'development', focused on maximizing production and return from land use investment and planned against a background belief that suitable lands for expansion could always be found somewhere, is forced to give way to a more cautious approach-one that recognizes the finite extent of fertile land and the seemingly insatiable demands of a growing human population.
Globally, and in many individual countries, there is clear evidence of impending land shortage. Areas in which the combination of land and freshwater resources is moderately or well suited to agriculture are, for the most part, already in use. Efficient use of these lands is becoming a matter of life or death for increasing millions of mankind. Future generations in still larger numbers are more seriously at risk-their livelihood endangered by present production choices that degrade the very resources on which future agriculture depends. Global production must increase dramatically to meet foreseen demand but the levels and means of production targeted locally must be those that can be maintained on a sustained basis. Global, and even local agriculture must be sustainable.
"We need a value system which enshrines the principle of sustainability over generations. Sustainable development may mean different things to different people, but the idea itself is simple. We must work out models for a relatively steady state society, with population in broad balance with resources and the environment." (Tickell, 1993).
The concept of sustainability includes notions of limits to resource availability, environmental impact, economic viability, biodiversity and social justice (Dumanski et al., 1991; Harmsen and Kelly, 1992). The concept of sustainability is dynamic in that what is sustainable in one area, may not be in another, and what was sustainable at one time may no longer be sustainable. Although sustainability cannot be measured directly, assessments of sustainability can be made on the performance and direction of the processes that control the functions of a given system at a specific location (Dumanski and Smyth, 1993).
The concept of sustainability is pertinent only against a background of limits to resource availability and use. If no such limits exist, or they are not perceived to exist, then it is common that resources are overexploited; under restraints, however, the concept of sustainability becomes increasingly important, rising as the scarcity of the resource increases. Our perception of scarcity and our knowledge of alternate resource possibilities for the same applications, determine the important factors to be considered in the supply-demand equation of sustainability and sustainable land management.
The first of these factors is the fixed supply of land suitable for agriculture and food production. The World's total ice-free land area is approximately 13.4 thousand million hectares, but of this only 24 percent or 3.2 thousand million hectares are potentially arable, i.e. land that can be cultivated and/or maintained in productive pasture. Of this, about 40 percent (1.3 thousand million hectares) is highly to moderately productive and 60 percent is of low productivity. Currently the best of these lands, about 1.5 thousand million hectares, are used for cropland, and the remainder are in permanent pasture, forest and woodland (Buringh and Dudal, 1987).
The second factor is the impact of competition between increasing numbers of people for the same land area. Each year global populations increase by about 90 million people. Since the best lands are almost all in use, necessary further expansion of agriculture will come increasingly at the expense of pasture lands and forests; lands usually of marginal quality where the risks of crop production are higher and the returns lower. Over the last three hundred years, human-induced land use change has resulted in a net gain of approximately 12 m km² of cropland but net losses of 6 m km² of forests and 1.6 m km² of wetlands. Even over the past two decades the global extent of cropland has increased by 9.1 percent, whereas pasture and forest lands have decreased considerably. Currently, the rate of tropical deforestation, primarily for agricultural purposes, is estimated at 17 million hectares (0.9 per cent) per year, sharply increased from the rate of 11.3 million hectares (0.6
percent) per year estimated in the early 1980s (WRI, 1992). Temperate and boreal forests suffered in the past, but they are no longer subject to acute deforestation; in fact, forest in these areas may have increased by about 5 percent since the early 1980s.
Since the middle of this century human-induced land use change has become so drastic, so rapid and so global that its impacts are affecting processes that sustain the interacting systems of the geosphere-biosphere (IGBP, 1992). The direct effects of these changes on global systems remains poorly understood but there is general agreement on the potential impacts. For example, expansion of agro-ecosystems over the last 150 years has resulted in a net flux of CO[2] equal to that released by burning fossil fuel during the same period; current release of CO[2] from land conversions is between 10 and 30 percent of that from fossil fuel combustion; land conversion is also the largest human-induced source of N[2]O, which contributes to greenhouse gas accumulation and ozone depletion.
With or without climate change, the conversion of natural habitats for agriculture and other uses is recognized as a major cause of loss of genetic stock and of genetic diversity. At current rates of conversion, it is estimated that 25 percent of the World's plant species will disappear in the next 50 years (IDRC, 1992). Modern agriculture, with its trends towards monoculture is particularly vulnerable; already only 20 crops provide 90 percent of the World's food; and wheat, rice, maize and potato contribute more than all other crops combined (IDRC, 1992). Only four varieties produce 75 percent of all wheat grown on the Canadian prairies whilst, in India, where as many as 30 000 varieties of rice were planted 50 years ago, it is estimated that by the turn of the century three quarters of the rice fields will be planted to only 10 varieties.
The pending onset of climate change, the narrowing genetic stock and the disturbance of global biogeochemical cycles all add considerable uncertainty to the evaluation of sustainability.
The third major factor in the sustainability equation is the depletion of biological production potential by the insidious processes of soil and land degradation, often accelerated by human activities. Although the extent of global soil degradation is not known with certainty, current best estimates are that approximately 1.2 thousand million hectares of agricultural, forestry and range lands have been affected by moderate to extreme soil degradation (75 percent of this is moderate degradation and 25 percent is severe to extreme). A further 750 million hectares have been affected by slight degradation. This degradation is caused by human related activities, namely: overgrazing (35 percent of degraded land); improper agricultural practices (28 percent); deforestation and overexploitation for fuelwood (37 percent); and industrial pollution (about 2 percent). A secondary effect of land degradation, often at least as serious in its local consequence as the loss of soil material,
is the pollution of surface and groundwater. Transposed and dissolved materials may cause salinization, alkalinization, and other forms of toxification and eutrophication. The impact of these effects may be felt far from the site of initial degradation. Within this century the impact of land degradation on production has been masked by greatly increased fertilizer use and other inputs, but it is obvious that productivity increases would have been much higher in the absence of degradation.
Challenges for the future
The evidence is mounting that global agriculture is at a watershed. Soon, for the first time in history, we will have run out of good land for agricultural expansion. For the first time we are faced with the imperative of increasing production on lands already cultivated in a manner which does not degrade productive resources. The magnitude of the task is illustrated by a calculation that shows that if we are to meet the needs of the anticipated global population, the amount of food we must produce in the next 50 years equals the total production of the past 8000 years of agricultural history (IDRC, 1992).
If the forms of agriculture used to achieve this increased production are to be sustainable they must be based on sound agronomic principles, but they must also embrace understanding of the constraints and interactions of all other dimensions of sustainable land management. Yields will have to increase but, at the same time, production risks will have to be controlled to ensure more reliable cash flow and permit confident planning. Soil resources will need to be controlled and water pollution cannot be tolerated. Production systems will have to be flexible, diversified and developed on a broad genetic base to ensure the possibility of rapid response to changing conditions. Land management practices, in large measure, control processes of land degradation and their efficiency in this respect will largely govern the sustainability of a given land use. However, institutional, political, social and economic pressures and structures can cause or exacerbate environmental problems
and control of their influence must form part of the solution.
This immense challenge for global agriculture will require that the principles and concepts of sustainable land management become entrenched in the policy arena no less than amongst rural populations. Some major changes in economic theory and in systems of national accounting are required to ensure that the loss of options for the future consequent upon depreciation of natural resources-loss of a nation's true 'wealth'-are properly recognized. Procedures of national accounting, for example, that mistakenly assume that natural resources are so abundant that they have no marginal value must be seen to be unacceptable.
Technical and scientific advances will be instrumental in the transition to sustainable agriculture, but they will need to be tailored to local environmental conditions-much more site-specific than has been the case in the past. The 'Green Revolution' continues to achieve considerable success with the use of high yielding crop varieties, highly responsive to fertilization, irrigation and other inputs. Such successes, however, are usually achieved on sites that enjoy a narrow range of highly suitable soils and climates, are not without environmental costs. Also, they incur a margin of risk which often is higher than with more traditional means. Attempts to transfer intensive forms of agriculture to the marginal and submarginal areas in which a large majority of the world's poorest farmers live has led, all too often, only to disaster and degradation. These regions have yet to receive the research effort necessary to devise sustainable systems of agriculture capable of
sustaining foreseeable levels of population.
Clearly, no 'technological fix' will prove effectively sustainable unless it is acceptable and beneficial to the people on the land and to society in general - but an improved technological and knowledge base will surely be a required part of the solution. It is the responsibility of the scientific community to develop criteria and indicators for evaluating whether land management practices will lead towards sustainability or away from it. They must, however, work with the farm community to ensure that recommendations that arise are realistic, efficient and acceptable.
Objectives of the report
This report proposes a strategic framework approach for evaluating sustainable land management. This approach is advocated because the concept of what constitutes sustainability cannot be rigid, it needs to be capable of change from area to area and over time. As solutions become mare precise they will have to be increasingly location and time specific. A strategic framework approach offers the possibility of providing preliminary estimates' of acceptable reliability, without waiting for all of the final data. The approach is intended to be generic and universal and it assists in organizing the concepts and principles to be used in deriving a solution. It is intended as an aid to guide decisions towards sustainable management, to increase the probability of success and/or identify potential failures. It should certainly assist in interpreting the results of the very many research initiatives that are now in progress in the search for sustainability.
The evaluation of sustainable land management is an integral part of the process of harmonizing agriculture and food production with the, often conflicting, interests of economics and the environment. Agriculture is expected to continue to be the engine of economic development in most developing countries but, for this to be realistic, agriculture in the future will have to be increasingly more productive, more economically efficient and more environmentally friendly-in a phrase, more sustainable. Although sustainability will continue to be elusive, learning to evaluate sustainability must begin now. The task is too important to wait until we have all the answers.
<section>3</section>
Aim
The FESLM is designed as a pathway to guide analysis of land use sustainability, through a series of scientifically sound, logical steps.
The Framework pathway seeks to connect all aspects of the land use under investigation with the multitude of interacting conditions-environmental, economic and social-which collectively determine whether that form of land management is sustainable or will lead to sustainability.
The FESLM is concerned with evaluation. It does not encompass planning or development; although it can make an important contribution to both. Choice between alternative forms of land use or between ways of improving a land use system may not depend on sustainability alone; but the FESLM can contribute to decision making in these areas also.
The concept of evaluating sustainability can be most easily understood in respect to a very small area of land given up to a single use, such as a small field under a single crop. If the field is small enough it can be assumed that the influence of variables which might change the acceptability of the land use is spatially almost uniform. If examination of these variables and projection of their influence over a defined time period implies that the changes wrought will not, for any reason, render the land use unacceptable the land use is deemed 'sustainable' - for that time period.
Detailed sustainability analysis of the kind just described will employ the whole sequence of procedures of the FESLM and will be costly. The time and money spent on such analysis will be fully justified, however, in appropriate circumstances-in the design, execution and monitoring of long term 'sustainability' experiments, for example, or in tests to confirm the validity of generalized sustainability analysis of much larger areas. In these contexts the FESLM will play a vital role in all forms of sustainability research-that of evaluating whether 'improved' methods are, in fact, sustainable.
Society, however, rarely makes decisions on individual fields, but seeks guidance on much larger and more complex areas. The FESLM provides a systematic basis for a generalized approach to sustainability investigation within large areas. This is achieved by selecting and conceptualizing the more significant influences on environmental change.
It is intended to present the FESLM in a form that is easily accessible and intelligible to the lay public, to farmers and other land users so that, understanding its approach and principles, they can have confidence in its findings.
Especially in the early days of its development and use, however, the FESLM will call for expert contributions from a wide range of specialists who will identify and interpret the factors influencing sustainability. Subsequent experience will confirm, or point the need to adapt, the initial projections. Over time, an encyclopedic check list of experience in different environmental situations will be built up to guide and simplify future evaluations.
The FESLM will be designed and the check list structured so that the huge volume of data collected can be stored, handled and eventually, to a large extent, evaluated by computer.
A Master (or 'Reference') version of a fully developed FESLM will include, in addition to details of the evaluation procedure, a comprehensive Checklist (databank) recording environmental influences adverse to stable land management and would relate these:
o to environmental indicators (selected factors) that reflect each influence;
o to actions that can be taken to minimize instability in each instance;
o to criteria (factors, numerical relationships, formulae, more complex models) that relate environmental change to observable and measurable attributes; and
o to measurable threshold values which determine at what level each influence is a threat to sustainability.
The Master Framework procedures will be independent of scale and it is intended that, eventually, the check list will be worldwide in scope. Together the information in the Master Framework will permit rapid construction of Action (or 'Local') Frameworks to be used in evaluating the sustainability of a specific form of land use in a specific locality at a specific scale of investigation-a crucial contribution to sound land use planning and environmental conservation.
Experience in applying these Frameworks will draw attention to gaps in knowledge and assist, therefore, in defining research needs in the scientific development of land management packages.
Scanning the relevant sections of the check list will provide a safeguard against any oversight of potential problems during the planning stages of land development.
Finally, the Framework is planned to provide a structured system for monitoring the progress of development; using the diagnostic pathway for periodic evaluation of any change in the sustainability prognosis.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: Background and principles
Nature of sustainable land management (SLM)
Aspects of sustainability
Principles of sustainability evaluation
Nature of sustainable land management (SLM)
Many definitions have been proposed to describe aspects of 'sustainable development'. Their variety reflects the complexity of relationships involved. Environmental characteristics, market forces, social ambitions, development objectives and conservation aims are but examples of the forces and factors that interact to determine sustainability. Definitions of sustainable management differ because observers place differing importance on these various factors.
Recognizing that a clear objective is essential to successful evaluation, the FESLM Working Party, in Nairobi (1991), laid a foundation for the following definition of SLM:
"Sustainable land management combines technologies, policies and activities aimed at integrating socio-economic principles with environmental concerns so as to simultaneously:
- maintain or enhance production/services (Productivity)
- reduce the level of production risk (Security)
- protect the potential of natural resources and prevent degradation of soil and water quality (Protection)
- be economically viable (Viability)
- and socially acceptable (Acceptability)."
These five objectives of Productivity; Security; Protection; Viability and Acceptability are seen to be the basic 'pillars' on which the SLM edifice must be constructed and against which its findings must be tested and monitored^1. Each objective is complex, and requires further brief examination:
Productivity:
the return from SLM may extend beyond material yields from agricultural and non-agricultural uses to include benefits from protective and aesthetic aims of land use.
Security: management methods that promote balance between a land use and prevailing environmental conditions, reduce the risks of production; conversely, methods that destabilize local relationships increase that risk.
Protection: the quantity and quality of soil and water resources must be safeguarded, in equity for future generations. Locally, there may be additional conservation priorities such as the need to maintain genetic diversity or preserve individual plant or animal species.
Viability: if the land uses being considered are locally not viable, the use will not survive.
Acceptability: land use methods can be expected to fail, in time, if their social impact is unacceptable. The populations most directly affected by social and economic impact are not necessarily the same.
¹ The objectives of the FESLM intentionally embrace the totality of on-going experience on Earth. They allow for consideration of the effects of everything on any activity. It is right that they should do so, for it is not possible, in a global context, to exclude as irrelevant any influence on the future development of any activity. This is true in principle. In practice, if the size of the task is to remain within acceptable limits, it is obviously necessary to restrict the investigation of sustainability to those interacting influences that appear most significant to the directions of development of the land use in question. Conscious limitations have to be placed on the range of investigation and, in reporting the findings of evaluations achieved using the FESLM, these limitations must be stated.
One consequence of this complexity is that evaluation of sustainability can scarcely be contemplated in terms even approaching the complexity of the real world on areas larger than a small field - an area small enough to ensure that, within it, physical, biological, economic and social influences operate almost uniformly. Planners, however, will require estimates of sustainability relating to larger areas, but it must be made clear that these will be based on selected, simplified concepts of the more complex reality. The FESLM is designed on this understanding.
These primary requirements of sustainability must be viewed in a positive light. Some 'trade-off' between objectives may be unavoidable-for example, lower productivity and profit may be accepted if this is necessary to achieve the required level of environmental protection-but all five 'pillars' must be soundly developed if the SLM itself is to be sound.
Aspects of sustainability
Sustainability and suitability
Sustainability and stability
Classifying sustainability - Stability and confidence
Sustainability and scale
'Detailed' and 'generalized' forms of sustainability evaluation
'Sustainability', within the context of the FESLM, is a measure of the extent to which the overall objective of SLM (as defined above) can be met by a defined land use on a specific area of land over a stated period of time.
Definition of the land use and specification of the relevant area serve to define a unique evaluation exercise. It is important to emphasize that the primary objective of the FESLM is evaluation. It may be that sustained production could be most easily achieved by doing something else, perhaps elsewhere, but uncovering planning solutions of this kind is not the immediate object of evaluation. It is also true that the route to sustained production may involve adaptation of the form of use with time. Progressive change of this kind can be built into the description of the use for evaluation - but, obviously, only to the extent that the need can be foreseen. Evaluation is not planning; but, as discussed later, the FESLM is designed to directly assist planning by assisting comparison of alternative forms of use.
The phrase 'over a stated period' is also important. It introduces a controlled variable into the process of evaluation. It recognizes that indefinite sustainability is unreal and that such concepts as "sustainable into the foreseeable future" are almost meaningless. By assigning a fixed period of time to an evaluation, the evaluator provides a measure of the confidence with which sustainability has been assessed-a measure of the apparent stability of the system. As discussed later, these measures could provide a basis for classifying differing degrees of sustainability.
Recognizing a time period over which sustainability is evaluated permits some flexibility in achieving the 'pillar' requirements-so long as these requirements are met over the period as a whole. Patterns of productivity, in particular, must be flexible. In an agricultural context the time scale might include regular regenerative fallows leading to cyclical changes in productivity, fertility etc. Short term climatic variation might give rise to similar year on year differences but, provided there is no progressive decline over the stipulated period, sustainability may be unimpaired. This degree of flexibility is essential if SLM overall is to be a realistic objective.
The initial definition of the land use should not be so tightly drawn as to preclude minor flexibility in the nature and volume of inputs as needs arise (of fertilizers, herbicides, farm equipment, for example, in the case of agriculture); provided always that such introductions do not change the basic nature or objective of the use and are both economically and socially acceptable within the system.
Sustainability and suitability
'Land suitability' has been defined as the fitness of a given type of land for a specified kind of land use (FAO, 1976). The authors might helpfully have added 'or vice versa'.
The interactions between environmental factors which determine 'suitability" at a given moment are largely the same as those which decide whether the same land use is 'sustainable' through a period of future time on the plot in question. Whilst suitability evaluation calls for observation and measurement of these factors in the present, sustainability evaluation requires that the future, possibly changed, states of these factors are predicted.
A form of land use may be regarded as 'sustainable' if no permanent or progressive deterioration of its 'fitness' (i.e. its 'suitability') to the land in question is foreseen over a reasonably lengthy period of future time. In other words, sustainability can be considered to be an extension in time of the concept of suitability.
The Framework for Land Evaluation, published by FAO in 1976 and still widely used in various forms, established a set of procedures for determining land suitability. Because these procedures take account of economic and other rapidly changing factors, the validity of suitability assessments is recognized to be short lived. Even with this understanding, the authors recognized that it was not sensible to declare a particular use 'suitable' if it was known that, in time, this use would degrade the quality of the land. Uses that were not sustainable were specifically excluded from consideration. This view is enshrined in one of the six 'Principles' that govern the FAO Framework; this states that ''suitability refers to use on a sustained basis".
The Land Evaluation Framework fails to explain in any depth how the sustainability of a proposed land use is to be assessed, but the procedures developed by FAO for analysing suitability provide a good starting point for sustainability evaluation - before embarking on the more demanding task it makes sense to ensure the current fitness of the use in question! Characterization of the site and other basic data collection required to determine suitability provide a sound foundation for evaluating sustainability.
Sustainability and stability
Environmental factors differ greatly in 'stability'; that is to say in the likelihood and rapidity of their expected change with time. In the context of the FESLM, the time scale is that of the evaluation.
Some factors, such as topographic form or geology, are very stable-unlikely to change significantly, even over periods that are long in human terms. Others, notably economic factors, such as profit margins, but also events like the incidence of pests or disease, are very unstable-likely to change frequently and rapidly. Between these extremes there are many factors in which change is either uncertain, as with climate; or gradual, as with population growth or genetic crop improvement.
Of course, change is not necessarily undesirable in relation to the requirements of sustainability. The effects of change in one unstable factor may be more than offset, in a positive or negative sense, by change in some other factor. Herein lies the difference between stability (concerned only with the likelihood of change) and sustainability (concerned with the balance between positive and negative change in relation to a particular system).
Changes in a land use system with time reflect instability in one or more individual factors. An understanding of the likely direction and nature of