<title>Tree and land tenure rapid appraisal tools</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Forests, Trees and People Programme, coordinated within FAO by the Community Forestry Unit, focuses on strengthening local communities' efforts to improve the management of their forest and tree resources. Land and tree tenure is a central issue in this area. The failure to clearly understand existing rights to land and trees has been a common cause of failure of community forestry projects. As a result, individual incentives are often misjudged, and the benefits of projects are distributed quite differently from the intention of project designers or participants. In designing a forestry initiative, an understanding of the existing system of tree and land tenure is essential to viable project design.
In 1989, FAO published Community Forestry Note 5: Rapid Appraisal of Tree and Land Tenure by John Bruce of the Land Tenure Center of the University of Wisconsin at Madison. This document presented a new approach to exploring tenure issues in forestry, and it forms the basis for the present Field Manual. The manual was developed by Karen Freudenberger also at the Land Tenure Center and translates the concepts of the earlier volume into the practical methodology of rapid appraisal. Among others, this means dividing resources into three broad categories holdings, commons and reserves - and then understanding how villages and households approach tree and forest resource management in each category. Reversing the traditional questioning order is a key approach which has been put into practice by Dr Freudenberger, deferring questions like "Who owns the land?" and "Can the land be sold?" in favour of more indirect questions like "If a newly married couple needs to build a house,
where do they get the poles?"
Dr Freudenberger has long been active in developing rapid appraisal techniques in the field. While a large part of her experience has been in the Sahel region in Africa, the issues she has confronted are often universal. For example, conflict identification, a particularly sensitive issue, is a very important area in project design, but detecting conflicts within a community is usually a long-term and difficult task. This is an area where her experience has led to the development of rapid appraisal techniques which permit quick discovery and understanding of key community problems.
Like other Forests, Trees and People Programme activities, the methods described in the manual lay a strong emphasis on community participation. As the author maintains, Rapid Appraisal is highly dependent on the rapport which is established between the researchers and the local community. Whether the method used is closer to Rapid Rural Appraisal or to Participatory Rural Appraisal, the active involvement of the community in the research process is important to the quality of tee results which can be obtained.
This field manual is being produced and circulated with the intention that it will be revised and enriched based on experience gained in different regions of the world in the application of its techniques. Readers and users are therefore encouraged to send their comments and suggestions to The Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, Food and Agriculture Organization. Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Marilyn W. Hoskins
Senior Community Forestry Officer
Forestry Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Development projects are often concerned with the management of natural resources. This is because the natural resource base comprises the principal wealth of many rural communities. The more fertile their land and the more productive their trees, the more possibilities these communities have to ensure their livelihoods and improve their well-being.
For projects to be effective in strengthening local communities' efforts to improve management of their resources, project designers need to have good quality information about the area in which they plan to work. They need to understand how resources are already being managed and the often complex tenure systems that govern the ownership and use of land and trees. For this information to be useful, whether designing a project or improving its implementation, it needs to be available without long delays. And for this information to lead to projects that really benefit rural people, it must be not only useable and useful, but used. That is, agencies must be prepared to adapt their programmes and activities in response to what they have learned about local realities.
Rapid Appraisal refers to a family of methodologies designed to encourage the participation of local communities in the collection and use of information to improve their livelihoods. The methods, which have been used in all parts of the world, put a premium on the usefulness of research as well as the rapidity with which results are obtained. They have substantially contributed to improving our knowledge of local conditions and to furthering a partnership between local communities and outsiders for a better management of natural resources.
<section>3</section>
About the field manual
This manual offers guidelines for using Rapid Appraisal methods ^1 to gather information on tenure and natural resource management. It will not give a full introduction to RA methodology since there are already many documents available on that subject. However, it will remind the reader of some of the most important features of the methodology ^2. Neither will it go into much detail explaining tenure and how it relates to development projects. There is already an FAO concept paper (Bruce 1989) that discusses these issues and it may usefully be read as a companion volume to this one. In addition, Appendix 2 suggests further reading on tenure and natural resource issues. It will therefore be assumed that (1) the reader is already familiar with RA and (2) the project for which the manual is being used needs certain information about tenure and natural resource management. The manual will suggest how RA techniques might be used to get the necessary information.
One important reminder is necessary. What follows is not a recipe! It should not be followed as such. Rather, the manual offers suggestions for activities that may prove useful in a tenure study. These must be mixed with the ideas and especially the good judgement of the user before they will produce results of any value. In any given situation, some of the suggestions may not be relevant or may not work. Even those which do seem useful will have to be adapted to the particular kind of study being undertaken and the specific working conditions. RA not only encourages but obliges the practitioner to be creative and resourceful.
The guide addresses, in order, the principal steps in doing an RA study of tenure issues. Chapter 1 gives a brief introduction to tenure and Rapid Appraisal. Preparations needed to do a tenure study are discussed in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 suggests practical techniques that have proved useful in gathering information in the field. Chapter 4 presents methods that may be helpful in organizing and analysing the information collected as well as writing the report. The final chapter discusses issues that may come up in using the information that has been gathered and notes some of the more common problems that may arise.
^1 The term RA is being used to refer to the group of methodologies that includes Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA), Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) and other similar techniques. Much of the information presented here is applicable to both RRA and PRA (see page 9 for a discussion of the difference) and where this is the case we use "Rapid Appraisal" to cover them both. Where there are significant differences in application between RRA and PRA, these are noted in the text.
^2 For those who are not already familiar with RA, some sources of information have been listed in Appendix 1.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: Tenure, natural resource management and rapid appraisal
Why study tenure?
What is rapid appraisal?
Why study tenure?
As projects or local communities work toward better management of natural resources, tenure becomes a critical issue. "Tenure" is "the set of rights which a person or some private entity holds in land or trees" (Bruce 1989). It includes questions of both ownership and access. Tenure relations in rural communities are often more complex than those to which westerners or urban, formally educated development workers are accustomed. Local tenure systems may incorporate aspects of official legislation. But they may also incorporate traditional or customary tenure systems.
These systems are often highly complex. Instead of one person having all the rights to a given plot of land and the resources on it, the 'bundle of rights" is divided up. It may be divided according to the resource: the land is owned by one person, the trees by another, the water by a third. It may he divided according to the way the resource is exploited: one person may be considered the owner of a tree and have exclusive rights to chop it clown or collect the firewood, but many other people may have rights to collect fruits or leaves. Or, the rights to the resource may change over time: one person may hold land for cultivation purposes during the rainy season while it becomes pasture with much less restrictive rules of access during the dry season. One characteristic of local tenure systems is that they are often adaptive, evolving over time in response to changing ecological and/or social economic conditions.
How Tenure Issues Affect Project Activities
1. TENURE AFFECTS WHO HAS ACCESS TO RESOURCES
o A project promoting women's gardens may find that women have difficulty obtaining good land.
o A project to improve land with local irrigation systems may find that only the noble classes have secure rights to land, while the former slaves have land rights only through their masters.
2. TENURE AFFECTS WHETHER PEOPLE ARE WILLING TO PARTICIPATE IN PROJECT ACTIVITIES
o Projects may find people reluctant to plant trees on their fields if all trees belong to the state and even the individual who plants a tree is not permitted to cut it.
o In many communities, especially where there is a strong inequality in land distribution, there is a great deal of land borrowing. Often there are rules against planting trees on borrowed fields.
o Projects to improve common areas may have difficulty attracting people to participate if it is not clear who will benefit from the improvements.
3. TENURE AFFECTS THE DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECT BENEFITS
o In some communities, even if a woman plants and waters a fruit tree to maturity, the benefits of the fruit go to the male head of household.
o A herder who used a pasture area during the dry season may lose his rights if irrigated gardening or orchards are introduced and the land is farmed during both the wet and dry seasons.
o A project may add value to a resource by constructing a small dam or other infrastructures. When this happens, powerful people may come and lay claim to the improved lands and the people who had been using the area may be disenfranchised.
Projects working on natural resource issues that fail to understand how tenure rules work in a community are likely to encounter major problems. Tenure issues affect project activities at every stage. Early on, tenure determines who has access to the resources needed to participate in the project. Once the project has begun, peoples' willingness to participate fully in pro posed activities often depends on the kinds of rights they have to resources which determine, in turn, their incentives to invest in or protect them. Tenure rules often determine who benefits from the project as time goes on.
There is a danger of viewing tenure systems as static and failing to recognize and respect the adaptability of local systems. Outsiders have had a tendency to promote more rigid, legalistic tenure systems that, while they may appear appropriate at a given time, are unable to respond to changes in social and ecological conditions.
The earlier information is gathered in the project cycle, the better. Ideally, it should be collected while the project is still being planned in order to avoid making mistakes from the start. However, in many cases the need to gather information arises in ongoing projects. It is never too late to gather information that can help in understanding difficulties that are being encountered and to explore ways to solve these problems.
What is rapid appraisal?
The methodology discussed in this manual is called Rapid Appraisal (RA). RA is a family of methods designed to get practical information on development issues in local communities quickly. Certain characteristics are common to all the methods in the RA family. For example, triangulation (see textbox below) is used in all types of RA both to reduce bias that can distort the results of research and also to increase the richness of information obtained in the study. All RA methods also use a wide variety of tools and techniques to gather information, rather than relying exclusively on pre-established questionnaires. These techniques include, among others, mapping exercises, diagrams, ranking activities, and semi-structured interviews with both groups and individuals.
One of the key differences among the various methods in the RA family is the question of who does the research. In what is often called RRA (Rapid Rural Appraisal), the research process is mostly managed by outsiders. Typically, a multidisciplinary research team determines the objectives for the study, conducts the research in the field, has the principal responsibility for analysing the results, and often decides what happens to the information in the end. This contrasts with PRA ^3 (Participatory Rural Appraisal) in which the local community manages the research process. The outsiders' role is limited, initially, to providing training in the methods and, later, to facilitating (as needed) their use In this case, the villagers them selves work on the objection of the study, they arc the principal collectors and analysers of information and they decide how the information will be used in the end After an initial orientation to the techniques they may or may not. choose to
include outsiders in this process.
^3 For a more complete explanation of the differences between RRA and PRA and the historical evolution of the methods, see Chambers (1992). For a practical guide on carrying out PRA, see Odour-Noah et al. (1992).
Triangulation
When doing any study, the researcher must be aware of bias. If a study is biased, it means that the results do not reflect the reality because one situation, or perspective was favored. A study that fails to include the perspective of women may be gender biased. A study that only considers the problems of villages near a road may be spatially biased. A study that fails to probe issues deeply may be subject to a bias of "politeness" if people tell only what they think the interviewer wants to hear.
Triangulation is one of the principles of RA that tries to ensure that the results of a study are as accurate and unbiased as possible. Triangulation means looking at any problem from as many perspectives as possible, but at least three. When doing a study, triangulation works at three levels.
1 ) Triangulation of the perspectives on the team by having at least three people with different points of view (women/men, social scientists/technical specialists, insiders/ outsiders, youth/elders, etc.).
2) Triangulation of the perspectives of informants by ensuring that a wide range of people are interviewed and all information is verified by at least three different sources (women/men, old/young, diverse ethnic groups, etc.).
3) Triangulation of information gathering methods by addressing the same issue using several different tools (historical interviews, spatial maps, seasonal calendars, etc).
In simplistic terms, RRA can be seen .as being led by outsiders while PRA belongs to the local community In practice however these are not two distinct ways of proceeding Rather there is .a continuum between the two Effective RRA teams even when composed of outside researches put a lot of effort into building a rapport (see the following textbox) with local communities so that the study is in fact a collaborative process in which local participation is solicited at all stages of the research process. The tools of RA help to encourage this kind of local participation in both the collection and analysis of information
There is a wide middle ground between RRA and PRA in which outsiders may initiate the process but then ask the Iocal community to select several representatives to join their team as active members. Over time, a local community that becomes familiar with the techniques may take more control of the process. Many studies that call themselves PRA, in fact continue to have substantial participation of outsiders. Whether the local community succeeds in taking charge of the process when there is significant outsider participation depends a lot on the attitudes and behavior of the outsiders.
There are beginning to be examples of PRAs in which local communities take over the process completely. In one example in south India, a local non-governmental organization (NGO) worked with a community to introduce PRA techniques to study village problems and to devise plans to confront those problems. Some time later, the village sent a message to the NGO to tell them that they planned to do a PRA the following week. "But," they added, "there is no need for you to come, we were just letting you know...."
The Primacy of Rapport
Most experienced RA users would probably agree that the most important ingredient for getting good information using these techniques is the attitude of the researchers and the relationship they are able to develop with the local population. Robert Chambers, who is one of the "fathers" of RA has this to say about what he calls the "primacy of rapport" (Chambers 1991):
The key to facilitating ... participation is rapport. At first sight, it is a mystery why it has taken until 1990 to "discover" the richness of the knowledge, creativity, and analytic capacity in villagers. But when the widespread beliefs, attitudes and behavior of outsiders are considered, there is little mystery. Outsiders have been conditioned to believe that villagers are ignorant or have interviewed them asking rapid questions, interrupting, and not listening beyond immediate replies. "Our" lecturing and interviewing are much of the problem. The ignorance of rural people is then an artifact of our ignorance of how to enable them to express, share and extend their knowledge. The attitudes and behavior needed for rapport have been missing.
These include:
o participation by the outsider [in village activities]
o respect for the villager
o interest in what villagers have to say and show
o patience, wandering around, not rushing. and not interrupting
o humility
o materials and methods which empower villagers to express and analyse their knowledge
Where a study falls on the RRA-PRA continuum depends on a lot of factors. Most of the people who will read this manual are "outsiders" who do not fully belong to the local community. Hence, it is unlikely that the research process, at least at the beginning, will be wholly "owned" by the villagers themselves. "Outsiders" should stop to think about whether they foresee their team being the principal investigators (in which case they are working in more of the RRA mode) or whether they imagine their role to involve training the local community to be the principal investigators (in which case they are thinking more about PRA).
There are many different reasons for gathering information on resource management and tenure. Two common reasons are (1) so that villages can create plans to make better use of the resources at their disposal and (2) to inform and influence national policy/legislation concerning tenure and resource regulation. In the former case, the argument is particularly strong for PRA in which villagers are encouraged to take the lead - as much as possible and as early as possible - in managing the process of collecting and analysing information. This is much more likely to lead to sustainable solutions than a process that is dominated by outsiders. Gathering information for policy reform may lend itself more naturally to RRA, however, since information will be collected from numerous sites. Indeed, one reason for doing such studies may be to expose and educate outside decision makers to local realities.
An RA can be divided into three stages as shown in Figure 1. The first phase is a preparatory phase. Activities during this period include setting the objectives for the study, choosing the site and the team, collecting and reviewing background information, and making the necessary logistical arrangements for the field study. The second phase of the RA is the field study itself. During this time, the team lives in the village where the study is taking place and divides its time between information collection and interaction for preliminary analysis. For the third phase of the RA the team sits down to carefully analyse the information collected and figure out how it can be used. In the case of a PRA - and especially one that is intended to come up with a community action plan - the full analysis takes place in the village, with the active involvement of the local community. In the case of an RRA, some initial analysis will take place with the local community and the
information gathered is verified and shared with that community. But typically, in an RRA at least some part of the final analysis takes place after the team leaves the village At this point for example information collected from several different sites might he compared and analysed.
Figure 1: Organization of a rapid appraisal
The next three chapters will address in turn these phases of doing an HA study: preparation, information collection and analysis.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: Preparing a study of tenure issues
Setting objectives for the study
Choosing the site for the study
Selecting the team to do the study
Reviewing secondary materials
Making logistical arrangements
There are several important preparations that must be done before the field work begins in any RA. The preparation time for the study may take anywhere from a few days to several weeks, depending on the complexity of the study and how much the researcher already knows about the area.
Among the first questions to ask are "why is this study being done and what is expected from it?" This will help decide what kind of RA to do. While there are no rigid categories, RAs are often grouped in four classes.
o An exploratory RA is done when there is not much information about an area and a general overview of the situation is needed. This kind of RA often helps to identify issues that are important and warrant more detailed study.
o A topical RA looks at a particular subject and tries to get more in-depth information. It is more focused than an exploratory RA and often results in specific recommendations for actions needed to solve a problem.
o An RA for monitoring and evaluation is carried out when actions have already been undertaken. The study is done to see whether they have been effective and to suggest improvements in the programme or activity.
o The final class of RA leads to a process of participatory planning. The product from this kind of not just information or recommendation, but a detailed plan of action that is devised with the population at the site where the study takes place.
Information about tenure and natural resource management may be gathered in any of these studies, so it is important to consider carefully what the actual information needs are. Are they limited to a rather superficial look at tenure issues as part of a broader study on how people ensure their livelihoods? In this case, the RA will be broad and exploratory. Is there a need to gather lots of information on tenure questions, looking at broader issues only superficially to get a context for the study? In this case, the RA will be topical. The kinds of questions asked and the amount of time spent on different issues will be quite different depending on the type of information required. It is important that the members of the team and the organization for which the study is being carried out all agree on what needs to be learned before field work is begun. This will help to minimize disputes in the field and criticisms when results are presented upon return to the office.
Setting objectives for the study
Once a decision has been taken regarding the kind of study required, the specific objectives of the work must be considered. The objectives define what information is desired and will be used to guide activities in the field. If objectives are clearly defined, they help orient the research and make it more likely that useful results will be obtained in the end. It may help to think of research as a kind of puzzle. Each time a piece of information is collected, another piece of the puzzle is obtained. The objectives are like the frame or the border of the puzzle. It is necessary to collect information that will fit inside the borders which have been established by the objectives.
There are two dangers in setting objectives that can be illustrated by the puzzle example. The first danger is setting objectives that are too broad for the time available to do the study. In this case the frame is a large one. Even if a lot of information is collected, it is likely to be scattered, with one piece here and another there. At the end of the study, there will be so many blank areas remaining that it will be hard to make any sense of the picture and to see the significance of the information collected. At the other extreme is the danger of setting objectives that are too narrow. In this case the frame is very small and it is easy to get enough information to fill in the whole frame. The picture may be too small to make much sense, though, and the most interesting information may fall outside the frame around the study. (Example: the study covers everything there is to know about tree tenure, but the more locally relevant and conflictual subject is how pastures
are managed.)
Setting good objectives is often one of the most difficult parts of an RA. In an RRA, the whole team should participate and sometimes other members of the organization doing the study should be invited to assist in order to ensure that everyone is in agreement. Plenty of time must be allowed for discussion because this is where the team members' different perspectives need to be represented. For a PRA, the local community should be actively involved in setting the objectives for the field study. In this case, objective setting may be the first step in the field work.
In setting objectives, a common ground must be found so that the team will work comfortably together in the field. It is dangerous to set objectives that are either too broad or too narrow; a middle course should be found that meets information needs and is compatible with the time available for the study. Typically, it is useful to define a theme for the study and three or four principal objectives. Several sub-objectives can be noted to help guide the study but very specific questions should be avoided, since they more appropriately belong on the daily checklist of issues to be examined in detail (see Chapter 3).
Choosing the site for the study
There is no set pattern for carrying out an RA. Every field study is a little bit different because the questions to be answered and the conditions encountered vary. A "basic" RA as well as two of the many possible variations are discussed below.
The first example might be called the "basic" RA. This is the case where the team does a single field study in a single village. Typically, the team has three to six members and the field study might last from four days to a week. While this is the simplest kind of RA, it is probably not the most effective since there is no follow-up. These kinds of participatory techniques lend themselves to building longer-term relations with the local communities in question.
Sample Objectives for a Tenure Study
RESEARCH THEME: An exploratory/topical RA on tenure and natural resource management in the village of X.
OBJECTIVE 1:
Identify the territory (ies) of the village of X and, by micro-ecological zone/tenure niche, the principal natural resources found there.
OBJECTIVE 2:
Identify the users of natural resources and their utilization with particular attention to the following social categories:
o Gender
o Age groups
o Socio-economic status, e.g. caste and class
o Residents and outsiders
o Livelihood /herder, cultivator)
OBJECTIVE 3:
Identify the institutions and rules governing the management of natural resources
o Local rules and regulations
o State rules and regulations
o Community institutions
o External institutions
OBJECTIVE 4:
Identify the key tenure and natural resource management issues in the territory of X.
o Cause of conflict or situation
o Results
o Consequences and future perspectives
One variation is to do a series of RAs in one village over time. Research might be carried out with the village on three or more different occasions. This might be done to get information at different times of year, or at different points in the project cycle. The same village might host exploratory, topical and monitoring RAs, for example. The objectives for each RA would be different, depending on what kind of information was needed at the time of each study.
A PRA that tries to draw up a resource plan might be done either during one discrete time period (perhaps taking two weeks or more) or might be done sequentially over several weeks or months. If outsiders are involved, they may make several sojourns in the village. The first sojourn could serve to participate in planning the study and setting objectives for the work, a second to participate in the community's activities to collect information and a third to come up with a plan in light of the problems and potentialities identified. Then, over a period of several years, follow-up studies might take place to evaluate actions that have been undertaken and to plan new activities.
In a second variation, the objectives of the study stay the same but RAs are carried out on different sites. Perhaps several villages in different areas of the country or different micro-ecological zones might be selected in order to get a sense of the diversity or similarity of conditions. If outsiders are conducting the research, the same team might conduct all the studies or the team might split into sub-groups to explore the situation in different areas.
The decision of how many sites to include in the RA will depend on (a) the purpose of the study, (b) the size and nature (relatively more heterogeneous or more homogeneous) of the territory to be covered, and (c) the means available. If the purpose of the RA is to gather information to inform a project or policy decisions, information will probably need to be gathered from several sites. The more variation in the area being studied, the more sites will probably need to be selected in order to understand the range of situations. However, if the purpose of the study is to gather information that can be used locally to create an action plan, then each study is independent of any others and the number of villages is not a concern.
The next step in site selection is to think about the criteria to be used in choosing the sites. Here it is important to decide whether what is required is a site or sites that can be considered representative, or, on the other hand, a site or sites with some special characteristics. For example, if the purpose of the study is to inform the activities of a project that is working in a certain area, it may be useful to sample one or several villages that are fairly representative in terms of resource management. In this case villages that are very different from the average would be avoided (for example because they are particularly large or are comprised of an uncommon ethnic group).
If there are some important differences in the area, it might be necessary to make a stratified sample. This means that the major factors that might cause villages to manage their resources differently are identified in advance. For ex