<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
THE FORESTRY DEPARTMENT of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations has worked continually to integrate the concerns and interests of project participants into projects. FAO has underscored this commitment in various ways.
The FAO mandate is to find ways "to eliminate the hunger and poverty affecting millions of people in developing countries. FAO constantly presents the problems and interests of the world's farmers, particularly the smallest and poorest among them"^1. Additionally, in 1980, the FAO Committee on Forestry Development Strategy reoriented FAO forestry programmes "to transform forestry-based activities into more efficient agents of socio-economic change" and "to ensure that forestry activities are better adapted to the requirements of rural development with an increased emphasis on the objectives of eradicating poverty and increasing rural self-reliance".^2
Concurrent with FAO's drive to better focus its work on people, the Organization has begun to increase the attention it pays to the potentially differing needs of men and women in project design, planning and appraisal. FAO's commitment to that end has also become apparent in Plans of Action and Committee reports.
The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) initially framed the issue for all United Nations Agencies in 1979. While the basic principles and objectives it enunciated focused on "the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition", two of the six WCARRD programme areas of action explicitly demand "people's participation" and "the integration of women in rural development".^3
In 1990, the FAO Women in Agricultural Development (WID) Plan of Action structured guidelines "to ensure the incorporation of concerns for women into all its activities".^4 And the FAO Committee on Forestry's Women in Development Strategy stated in 1990 that "the FAO Forestry Department has been working to increase understanding of the role and dependence of women in forestry and to address women's needs".^5
It is acknowledged that part of any Forestry Department effort to focus programmes on the intended beneficiaries must involve the operationalization of channels for integration and monitoring of local people's situations and interests. Yet a review of project documentation in the Forestry Department revealed that while a great deal of information about project activities was available, almost no information about participants could be found. What projects did and how they did it, was reported. An indication of who participated and how they benefited was not formally traced. The individuals backstopping projects needed more people-oriented information. Those evaluating projects needed more opportunity to report on participants.^6
A consultancy, "Monitoring People in Forestry Projects", was initiated to help design a technique that would al low greater reporting from the field on the people and gender-related aspects of forestry projects. Among other things, the consultancy recommended that guidelines be created to indicate how projects could be designed, monitored and evaluated to focus on the various needs and interests of the different groups of intended beneficiaries.
This document presents guidelines that help better focus the project cycle on local people's concerns. More specifically, it begins with the assumption that local people's concerns are relevant and highlights the ways in which gender-based considerations need to be continually examined and can affect project operation, approach, success or failure. The approach was developed by Mary Rojas and synthesizes both a large body of literature and several agencies' experiences with participatory development, the use of socioeconomic indicators and gender issues in development.
^1. FAO, What it is. what it does. Rome. 1988
^2. FAO, Committee on Forestry. Women in agricultural development. Rome. 1980
^3. FAO, World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development ten years of follow-up. Guidlines on socio-economic indicators for monitoring agrarian reform and rural development. Rome. 1988
^4. FAO, Plan of action, women in agricultural development. Rome. 1990
^5. FAO, Committee on Forestry tenth session: women in forestry. Rome. 1990
<title>Integrating gender considerations into FAO forestry projects</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
THESE GUIDELINES FACILITATE a people-focused approach to forestry projects. They help project personnel consider the potentially distinct interests and concerns of male and female beneficiaries. While the guidelines begin to highlight some of the ways participants need to be disaggregated if projects are to be designed and implemented considering the full range of beneficiary concerns, it does not present all the relevant people-related issues that need attention. The guidelines focus on gender-based distinctions, one of several social dimensions that distinguish different sub-groups within any community. The full range of interdependent socio-cultural variables that influence different community member needs and priorities is broader (see diagram). Hence, even disaggregation by gender will group very heterogeneous sets of people together.
The diagram - Variables in the socio-economic context
The assumption of the guidelines is that the needs, interests and concerns of intended participants are centrally relevant at every stage in the project cycle. The guidelines provide a means by which gender considerations can be integrated into projects:
_ Who participants are intended to be, who they are
_ What they do
_ What constraints they face
_ Which resources they have available to them
_ Which resources they have access to, which they control
_ How their participation can be monitored
_ How the project's impact on beneficiaries can be determined
They show when participant-related information is going to be relevant and how that information can be gathered.
The implementation and operation of activities will naturally be more people-focused, take into consideration the relevant gender-related issues and lead to more effective and successful forestry projects if
_ local people are involved in the design, implementation and evaluation of projects;
_ "people-related" considerations are consistently the focus of the steps leading to implementation;
_ monitoring and evaluation emphasize the need to look at people, including gender-related aspects of the project; and,
_ the terms of reference for project personnel and consultants emphasize the need to consider and focus on people and gender-related issues.
<section>2</section>
I Why integrate gender considerations into forestry projects?
I Why integrate gender considerations into forestry projects?
The call to consider men and women independently when examining development activities has become virtually universal. Yet frequently, the need for such disaggregation is justified on the basis of past and continuing inequity. Development experts should, however, feel compelled to think about men and women independently, primarily because independent consideration increases the potential for the design, implementation and management of effective, sustainable development activities.
Men and women frequently have very distinct rights and responsibilities. They often control and have access to different resources, complete different jobs for the household, earn income in different ways, allocate time differently, have different legal and traditional rights, and possess different information regarding the structure of their community and the natural resources that surround them. As a result of these far-reaching distinctions women and men will frequently have different priorities and goals. Similarly, their ability to participate in forestry activities may vary depending upon the way projects are designed and implemented.
Consideration of the profound distinctions between men and women can improve the potential effectiveness of forestry projects in a number of ways.
1. Net economic benefit
IN ORDER TO MAXIMIZE the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of forestry activities, projects need to be targeted to meet local needs. Frequently, however, real task distribution is not accurately assessed prior to the development of programmes. The net economic benefits accrued by both FAO and the community increase when a thorough analysis of the community is used to develop projects and target subgroups of beneficiaries.
Both women and men are involved in different elements of the household's subsistence and income-earning agricultural activities. Their tasks are complementary, but distinct. Yet few training and extension programmes, for example, accurately and specifically target programmes based on local distribution of time and labour. As a result, the training and information services are sometimes, at best, conveyed secondarily to the person who actually completes the related task, decreasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the effort.
2. Sustainability
SUSTAINABILITY IS A CRUCIAL CONSIDERATION in any development activity to what extent can the project-recommended approach to natural resource management continue to be used beneficially without external support.
Throughout the world, both men and women are heavily involved in natural resource management and use. Their influence on the environment can differ greatly because their roles differ. Men are often more involved in clearing fields, hunting and tilling the soil, while women frequently do most of the fuel and water collecting, cooking and weeding. By virtue of their tasks, their influence on and role in environmental management varies.
3. Achievement of development objectives
FAO's OVER-ARCHING GOAL IS to eliminate hunger and poverty throughout the world, particularly by working with the poorest and least represented. To understand and assist the weakest society members, attention needs to be paid to exactly who the poorest are and what they do. Studies have shown that households headed by women compose a significant percentage of the population and are frequently among the poorest of the poor. In Africa, the percentage of households headed by women can be as great as 65% in areas where there is a high level of male migration (Commission of European Communities 1991). In order to understand and effectively work with these poor families, their special needs, rights and restrictions need to be understood and used in planning activities.
Similarly, if hunger and poverty are to be eliminated, beneficiaries must be carefully targeted based on their role in the family and the way they use their income. Women's and men's activities often differentially affect family wealth and nutrition. A study indicates that in Burkina Faso men spend 33% of their income on food and family needs while women spend 84% of their income on the family (Commission of European Communities 1991). By considering differences in spending and income earning activities, a more effective attempt to specifically work to eliminate poverty and hunger can be made.
4. Enthusiasm and participation
WHEN COMMUNITY MEMBERS feel that they own a project, the quality of the effort often increases enormously. The involvement of all those who may be affected by the project can increase the chances for success and investment on the part of local participants. For example, a government-sponsored reforestation effort in Peru suffered because women passively and actively resisted establishment of plantations even after the community assembly voted for their creation. Women were accustomed to influencing decision-making in the all-male assembly by speaking with their husbands privately prior to meetings. However the assembly to discuss the plantations had been called without enough prior notice to enable women to discuss the agenda with their husbands at home. Therefore, they felt excluded from decision-making and were disadvantaged by the final results.
<section>3</section>
II General tips and guidelines
II General tips and guidelines
1. Clearly define the ultimate beneficiaries in all project documents. A more specific definition of beneficiaries makes participants more tangible and increases the likelihood of successful project design and monitoring. An explicit description of beneficiaries highlights the relevant parties, helps in the design of an appropriate approach and facilitates monitoring. It becomes more obvious if important beneficiaries have been left out and need to be added.
2. Link specific project activities to specific beneficiaries. Reports often neglect completely the link between activities and recipients. Project documents frequently define groups of beneficiaries vaguely and with little reference to the specific ways in which they will benefit. Indicating how different groups will benefit differently can highlight the ways in which the project works for specific groups. For example, the project objective, "Increase the timber products yield", begs the question "to do what for whom?"
3. See beneficiaries as participants, not passive recipients. Projects should be viewed as collaborative activities that bring together the efforts of beneficiaries and outsiders to improve upon the status quo. The biggest obstacle to genuine participation is an approach in which development is seen as a process and the beneficiaries are thought of as objects and not actors.
4. Use gender-neutral terminology in project documents. Gender-neutral terminology can help prevent the creation of a sense of exclusion. Using the male form of a word to mean both men and women (i.e. "A Forest Economist is needed. He will be expected to...") can be confusing and does not indicate the importance FAO places on working with everyone. The "he" can prove to be self-fulfilling or misrepresentative.
5. Collect socio-economic information to identify project beneficiaries. Socioeconomic information can help determine who actual beneficiaries will be in the various social strata or resource dependent groups: men and/or women. Such information can also help reveal, in advance, the unintended potentially negative and positive impacts of a project on different groups within the project area.
6. Ensure that national counterparts, co-workers and staff support a people-focused approach to development. Project objectives become more persuasive when the goals of FAO and actual projects reflect those of local people. Try to give both women and men input into project design and decision-making. Make sure that national counterparts know the groups that the project intends to serve. Try to work with counterparts who already work with the various beneficiary groups.
7. When possible, integrate both women and men into the central activities of projects. It is generally more effective to involve both women and men in achievement of primary project objectives. If it is possible, women and men should work together, although a "women-only') project may be required where:
_ there are strong taboos against unrelated males and females working
_ together the effects of past discrimination need to be overcome
_ many or most households are headed by women
_ women specialize in tasks that could be made more productive with outside assistance
_ women request a measure of self-reliance to avoid conflict or competition with men (Dixon-Mueller 1988)
8. Disaggregate data by gender in reporting. Disaggregation of data highlights the importance of serving both men and women. It can also facilitate monitoring and reveal potential benefits or problems related to the gender of participants. For example, "Results: those trained, men 15, women 34, Total 49".
9. Maintain a file that documents the impact of the project on beneficiaries. When projects maintain a file that tracks different beneficiary groups based on gender, it helps re-emphasize the importance of both men and women as beneficiaries. It can also make monitoring and evaluation easier. A project's internal reporting system should be efficient so that external reporting is adequate.
<section>4</section>
III Integrating gender considerations into the project cycle
1. Pre-identification
2. Project identification, formulation and appraisal
Project identification: gathering information
Research
The project formulation framework document
Project formulation
The project document
Project appraisal
3. Implementation, monitoring and evaluation
Implementation
The inception report
Semi-annual and annual reports
Monitoring and evaluation
The beneficiaries: asking the questions
The tripartite review mission
The terminal report
III Integrating gender considerations into the project cycle
This section outlines the ways that gender considerations need to be integrated into the project cycle in its various stages. The different sections highlight the particularly stage-related issues that need to be confronted.
The successful integration of people-centred considerations in the creation, implementation and operation of a project will depend most on who participates in decision-making. The involvement of the communities as partners in the development process will help guarantee that forestry activities are designed to fit local circumstances. Similarly, the use of consultants and staff members who are aware of and have terms of reference (see chapter entitled "Choosing consultants and project staff") that emphasize the importance of people-related concerns will further reinforce the relevance of gender issues to each element of forestry efforts.
For all project cycle stages, the information that will aid incorporation of gender-related considerations into the project cycle will be consistently of the same nature. The depth and type of analysis will, however, change as design progresses. In-depth analysis will not need to take place in every stage of the project cycle.
The gender analysis framework overleaf outlines the basic questions that are relevant in the integration of gender considerations. Those questions should guide the entire project cycle. Depending on the country, the sector, the institutions, and other contextual factors, the answers to the questions in the framework can produce very different profiles.
Gender analysis framework: basic questions
1. Who does what? What is the actual (as opposed to the idealized) division of labour between men and women in the project area. For example, in many parts of rural Honduras the division of labour between men and women is clear. The men plant (siembran) the corn and the women grind (muelen) the corn. It can also be important to consider who provides "informal" assistance related to given tasks. In Honduras, although cultural prescriptions clearly divide labour by gender, the whole family helps in the fields when the corn needs to be harvested or the men leave the farm to work in sugar cane fields or pick coffee.
2. Who has what? Who has access to and control over private resources in the project area? In Honduras, for example, women in particular often have access to and control over land surrounding the house (solares). Those areas often have trees and vegetation that provide both food and income for the family.
3. What influences arrangements related to resource access and control? What cultural and religious prescriptions, laws, economic and political policies influence gender-differentiable rights of access and control. Are any of the gender-based distinctions flexible? In what ways are rules changing, if at all? In Kenya, because 60% of rural households are now headed or managed by women, they have begun to take on jobs that were traditionally done by men. The cultural prescriptions have evolved through necessity.
4. How are public resources distributed and who gets what? What institutional structures are involved; do they function equitably and efficiently? How can institutional responsiveness to al I community members be insured? For example, until recently in Honduras little attention was given to the land and agriculture which women controlled. Extension services focused primarily on corn growing (and therefore men). Women are now being trained to use fuel efficient stoves and to grow vegetables.
1. Pre-identification
IN PRE-IDENTIFICATION, it is most important to discuss explicitly the project beneficiaries and highlight gender considerations. Starting the process by enunciating the relevant considerations and focusing attention on the intended beneficiaries implicitly sets the tone for both future documentation and the project itself.
The idea for a project can come from a range of different sources - donors, governments, rural communities and multilateral organizations among others. Generally, pre-identification presents a social, economic or political opportunity or problem in a geographic area with a proposal for how to respond. Needs and opportunities can vary greatly - fuelwood, income from non-timber forest products, access to forest foods, trained forestry personnel, for example. Regardless of the target issue, answering the following five questions can lay the foundation for a project that focuses on the beneficiaries:
_ Which sectors, institutional personnel and community groups and individuals will be involved?
_ Who, around the world, is working on similar problems?
_ Who is working on similar problems in the targeted geographic region?
_ Who is examining the impact of similar types of problems on local people, both men and women?
_ What women's and men's groups, both inside and outside the proposed project area, can be consulted?
By considering each of these questions, the pre-identification statement can be written in an informed manner that adds both substance and credibility. The questions also help immediately focus the project on participants, both men and women. The pre-identification can be short while still responding to the questions.
Pre-identification: an example from Indonesia
Indonesia's Directorate General of Forest Utilization and Ministry of Forestry and several communities in East Kalimantan, along with FAO's Community Forestry Unit and Forest Products Marketing and Non-wood Forest Products Branches, are interested in promoting the development of non-timber forest products processing capability for income generation in East Kalimantan.
Forest products help support the livelihood of more than 100,000 Indonesians. Many studies of forest products in Asia have examined the significance of a wide range of forest products, from traditional medicines and forest foods to tools and other goods for household use and sale (FAO 1991, Peluso 1993). In East Kalimantan, rattan collection and trade are an extremely important activity for both male and female peasants and off-farm labourers. The rattan from that region comprises approximately 50% of Indonesian rattan exports, valued at some $150 million annually. Much of the rattan is sold unprocessed, removing much of the value-added production from the source of collection. Given the importance of rattan to regional income, a project to increase local male and female rattan processing capacity might be advisable.
The Community Forestry Unit within FAO has published many relevant documents including Community Forestry Case Study 4, entitled Case studies in forest-based small scale enterprises in Asia: rattan, matchmaking and handicrafts. The Government of Indonesia is increasingly aware of the important role women and men play in natural resource management and forestry. For example, it has sponsored a series of studies on rattan harvesting, processing and grading.
East Kalimantan residents are aware of the income earning potential of processing. Two Dayak brothers, for example, have established a first stage processing centre. This centre employs both men and women who are primarily producers and has led to the construction of a school and dormitory for workers' children (FAO 1990). In order to explore the potential for a project that promotes non-timber forest production and processing in the East Kalimantan region of Indonesia, preparation of a preliminary project description and appointment of a project formulation team are recommended.
NB: It is easy to draft a pre-identification statement that does not focus on participants. The above example could have focused on forest products, saying little about who relies on them or could benefit from promotional efforts.
2. Project identification, formulation and appraisal
PROGRESSIVELY MORE DETAILED information about the community and project circumstances is gathered and then confirmed in the project identification, formulation and appraisal stages.
The final output is the project document which contains a statement of the goals, objectives, activities and approach for the project. Theoretically, identification, formulation and appraisal have distinct purposes and approaches:
_ The project identification phase is used to gather the information that is needed to analyse and assess the project situation. Project identification research is extensive and fairly general.
_ During project formulation the relevant technical, economic and social considerations are investigated in detail. The formulation stage leads to production of the project document.
_ Project appraisal validates the data and conclusions from formulation while also reviewing the soundness of the project document on the policy, technical and financial levels.
Frequently identification, formulation and appraisal are done simultaneously or by a single team of people. As noted in the descriptions, the type and depth of research and analysis will differ. However, in each of the three phases the overriding principle is to ensure focus on:
_ people and the effect the project will have on individuals; and,
_ how the different activities, rights, needs and requirements of men and women can be considered in project activities.
First, it is important to get an idea of the community. The local approach to division of labour, and the rights, responsibilities, restrictions and benefits accrued by different subgroups, particularly women and men, need to be understood if the project is to be constructed truly considering all the relevant information. An analysis of local rules, regulations and customs can help the team become aware of the motives for and constraints to participation by different community members. It can also help the team to identify positive and negative effects of participation on different community members. Simply looking and knowing what to look for can provide a new view of men's and women's roles in the community and, therefore, indicate how the project may need to be adjusted given the site. Driving, walking or riding through part of the project site with the project's beneficiaries, objectives and some pertinent questions in mind can yield a great deal of information about
beneficiaries.
Project identification: gathering information
In order to ensure that beneficiaries and the opportunities for and constraints to their involvement are properly considered in project identification, social and socio-economic considerations must be examined to learn how proposed beneficiaries live and work. The basic framework identified in Table 1 provides the questions necessary for gathering the information that is needed at this stage. Several methods can be used in information collection: research, observation and consultation and discussion.
Research
n Existing information
A review of literature is a good first step in project identification. The literature search should be used to find out about the project area, the project objectives, the people living in area and similar projects elsewhere. The literature that is used should not be limited to external reports. When possible, it should combine international, national and local documentation.
In order to carry out a literature review that emphasizes the relevant people-related considerations, several particular subjects and types of institutions should be consulted in different venues:
o At FAO Rome headquarters. Publications available include:
_ Restoring the balance, the FAO Forestry Department policy paper on women and forest resources;
_ Women in community forestry: a field guide for project design and implementation, the FAO Forestry Department guidelines;
_ the forestry-specific literature on participatory development and gender, land tenure and farming systems research;
_ the literature available from the FAO Women's Service, Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service, the People's Participation Programme (ESH).
Through the above resources, other possible information sources will become apparent. Non-governmental organizations, governmental organizations, multilateral organizations and universities are all potentially useful. For example, women's organizations such as Kenya's Green Belt Movement, FINNIDA, UNIFEM, the World Bank, non-governmental organizations and university social sciences and women's studies departments are all sources of information regarding relevant socio-economic issues including those relating to gender. Some have published guidelines related to the integration of gender and women's issues in forestry.
o Within the partner country. A review of partner country literature will help the team understand the social or socio-economic issues: household characteristics, land tenure considerations, population and migration, labour supply and employment, income levels, social welfare policy end social organization-when possible all disaggregated by gender.
At national level, review government documents dealing with social or socioeconomic and gender issues and literature from universities, non-governmental organizations and women's groups.
At local level, review any literature from women's groups, municipal government agencies, cooperatives, extension offices, non-governmental organizations.
n New studies
A full socio-economic study of the project area is not appropriate during identification. Until the project is formulated such surveys cannot be properly designed. Socio-economic surveys on a variety of subjects (the specific topics will depend on the foreseen activities) will be needed later to provide baseline data for participatory project planning, monitoring and evaluation.
Rapid rural appraisal or participatory rural appraisal of the project area might be advisable during identification. There are many approaches to appraisals and the degree to which participants are actively involved varies. The gender analysis framework in Table 1 provides the basic questions for a rapid appraisal. A more detailed outline of the relevant questions is provided in Annex 1. For more in-depth consideration of the rapid appraisal approach to information gathering see Community Forestry Notes 3 and 5, Rapid appraisal and Rapid appraisal of tree and land tenure which are available in the FAO Forestry Department.
o Consultation and discussion. Consultation and discussion should also be used to gather information. A range of different people can often give relevant information from various perspectives and help ensure that relevant socioeconomic and gender-related issues are being considered. For example:
_ Discuss the issues with villagers, both men and women, local organizations, extension personnel, leaders of cooperatives and heads of municipal agencies within the geographic boundaries of the project.
_ Speak with the FAO Community Forestry Unit and Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service at FAO Headquarters in Rome, Italy.
_ Interview the heads of the governmental agencies within the partner country that deal with women's concerns and with concerns of ethnic groups or the poor in the country.
_ Interview university department faculty who deal with gender issues in the partner country. If they are to be partners in the development process, consultations with future project participants will be particularly important. Their early collaboration helps ensure that the project is developed with local circumstances in mind.
o Observation. Direct observation can help quickly gather information about a potential project site. There are many ways to systematically observe a community. Walk around the area at different times throughout the day and observe who is doing which tasks.
In observing, the following people-related questions should be kept in mind.
In the town or village:
_ Who are the people?
_ Who looks prosperous and who less prosperous?
_ What are women, men and children doing?
_ Which institutions - such as schools, religious buildings, health fa