<title>This is Codex Alimentarium - 2nd edition</title>
<section>1</section>
Overview
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
People everywhere have the basic right of access to food which is of good quality, safe and nutritious. Codex Alimentarius helps to reach this goal by combining consumer protection with food production and trade; globally, regionally and at the national and local level. Codex food standards, codes of practice and other guidelines protect consumers from unsafe food and fraudulent practices. At the same time they allow food producers, processors and traders access to markets by breaking down artificial non-tariff barriers to trade. Codex Alimentarius brings together all the interested parties - scientists, technical experts, governments, consumers and industry representatives to help develop standards for food manufacturing and trade. The Codex Alimentarius Commission is a unique, science-based, international organization. Its standards, guidelines and recommendations are recognized world-wide for their vital role in protecting the consumer and facilitating international
trade.
Hiroshi Nakajima
Director-General
World Health Organization
Because food-borne illnesses remain a worldwide public health problem, Codex Alimentarius is important to all humanity. No food is a nutritious food if it is not safe. By following the standards laid down by Codex Alimentarius, countries and individual businesses can help ensure that foods are safe and nutritious. Good practices start with hygiene. The World Health Organization's involvement in the work of Codex provides reassurance to anyone anywhere that foods produced according to its codes of hygienic practice and complying with its standards are safe and nutritious and offer adequate health protection. Stricter standards do not necessarily offer better health protection but may be used as non-tariff barriers to trade. The world will ever need more food, and international trade will need to flourish to meet this demand. All the more reason for Codex Alimentarius.
<section>2</section>
Codex Alimentarius: How it came about
"Simply stated, if Codex didn't exist, it would have to be developed... "
- Vice president for health, safety and quality control for a food exporting firm
Microbiological analysis for food quality control in India
The Codex scoreboard
o Codex membership: 146 countries
o Commodity food standards established: 237
o Hygienic and technological practice codes: 41
o Pesticides evaluated: 185
o Maximum residue limits (MRLs) established for pesticides: 3274
o Food additives evaluated: 760
o Food contaminants evaluated: 25
o Veterinary drugs evaluated: 54
The term Codex Alimentarius is taken from Latin and means food code. And that's just what Codex Alimentarius is: a code of food standards for all nations. Codex has been developed by an international commission established in 1962 when the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) recognized the need for international standards to guide the world's growing food industry and to protect the health of consumers. As spelled out in Volume I, the purpose of Codex Alimentarius is:
"... to guide and promote the elaboration and establishment of definitions and requirements for foods, to assist in their harmonization and, in doing so, to facilitate international trade".
Since it was established in 1962, the Codex Alimentarius Commission has produced sets of standards, guidelines and principles bound into 28 volumes which include 237 food commodity standards and 41 hygienic and technological practice codes. Codex has resulted in evaluations of the safety of over 700 food additives and contaminants and the setting of more than 3200 maximum residue limits for pesticides. As of 1994, Commission membership included 146 countries.
The standards contain "requirements for food aimed at ensuring the consumer a sound, wholesome food product free from adulteration, correctly labelled and presented".
Today there is little doubt that Codex Alimentarius has had a great impact on the quality and safety of the world's food supply. Codex has helped to upgrade standards for food manufacturing, processing, safety and quality all over the world and has contributed to an increase in international food trade of more than 800 percent since 1962.
Codex Alimentarius has had many parents, as food codes are about as old as the written word. The decision to establish an international programme might be traced back to 1943 when 44 nations met for a United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture. They recommended formation of an international organization "to assist governments to extend and improve standards of nutrient content of all important foods" and to consider "the formulation and adoption of similar international standards to facilitate and protect the interchange of such products between countries". The organization, which became today's FAO, was also to help the nations of the world agree on international methods of determination. The decision to establish an international programme was accelerated by moves in Europe to develop a European Food Code - the Codex Alimentarius Europeus.
While food codes may once have been written on stone tablets, the nature of food problems has changed for much of the world. In the past, concerns were mainly for food that had rotted or that had been adulterated by the inclusion of inferior or cheaper and sometimes dangerous substances. But in more recent years chemistry has altered that situation. Substances are now added to food for a variety of purposes - to preserve it longer, for instance, or to improve its nutrient value. And chemicals are applied to farm lands to make the crops grow faster, bigger and in less space. Chemicals are also put on crops to protect them from pests, and food animals are often treated with chemical drugs against disease.
One food problem that has not changed is bacterial contamination, often caused by improper handling of foods. Such contamination remains by far the leading cause of food-borne illnesses throughout the world. Indeed, as we shall see, the problem seems to be growing as new, or long dormant, pathogens emerge.
While chemicals have helped make food more abundant, as well as cheaper and easier to ship, they have not been without their drawbacks, one of which is the potential for adverse health consequences. Thus in 1953, WHO's governing body, the World Health Assembly, said the widening use of chemicals in the food industry presented a new public health problem that needed attention. FAO and WHO responded by setting up a joint committee of experts to study food additives. A few years later the two organizations agreed to establish world food standards. The work of the additives committee was blended in, resulting in what we know today as Codex Alimentarius.
Codex Alimentarius was created at just the right time. For one thing, the world population was growing from less than 3000 million in 1960 to more than 4000 million in 1980, meaning the world needed more food. Food production was also increasing rapidly, climbing by two-thirds during those 20 years.
Further, technologies other than those based on chemicals were coming to the farms. Until 1950, increases in crop production resulted mainly from bringing more land under cultivation. But since then, gains have been obtained largely by increasing yields.
This was done through more irrigation, more and better mechanization and new, high-yielding varieties of crops. Chemical fertilizers and pesticides played their part, and techniques to reduce food loss and wastage were introduced.
Just how important technology has been to world agriculture might best be shown with the example of improved wheat varieties for subtropical climates. India first began using them in 1966, at a time when the country was the world's second largest importer of grains. By 1972 India had doubled its grain production, and by the late 1970s it was self-sufficient in basic cereals.
Food preservation and processing technologies were also improved. One example of a technology developed during the period is extrusion cooking of cereals and related products, in which cereals are cooked faster in a process that one manufacturer advertised as "shot from guns". Also relatively new are textured vegetable proteins. Some made from high-protein soybeans are used throughout the world as meat extenders.
But while technology improves, the world's population continues to grow. The total is expected to reach nearly 6000 million by the year 2000, which would be a doubling since 1960. And yet resources on a planet that is two-thirds covered by water are finite. In fact, only 11 percent of the land is suitable for farming.
To increase their food production in coming years, the developing nations will bring more land into production and will get some additional harvests per year, but about 60 percent of their growth will come from increased yields.
How world soil conditions limit agriculture (percentages are of total land area)
Help from outside
Many international organizations help Codex develop its standards. Here is a list of some important ones:
o International Organization of Consumers' Unions (IOCU)
o International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
o Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC)
o United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
o General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
o International Dairy Federation (IDF)
o International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI)
It is important to note that Codex Alimentarius was developed at a time when many new nations were evolving in virtually all corners of the globe, nations with the responsibility for providing their citizens with safe, adequate and wholesome food supplies. Most of these nations needed to set up food control establishments - what today might be called infrastructures - that would provide systems to ensure quality and safety in growing, harvesting and distributing foods.
Codex Alimentarius has provided these nations with guides for good agricultural practices, including how to use pesticides; with commodity food standards for processing products; and with hygiene codes for making food safe for citizens and acceptable in international trade.
Codex also came along at a time when consumers were becoming more aware of what they were eating or what they were told they were eating. People became more concerned about getting proper nutrients and avoiding certain additives and contaminants.
To industrialized countries, Codex Alimentarius has become the ultimate reference. "What does Codex say?" is the question asked often by food technologists, manufacturers, government officials and consumer advocates as they ponder food-related matters. To developing countries, Codex is recognized as a ready-made set of requirements. Whether adopted into law entirely or simply by reference, Codex standards provide consumer protection, and both domestic food producers and importers know that the risk is theirs if they fail to live up to Codex.
<section>3</section>
International food trade
"Tell me what you eat, and I will tell you what you are. "
- Anthelme Brillat-Savarin (1755-1826)
The words of the Frenchman Savarin are not as appropriate in today's world when pasta can be found in Brazil, pita bread graces the shelves of German supermarkets, fresh Norwegian salmon is available in Saudi Arabia and Canadian wheat grows in China.
These are all signs of the times, signs that food has gone international. Even dictionary editors can testify to that. One English language collection had 800 more food words in its 1989 edition than in the one published 21 years earlier. Added were words such as tofu, chapati, sushi and crepe.
These signs of changing cuisines are confirmed by the fact that international food trade reached US$200000 million in 1989 and continues to grow.
More and more food is moving across borders for a combination of social, economic and technological reasons. Transportation has improved greatly, and better ways, such as freezing, have been found to preserve foods. In the economic boom after the Second World War, more people had more money and through travel they found out about foods eaten in other parts of the world. Mass migrations of people between countries and continents also contributed to the changes in eating habits.
On top of all this, many developing nations were ready to sell the foods they were producing to obtain funds to continue building up their countries.
The growth rates in exports and imports were phenomenal for some individual countries. For example, Chile exported 36 times more food in 1990 than in 1970. Malaysia reported a 13-fold increase in exports, and Thailand did 1178 percent more food export business in 1990 than in 1970. And all of these figures are adjusted for inflation.
On the import side, from 1970 to 1990, the Republic of Korea and its neighbour Japan both had more than eightfold inflation-adjusted increases in food imports. The value of Japan's imports topped US$17000 million in 1990. On the other side of the world, Spain's imports increased to nearly US$5000 million in 1990, a 947 percent gain from 20 years earlier. France imported 717 percent more over the same period.
And yet the figures could have been greater. Non-tariff trade barriers and failure to "harmonize" or adopt accepted food standards have resulted in countless food shipments being rejected by importing countries. For example, in the late 1980s, one country turned back some 18000 food shipments valued at US$1100 million in a single year. Had exporters been more aware of the country's requirements or had Codex procedures and standards been followed, much of that food would have reached the intended consumers.
Such rejections and detentions are costly. In some cases, food may be reconditioned or relabelled and thus salvaged, although in the case of perishable food this is not always possible. But often the food is rejected outright, and the exporter looks for a nearby buyer, which could mean that the unacceptable food is "dumped" on an unsuspecting third nation.
Imports are sometimes turned down because they contain certain chemicals that exceed maximum residue levels (MRLs), or what may be considered safe residue levels. Often that can be avoided by merely following Codex MRL standards.
Trends in world food and animal exports 1970-1990
All charts adjusted for inflation; 1979-1981 average = 100
Trends in food and animal exports by developing countries 1970-1990
Take bananas as an example. They are grown in tropical areas and shipped to countries in temperate regions, which usually have no experience with chemicals used in banana growing. There is no need for the importing country to test and evaluate a pesticide used on bananas if Codex has already done it. Without the Codex standard, bananas containing any amount of the unfamiliar pesticide might be turned away, safe as they may be.
Non-tariff barriers are another matter. They may be disguised as health or safety measures, but their purpose is to protect farm products of the importing country, or they may be a response to consumer misconceptions about the dangers of chemical products used to promote plant or animal growth.
Such examples point to the need for harmonization of food standards. Harmonization, a word long used in international food trade, is shorthand for getting the countries of the world to agree on food codes. Harmonization aims at agreement on:
o testing and inspection procedures,
o acceptance of test data,
o rules concerning food.
Complete harmonization of food standards may never be fully realized because there are too many parochial or local reasons for countries to adhere to a particular standard and because scientists and societies sometimes reach different conclusions for different reasons. But pressures are building because non-tariff barriers are constraining world trade.
To further harmonization, Codex Alimentarius stands ready with scientifically and technically based standards that represent a consensus of food and trade experts from around the world. They are standards that international trade negotiators are using more and more for settling disputes.
Crates of oranges being loaded in Morocco for shipping to Europe
Trends in food and animal imports Chile 1970-1990
Trends in food and animal imports France 1970-1990
<section>4</section>
Modus operandi of Codex Alimentarius (the way codex operates)
Food standards under debate. The Codex Alimentarius Commission meets every other year in either Rome or Geneva
When the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization got together in 1962 to implement the Joint FAD/WHO Food Standards Programme, the two organizations set up the Codex Alimentarius Commission, consisting of the nations belonging to FAO or WHO that wish to participate in the Codex programme.
The Commission meets every other year, alternating between Rome, Italy, and Geneva, Switzerland, and is supported by staff from FAO and WHO. The Secretariat is located in Rome in the Food Quality and Standards Service of FAO's Food Policy and Nutrition Division. The WHO focal point is the Food Safety Unit of WHO's Division of Food and Nutrition in Geneva.
An Executive Committee of the Commission is responsible for making recommendations about the general direction of the Commission's work. Regional coordinating committees see that the work is responsive to regional interests and to developing countries. The Executive Committee, which meets between Commission sessions, acts as the executive organ of the Commission and may make decisions for the Commission subject to approval at the next Commission session.
The Executive Committee is geographically balanced, with no two members elected from the same country. Terms and re-election are limited so that the chairman and three vice chairmen may hold their offices for no more than four years.
The Commission has set up 28 general subject and commodity committees. These are the groups that draft standards and make recommendations to the Commission. The Commission itself determines the need for a standard and arranges for it to be drafted. That begins an eight-step procedure in which the standards - including such items as maximum residue levels (MRLs), codes of practice and guidelines - are reviewed twice by the Commission and twice by governments and other interested parties, including food manufacturers, traders and consumer advocates, before adoption.
Hillside terracing for farming in Peru
After a standard is published, the Codex Secretariat periodically provides a list of the countries that have accepted it so that exporters know where they can ship their products that conform to Codex.
Of the 28 subsidiary bodies within Codex, the seven so-called general subject committees are, as might be expected, the most far-reaching. These seven committees work closely with scientific bodies in developing the standards and recommendations. The committees and their host countries are:
o Food Labelling (Canada)
o Food Additives and Contaminants (The Netherlands)
o Food Hygiene (United States)
o Pesticide Residues (The Netherlands)
o Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (United States)
o Methods of Analysis and Sampling (Hungary)
o Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (Australia)
In addition, a General Principles Committee (France) has set the procedures and rules for Codex Alimentarius. Although the rules and procedures were made final in 1969, small changes have been introduced over the years to make sure that they are always up-to-date.
Eighteen commodity committees have operated from time to time. Six are still active, while 11 have been adjourned without setting new meeting dates, and one has been dissolved. Those that are still active and their host countries are:
o Fish and Fishery Products (Norway)
o Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses (Germany)
o Fats and Oils (United Kingdom)
o Milk and Milk Products (New Zealand)
o Cereals, Pulses and Legumes (United States)
o Tropical Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (Mexico)
Adjourned are committees on processed fruits and vegetables, cocoa products and chocolate, processed meat and poultry products, meat hygiene, fruit juices, sugars, soups and broths, edible ices, vegetable proteins, natural mineral waters and quick frozen foods.
The host countries fund the committees, while FAO and WHO share the overall costs of the Codex programme, with FAO providing about 80 percent of the funds.
Also active in the Commission's work are representatives of food industry associations, consumer groups and international scientific and food technology organizations.
<section>5</section>
Commodity food standards
"A rose is a rose is a rose. "
- From "Sacred Emily" by Gertrude Stein
A production line for catsup, a condiment, in the United States
And a can of tomatoes is a can of tomatoes is a can of tomatoes. Or is it? That depends. Yes, there are tomatoes in the can, but what liquid were they packed in? The type and amount of liquid makes quite a difference in the taste and quantity of tomatoes. Also, are any spices, seasonings, food additives or fillers added?
Food standards are needed so we know that when we buy a can of tomatoes we are getting a generous portion of tomatoes and not a lot of cheap, inferior and maybe dangerous filler in the can. Consequently, a can of tomatoes in Italy can be the same as a can of tomatoes in Canada, which in turn can be the same as a can of tomatoes in Argentina.
The more than 200 food standards developed by Codex are contained - along with labelling and additive standards and other recommendations - in 19 volumes. That may sound daunting, but the standards have been neatly condensed in a portable loose-leaf binder that references the more detailed materials needed.
Also listed are the additives that may be used in these tomatoes. In this case they include acidifying and firming agents. Maximum levels for the additives are spelled out in the complete Codex and are referenced in the additives part of the abridged version. For example, under firming agents permitted in tomatoes, the first listing is identified by its INS (International Numbering System) number of 509. Reference to page 86 of the additives section in the binder reveals that the agent is calcium chloride, which may be used in quantities of 450 or 800 milligrams per kilogram depending on whether the tomatoes are cut up or whole.
PART B - CODEX WORLDWIDE FOOD STANDARDS
DIVISION 4 - PROCESSED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES AND EDIBLE FUNGI
CANNED TOMATOES (CODEX STAN 13-1981)
(a) shall be the product prepared from washed, ripened tomatoes, conforming to the characteristics of the fruit of Lycopersicum esculentem P. Mill. The product shall be heat processed and have had the stems and slices removed and shall have been cored, except where the internal core is insignificant as to texture and appearance.
(b) the product may:
o be packed in packing media including the following: juice, residual material puree or pulp, paste
o contain spices, spice oils, seasoning, starch, vegetable products (such as onion, peppers, celery, and basil leaf providing that such ingredients do not exceed 10% m/m of the product), salt and when acidifying agents are used, sucrose, dextrose, and dried glucose syrup
(c) may contain the following food additives indicated in the relevant pages of Division. 3 as listed below:
FOOD ADDITIVE/CLASS NAME
INS NO.
PAGE
Acidifying Agents
Firming Agents
(d) the minimum drained weight of the product shall be not less than 50% of the weight of distilled water at 20°C, which the sealed containers will hold when completely filled in addition to the mandatory labelling provisions found in the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods, the following specific provisions apply:
o if the peel has not been removed, the word "unpeeled"
o the packing material, as appropriate in close proximity to the common name "Tomatoes"; "tomato puree", "tomato pulp", or "tomato paste".
o the style: "diced", "sliced", or "wedges" as appropriate
o the type: "flavoured", "seasoned" or "stewed" as appropriate
o the style, "whole" when the product consists of not less than 80% m/m of drained tomatoes in whole or almost whole units.
The standard makes no mention of tolerating blemishes in the product. Nor are any extraneous items permitted, so we wouldn't expect to find pieces of vine in the can. With some products, blemishes, pieces of pits and the like may be permitted, but always to a limited degree. For example, the Codex standard for raisins allows two pieces of stems per kilogram, while the canned mandarin orange standard permits one seed per 100 grams.
The categories covered in the 237 Codex commodity food standards are listed below, in the order in which they appear in Codex documents:
o Processed fruits and vegetables and edible fungi
o Sugars
o Processed meats, poultry products and bouillons and consommés
o Fish and fishery products
o Cocoa products and chocolate
o Quick frozen fruits and vegetables
o Fruit juices, concentrated fruit juices and fruit nectars
o Edible fats and oils
o Milk products
o Cereals, pulses, legumes and derived products
o Edible ices and ice mixes
o Vegetable proteins
Regional standards for gari, pearl millet grains and pearl millet flour for Africa, and natural mineral water, vinegar, mayonnaise and the fresh fungus "chanterelle" for Europe are being converted to fully international standards.
There is also a general standard for irradiated foods, telling what levels of irradiation may be used on what foods. The foods covered are chicken, cocoa beans, dates, mangoes, onions, papaya, potatoes, pulses, rice, spices, strawberries, dried fish and fish products and wheat. Irradiation is used on these products to control insect infestation, reduce microbial contamination and/or prolong storage life.
In addition, standards have been developed for foods for special diets. These include low-sodium foods, gluten-free foods infant formulas, baby foods and cereal-based foods for infants and children.
As international trade grows and consumer interest peaks, the emphasis is shifting to more flexible commodity standards, which treat additives, contaminants and other items on an across-the-board or horizontal basis. This change should help to breach those non-tariff barriers that some nations have erected in the guise of health protection measures.
Not that food standards will be abandoned. Far from it. They're still needed and still used because a can of tomatoes must always be a can of tomatoes.
Young woman at work in a seafood packing plant in Shanghai, China
<section>6</section>
Labeling to communicate
"Not the same thing a bit, " said the Hatter. "Why, you might as well say that 'I see what I eat' is the same thing as 'I eat what I see'. "
- From Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll.
Food labelling is important, providing valuble information to the consumer
In some countries surveys consistently show that well over half the shoppers read labels on food products. Glance into a market or food store and you might well find someone scanning an ingredient list.
People are reading those labels because they're looking for value for their money and because they believe that diet and health are linked. They want to know if the product contains some substance that they want to avoid or limit for health reasons.
Codex Alimentarius has recognized the importance of labelling and has developed not only standards for conventional labels but also model regulations to control outrageous or unsubstantiated claims made on labels, as well as special regulations on nutrition labels and health claims.
According to Codex, a food label has to contain the following:
o name of the food,
o list of ingredients (in descending order of quantity),
o net contents and drained weight,
o name and address of the manufacturer,
o country of origin,
o lot identification,
o date marking and storage instructions,
o instructions for use.
The rules provide for the use of class names such as vegetable or animal oils, fat, starch, cheese, sugar and spices. In addition, class titles for food additives must be used together with the specified name of the additive. The additive classes include: anticaking agents, preservatives, stabilizers, thickeners/gelling agents, flour treatment agents, sweeteners, acidity regulators, propellants, raising agents/baking powder and emulsifying salts.
The date that is required is the minimum durability (best if used before) date, which tells how long the manufacturer can guarantee the true quality of the product. In addition, on a food that has been treated with ionizing radiation, the label must indicate such treatment in close proximity to the common name of the food.
The model Codex nutrition label is in guideline form and thus is advisory in nature. The guideline suggests that the nutrition label be required when a nutrition claim or representation is made on the label; then the declaration of a standard list of nutrients must be made. The idea of the nutrition label is to require the manufacturer to back up a claim by providing more information on the nutrient value of the product.
A nutrition claim is "any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular nutritional properties including but not limited to the energy value [calories] and to the content of protein, fat and carbohydrates, as well as the content of vitamins and minerals". The vitamin/mineral list should include those for which the country has established recommended daily allowances and should include only those substances that are present in significant quantities in the product.
The nutrition label on this page, for example, shows quantities of 9 percent or more of the recommended daily intake for nine vitamins and minerals. A total of 16 vitamins and minerals have been assigned recommended daily allowances by FAO/WHO. On the label used in the example, the seven of those that are not listed (vitamins A, D, E, C and B12 and the minerals phosphorus and iodine) are not in sufficient quantity to be listed. The guidelines on claims seek to preclude foods from being wrongly presented as superior from a nutritional or health standpoint. For example, claims that foods have medicinal properties are flatly prohibited.
Codex also has a general standard for labelling food additives. It covers additives used commercially as well as home cooking items such as the colours that are added to frosting.
Example of nutrition labelling according to Codex guidelines
*WHOLE WHEAT DINNER ROLL
*1 serving-1 roll = 35 g
NUTRITION INFORMATION
per 100 g
Energy
257 Cal
(1086 kJ)
Protein
10 g
Fat
3 g
Carbohydrate
51 g
PERCENTAGE OF RECOMMENDED DAILY INTAKE
Thiamin
Riboflavin
Niacin
Vitamin B6
Folacin
Calcium
Magnesium
Iron
Zinc
Example of a conventional food product label that meets the Codex general standard
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL
MARMALADE
375 ml
INGREDIENTS: Sugar, orange peel, water, orange juice concentrate, pectin (gelling agent), citric acid (acidity regulator)
PRODUCT OF CANADA
XYZ CANNING COMPANY Toronto, Ontario
SIDE OR BACK PANEL
Best if used before 30/11/92
Batch No. 1594
Refrigerate after opening
<section>7</section>
Food hygiene
Street foods for sale in Africa
A food inspector at work
While food contamination from synthetic chemicals such as pesticides has been of growing concern to health authorities, naturally occurring microbiological food contaminants are a bigger threat to the world's general health. Diarrhoea from bacteria- and virus-contaminated food is estimated by WHO to run into billions of cases each year. Most of the victims are children under the age of 5 in developing countries.
Such illnesses continue to be a problem because food can be subject to harmful contamination from the soil it's grown in, from the animal it's derived from, from handling during processing and preparation, and from the dish it may be served on. A teaspoon of soil, for example, contains about 2000 million bacteria, while the human body carries some 150 types that number around 1 million. The vast majority of those bacteria are not harmful; some are even beneficial, and some are used in making food.
Generally, bacteria need food, moisture, warmth and time. Given the right conditions, some harmful bacteria found in foods can double their numbers in just 20 minutes. But it is also generally true that temperatures above 70°C (160°F) will kill most of them and 