<title>Drylands development and combating desertification </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Research and development programmes sustainable management of arid and semi-arid lands and in combating desertification have been implemented in various regions of the world. In each of them, diverse approaches have been adopted which do not benefit as much as they could from the experiences and results obtained in other regions. The case of the countries of the Community of Independent States (CIS), which until 1989 made up the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), is representative of this: what has happened there in the management of arid and semi-arid zones and in the combat against desertification has remained until now little or unknown by specialists in these fields in other regions. As one of FAO's roles is to collect and diffuse information on agricultural and rural development and corresponding fields of research, and on the conservation of natural resources, it was therefore decided to undertake a bibliographic study of the work in this sector implemented by
the countries of the CIS.
This study has been conceived and carried out within the framework of the Sub-group on Desertification of the Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Sustainable Development of FAO. It has been entrusted to Mr. Florian Plit, Professor of Geography at the University of Warsaw, who has been assisted by Mrs. Joanna Plit of the Polish Academy of Sciences, and by Mr. Wladyslaw Zakowski of the University of Warsaw. FAO would like to thank Mr. F. Plit and his collaborators for the quality of this work, which has been completed in a relatively short period of time considering the extent of information collected. Within FAO, Mr. Aleksander Kawalec, Senior Agricultural Officer at the Investment Centre, has been in charge of coordinating the study.
The mandate of this study was to investigate the principal institutions of CIS countries specializing in this field, and the work they do; to analyze available documents and select those which demonstrate the greatest methodological, technical, or socio-economic interest; and, for each of them, to prepare a bibliographic note including, among other things, a summary of the principal conclusions of the document. The work proceeded in three stages: collection and compilation of the documentation available in Warsaw on CIS institutions and their work; discussions with the personnel of the scientific institutions concerned in Moscow, Kiev and Alma Ata, and the collection of supplementary documents and information from these institutions; and, finally, drafting the summary and the bibliographic entries.
FAO hopes that this study best fulfills its designated objective, which is to usefully inform researchers and managers working in the fields of managing arid and semi-arid lands and combating desertification, of the experiences of their colleagues in CIS countries, so that they may benefit from them.
J.P. Lanly
Chairman
Desertification Group
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
BI Botanika Instituty (Botanical Institute), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata.
BiL Bibliotïeka imïeni Lïenina (Lenin Library), Moscow.
BIV Bibliotïeka imïeni V.I. Vïernads'kogo (V.I. Viernadsky Library), Kiev.
CIS Community of Independent States
ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
ESKATO (= ESCAP) Ekonomichïeskaïa i Stosial'naïa Kommissiïa OON po stranam Azii i Tikhogo Okïeana.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
GNP Gross national product.
IGRAN Institut Gïeografii Rossiïskoï Akadïemii Naouk (Geographical §Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences), Moscow.
IP Institut Pustyn' (Institute of Deserts, Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ashkhabad.
KR FAK Kazakhstan Rïespublikasy. Fylym Akadïemiiasynym Kitapkhasy (Republic of Kazakhstan. Academy of Sciences Library), Alma Ata.
MGU Moskovskiï Gosudarstvïennyï Univïersitïet imïeni M. Lomonosova (M. Lomonossov University), Moscow.
RAN Russkaïa Akadïemiïa Naouk (Russian Academy of Sciences)
SOPS Sovïet pro Organizatsii Proizvoditïel'nykh Sil (Council for the Organization of Productive Forces)
UAM Uniwersytet Adama Mickiewicza w Poznaniu (Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan').
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme.
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
WGiSR UW Wydzial Geografii i Studiow Regionalnych Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego (Department of Geography and Regional Studies, University of Warsaw), Warsaw.
<section>3</section>
List of place names changed between 1990 and 1993
Former name Present name
Ashkhabad* Ashgabat
Alma Ata* Almaty
Frunze Bishkek (Bishkïek)
Karakumy Garagum
Kazakhstan* Kazakstan
Leningrad Saint Petersburg (Sankt Pïetïerburg)
Tukmenia Turkmenistan
* The former name is still accepted.
<section>4</section>
1. Ecological and socio-political context of drylands development and desertification in the ex-USSR
1.1 The processes of change in the Community of Independent States (CIS), whether economic, social, political, or in institutions of research and development, are very rapid. Therefore, the results cited in this report are only provisional. They must be regularly brought up to date by other missions and by consultations with experts and organizations concerned.
1.2 It is impossible to understand desertification and, more widely, any degradation of the natural environment in the countries of the CIS without considering the geography and history of the Soviet Union, even that of Czarist Russia. Until the end of 1991, the Soviet Union was the largest country of the world (22.4 million km^2), extending from the ice deserts of the north, across the tundra, through pine, mixed, and deciduous forests, to the steppes, the semi-deserts and the sub tropical deserts of the south. In the Russian language, as in English, the word "desert" (pustyni) is used both to describe deserts in arid and semiarid zones, where the paucity of vegetation and animal life results from a deficit of water, and to designate ice deserts where this scarcity is essentially due to cold. Occasionally, the term "desert" is used for high-altitude lands above the snow line. However, this term can only be used without an adjective to describe deserts in arid or semi-arid
zones; in other cases, an adjective is indispensable (liedovyïe pustyni - ice desert, gornyïe pustyni - mountain desert). The term "desertification" (opustynivaniïe) is only used to refer to lands in arid or semi-aria zones.
1.3 This mission is concerned exclusively with the deserts of arid and semi-arid zones. The difference between scientific research pertaining to subtropical deserts and to ice deserts is so important that these problems are approached in the CIS by different scientific institutes, and when, rarely, within the same geographic institute, by different teams of scientists. We have not seen a case of collaboration between specialists of subtropical deserts and specialists of ice deserts, nor of a scientist who deals with the problems of both regions.
1.4 Arid and semi-arid zones were described in Russia relatively late, some not until the end of the 19th century (the deserts of central Asia). Scientific research on deserts began at almost the same time as the «conquest." In relation to the questions arising about climate change and the possibility of aridification, research has been carried out by the main centres at St. Petersburg and Moscow. In particular, the limnological work of L.S. Berg has contributed to the dominant opinion that in Central Asia it is a question of the more or less cyclic variation of rainfall rather than of the aridification of the climate or of desertification (cf. bibliographical entry 116). This has undoubtedly caused a lessening of interest in the issue of desertification, especially theoretical work. The emphasis has been on technical questions relating to the management of arid and semi-arid lands.
1.5 After the creation of the Soviet Union, almost all the arid and semi-arid regions of the country were found outside the borders of the Federal Republic of Russia, the largest and the politically and economically dominant republic, in Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, in the Caucasus and in the Ukraine. In the Soviet system of organization, the Academy of Sciences had the major research role, not the universities. The centre at Moscow held the dominant position, but all the republics had their Academies of Science which concentrated on their own problems. This meant that questions concerning arid and semi-arid zones (including desertification) came up in the research centres of republics outside Russia. The centres at Ashkhabad (Turkmenistan), Baku (Azerbaijan), and Alma Ata (Kazakhstan) were the most dynamic. Nevertheless, almost all their publications were published in Russian.
1.6 The goal of most scientific projects was to modify the natural environment; the official thesis extolled the harmony between the development of the socialist economy and the rational exploitation of natural resources. This had a considerable effect on the character of scientific research. The problems of desertification in arid lands in the USSR were scarcely addressed.
1.7 In the mid-1970's, information on desertification appeared in only a few articles analytic studies concerning relatively small areas (cf. bibl. entries 76, 110, 147). The same is true for work on the degradation of the natural environment in the USSR at that time. However, there were numerous studies, often very detailed, concerning the natural environment of arid and semi-arid regions (vegetation, soil, geochemistry, landscape cf. bibl. entries 80, 122) which described methods of combating desertification and the implementation of concrete actions (cf. bibl. entries 5, 62, 120).
1.8 At the end of the 1970's, the problem of desertification became one of the most important scientific issues world-wide. Soviet scientists' interest in desertification increased remarkably, all the more because acknowledging the catastrophic state of the natural environment slowly ceased to be taboo, thanks in part to the work of Soviet dissidents (cf. bibl. entry 42). During the United Nations Conference on Desertification in Nairobi in 1977, the USSR presented documents dealing not only with the management of deserts but also with the degradation of arid and semi-arid lands. In their terminological work relative to the natural environment of deserts, Soviet scientists made a significant contribution to global thinking on desertification (cf. bibl. entries 59, 70). However, this work still dealt with desertification in an indirect rather than direct manner. After 1977, documents on desertification were published in the USSR which emphasized the process of degradation and
the biological systems involved (cf. bibl. entries 12, 44, 45, 79, and others). At the end of the 1980's, in "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'», articles treating desertification directly become predominant. These are regional studies, analyses of processes, and methodological and terminological texts (cf. bibl. entries 35, 36, 48, 103, 143, and others).
1.9 The evolution of Soviet opinion on the subject of desertification can be seen by taking the example of publications concerning the Aral Sea. At first, official optimism is the rule: thanks to the diversion of Siberian rivers, it was considered possible to accomplish enormous irrigation projects (cf. bibl. entries 49, 61, 87, 106) and to assure the future of the sea. Contemporary publications, on the other hand, describe the catastrophic state of the sea and its surrounding environment, as well as the absence of solutions.
1.10 During the last ten years, there has been a growing interest among Soviet scientists in work taking place in other countries. Although this has always been the case, today it is becoming more and more apparent. The regions which most interest scientists in the CIS are the deserts and semi-deserts of Asia and Africa (cf. bibl. entries 3, 48, 63, 85, 111).
1.11 Works on desertification published in the USSR generally show a marked concentration on biological and geochemical issues and a neglect of social questions. Studies concerning the natural environment are much more concrete than those, less numerous, on social problems, which fall into ideology and are full of generalities. This tendency prevails during the entire period analyzed and is equally apparent today, as is reflected in a bibliography dominated by work in the fields of biology, pedology, geochemistry, etc.
1.12 As for the future of arid and semi-arid lands, it is not easy to pronounce a forecast. During the last several decades, there has been significant development, but at the same time there has been environmental degradation. It is difficult to foresee the consequences of the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Several scenarios are possible. On the one hand, land and water are beginning to acquire an economic value, and privatization and the decentralization of management could contribute to limiting waste. But on the other hand, the solution to these problems - such as the particularly serious one of the Aral Sea, which requires the cooperation of at least 5 countries (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan) and probably Russia - needs financial means that none of these countries has available.
1.13 The break-up of the USSR could have very negative effects on desertification research. The "pessimistic" scenario, which is not inevitable, predicts that the scientific institutes of all the CIS countries will publish their work exclusively in their national languages, which are less known in the world than Russian. It is also feared that cooperation between institutions will stop, many scientists of Russian origin working in other countries will leave for Russia where they will not be able to work as easily in the field of drylands development, and even that scientific institutes might be liquidated due to financial difficulties and internal conflicts. It is also clear that lack of money will limit work on drylands management and on combating desertification.
<section>5</section>
2. Institutions concerned with the issues of desertification and drylands development
A. Turkmenistan
B. Russia
C. Kazakhstan
D. Ukraine
E. Centres in other states of the CIS
F. Projects for change
2.1 In the Soviet Union, all scientific work on desertification and drylands development, whether theoretical or practical, was concentrated in the institutes of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union. These were important establishments with hundreds of employees including administrative and support personnel.
A. Turkmenistan
2.2 The most important research institution in these fields is the Institute of Deserts of the Academy of Sciences of the SSR1 ^1 of Turkmenistan, renamed in late 1991 the Institute of Deserts of the Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan (Turkm.: Chöllïer Instituty, Turkmïenistan Ylymnar Akadïemiïasy; Russian: Institut Pustyn' Akadïemii Naouk Turkmïenistana). Founded in 1962, it has taken charge of the research stations at Repetek (Rïepïetïek), and has two other stations near Ashkhabad. The Institute has a total of about 400 employees. Its address is: 15 ulitsa Gogolïa, Ashkhabad (Turkm.: Ashgabat). The address "Ashkhabad sad Keshi," which is occasionally seen (for example, in World of Learning), is false.
^1 SSR - Soviet Socialist Republic
2.3 The Institute, currently directed by A. G. Babaïev (Babayev), is interdisciplinary, employing geographers, biologists, engineers, computer experts, agronomists and other specialists. In the 1970's, the work of the Institute concentrated on accumulating knowledge of the deserts of Central Asia and on their management, particularly sand dune fixation. In the 1980's, the Institute took an increasing interest in studies on the degradation of the natural environment, on changes in the Aral Sea region, and on the possibilities of limiting their negative impact. Noteworthy among these researchers is Mr. I.S. Zonn who coordinated this research and is the author of several works on defining desertification (cf. chapter 4 A and bibliographical entries).
2.4 Since 1967 the Institute of Deserts has published the bimonthly "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'" (cf. bibl. entry 15; Turkm.: Chöllïeri özlïeshdirmïegin prïoblïemalary) and several publications whose visual presentation leaves something to be desired (small characters, lack of photographs, barely readable graphics). These are mainly team efforts under the direction of A.G. Babaïev. So far, the Institute publishes almost exclusively in Russian, although its scientists come from various republics (many of them, however, are Russian). Its books are written exclusively in Russian, as are the articles in "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'," sometimes accompanied by brief summaries in Turkoman and/or English, with the title page in Russian and in Turkoman (since 1992, Turkoman first), and the titles of articles in Turkoman, occasionally in English. The official documents of the USSR were drafted by the Institute in English (cf. bibl. entries 12, 22, 49). Since 1980 the English
version of "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn"' has been published in the U.S. (by Alerton Press).
2.5 A.G. Babaïev and a delegation from the Academy of Sciences of the USSR participated at the United Nations Conference on Desertification (Nairobi, 1977). Since the conference, the Institute has acquired a privileged position in doing research on desertification in the USSR. It coordinated the programmes USSR/UNEP, USSR/UNEP/FAO, USSR/UNESCO and the cooperation of the USSR in ESCAP.
2.6 The Institute of Deserts has organized courses for specialists from developing countries on the development and management of pasture resources and on integrated development (cf. bibl. entries 20, 21, 71, 144). For scientific expertise, the Institute benefits from the services of the institutes of other republics; the organizational side of its work has been taken over by the Centre of International Projects of the Higher Committee of Science and Technology of Moscow (Tsientr Miezhdunarodoykh Proïektov, Glavnyï Komitïet po Naoukïe i Tiekhnikïe).
2.7 In Turkmenistan, apart from the Institute of Deserts, no other research centre exists which deals with desertification.
B. Russia
2.8 In the Federal Republic of Russia, the Geographical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Institut Gïeografii Rossiïskoï Akadïemii Naouk; until 1991 the Academy of Sciences of the USSR) is the chief research centre. Its address is: Moscow, Staromonïetnyï Pïerïeulok 29. The institute employs approximately 400 people.
2.9 A large involvement of geographers in the studies on desertification has resulted in a concept of geography entirely different from that in Western European countries. In the USSR the geography has been treated as an exact science, as for example in France, geography is thought of as a social science. In geographical institutes, approximately 80% of the personnel deal with physical geography in departments (kafiedra) such as climatology, hydrology, geomorphology and pedology. In this Institute, the hydrologist and pedologist S. V. Zonn initiated work on desertification (cf. bibl. entry 146). In the 1980's, changes in the natural environment of the Aral Sea and methods of combating these changes were the priority objectives of the Institute's research. This work, directly supervised by the director of the Institute, Mr. V. M. Kotliakov (Kotlyakov) led to several publications, a number of them in English (cf. bibl. entries 43, 77, 109). In the 1990's, the countries of
Central Asia decided that henceforth all work on the restoration of the Aral Sea and on the management of the surrounding region would be completed without Russia's help. The State University of Lomonossov at Moscow (MGU) was virtually uninvolved in the studies of desertification. However, this Institute led research on soil erosion in various regions of Russia, and, in lesser extent, in the other countries of the CIS. Some of these works could be useful in attempts to limit desertification (cf. bibl. entry 92). -It is worth mentioning also the Lenin Library of Moscow (Bibliotïeka imïeni Lïenina -its current name) which fills the function of central library where nearly all publications appearing in the USSR until 1991 can be found. However, the collection is catalogued with a 1 to 2 year delay, and since 1991 a number of the documents which do not concern Russia do not reach the library. This library also has catalogues of the collections of some other Russian libraries. In
Russia, outside of Moscow, there are few individuals who deal with desertification. At St. Petersburg, the second most important scientific centre of the country, problems of desertification are scarcely studied, probably because of the distance between St. Petersburg and the subtropical dry land zones. Nevertheless, since the Institute of Hydrometeorology (in Russian: Institut Gidromïetïeorologii and Gidromïetïeoizdat Publishing House) in St. Petersburg remains the chief centre in Russia for research on long-term climate change, the problems of desertification sometimes come up in the course of work on other issues (cf. bibl. entry 78).
C. Kazakhstan
2.10 Unlike the situation in Russia and Turkmenistan, desertification is the subject of research in several small institutions in Kazakhstan. They have close relations with the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad and with the University of Urumchi (China). They also correspond with institutes in Japan, Germany, the United States, and with international organizations, especially UNEP and UNESCO. Contact with Moscow and St. Petersburg is limited. The Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan has led research in Mongolia, published articles, and is currently preparing a vegetation map. The characteristic features of all the research centres at Alma Ata are a relatively good methodology, poor technical equipment, and enormous printing difficulties which prevent the publication of a number of articles (cf. bibl. entries 121, 124).
2.11 The main centres of Kazakhstan are:
(i) The Botanical Institute (in Russian: Institut Botaniki; Kazakh: Botanika Instituty) of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan. It prepares vegetation maps (of present state and evolution). It also directs studies on the productivity of pastures and work on revegetalization. Several years ago, L.I. Kurochkina was the scientific head of this institute; now it is I.I. Rachkovskaïa.
(ii) The Geographical Institute (in Russian: Institut Gïeografii; Kazakh: Gïeografiïa Instituty) of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan. It has a team of about 15 members led by G.V. Gel'dyeva working on desertification. They prepare maps of the landscape, of the degree of desertification, and of other changes in the natural environment. The regions of study are the areas surrounding the Aral Sea and Lake Balkhash.
(iii) The Council for the Organization of Productive Forces (SOPS, in Russian: Sovïet pro Organizatsii Proizvoditïel'nykh Sil) of the Republican Office of Planning. It prepares maps of natural resources and designee projects for combating desertification, prepares regional development plans and organizes conferences. Considering, among others, the existence of the Ministry of Ecology in the government, the position of this nature group is particularly strong.
(iv) The main library is in Alma Ata, the regional equivalent of the Lenin Library in Moscow. It is also a library of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan (Russian: Biblïotïeka Akadïemii Naouk Rïespubliki Kazakhstana; Kazakh: Kazakhstan Rïespublikasy, Fykym Akadïemiïasynyn Kitapkhanasy).
D. Ukraine
2.12 As in Kazakhstan, there is no central institution dealing with desertification and the problems of combating it. Studies of limited scope are directed by small teams dispersed among different institutions at Kiev, L'viv Ivano-Frankovsk, and elsewhere. The problems of desertification remain in the background and are only dealt with in the course of studies on soil erosion or on vegetation changes (cf. bibl. entries 89, 130). Most scientists work for the Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine. The main collections of specialized literature are kept at the V.E. Vernadski Central Scientific Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine (Tsïentralna Naoukova Bibliotïeka im. V.I. Vïernadskogo, Akadïemiïa Naouk Ukraini).
E. Centres in other states of the CIS
2.13 Studies on desertification are pursued in other countries which have separated from the Soviet Union, but their scale is smaller and they are carried out by individual researchers. Azerbaijan, however, deserves special mention. At Baku, research has been supervised by the Geographical Institute (in Russian: Institut Gïeografii Azïerskoï Rïespubliki) - Baku, Nartsimanova 31 -and by the Institute of Natural Resource Studies by Remote Sensing (in Russian: Institut Isslïedovaniïa Prirodnykh Rïessursov iz Kosmosa) - Baku, Kommunistichïeskaïa 10. It has not been possible to obtain more precise information about these institutes; contacts with the RAN Geographical Institute are not currently maintained. Both these centres published their works in Russian and in Azeri. A portion of the results especially those obtained via satellite imagery - are not available to the public. Some small-scale projects have been carried out by the Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences (in Tashkent) and
by the Academy of Sciences of Kyrgyzstan (Bishkek, formerly Frunze), generally in close cooperation with the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad or the RAN Geographical Institute.
F. Projects for change
2.14 It is understood that scientific structures have not yet adapted to the new political situation (interview with S.V. Zonn, among others). Considering current political conditions, the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad could lose the ability to function outside Turkmenistan. Most of the scientists working on desertification are Russian. Russia has no interdisciplinary centre of desertification. The success of reforms introduced since the end of May, 1993, depends above all on the development of the political situation in the countries of the CIS.
2.15 A subsidiary of the Institute of Deserts under the direction of I.S. Zonn has been founded at Moscow. Its future status has not yet been determined. The plan is to locate it in the heart of the city, next to the International Projects Centre. This would undoubtedly lead to the Institute's becoming far more than just the subsidiary of a Turkoman scientific institute.
2.16 The creation of an Institute of Deserts in the Federal Republic of Russia was planned for the end of 1993. It would be located at Elista, capital of the Kalmyk Republic of Russia. The range of activities of this research centre would include the Republic of Kalmyk, which is the most involved in the creation of the institute, the territory of Krasnodar north of the Caucases, the oblast (administrative district) of Astrakhan in the lower Volga, and possibly other regions. However, the structure of the institute had not yet been determined as of July 1993. It will benefit from local scientific potential (the University of Elista, the Russian Academy of Sciences). Financing will come from the Buddhist community in the United States (the majority of Kalmyks are Buddhist), and from Japan. The institute is to conduct complex studies of the natural environment of deserts, to work on endangered species of vegetation, and to study methods of combating sand encroachment and
salinization. It will direct studies on the optimal conditions for irrigated agriculture, methods of irrigation, and pasture management. The institute will also conduct research on the possibility of acclimatizing American plant species to the subtropical zone (oleaginous plants, among others). Noteworthy among local scientists is V.A. Bananova (cf. bibl. entry 25).
<section>6</section>
3. Desertification and drylands development in CIS countries
A. Definitions
B. Theories and hypotheses
C. Methodology and approaches
D. Large-scale development projects for arid and se -arid lands in the USSR - "Conquest of the deserts"
E. Phenomena of desertification
F. Causes of desertification
G. Impact of desertification and drylands development on the environment and on socio-economic conditions
H. Drylands development and combating desertification
I. Results of large-scale projects in drylands development and combating desertification
A. Definitions
3.1 In studying changes in the natural environment of arid and semi-arid regions, researchers often discern two processes: "desertization" and desertification. This is particularly true in the French school of thought. In the USSR, almost all the literature concerned with Desertification has been written in Russian. The term "opustynivaniïe" is used, and is considered by Soviet and post-Soviet researchers to be a synonym for Desertification (cf. bibl. entry 67). Researchers in the Institute of Deserts have not found a Russian language equivalent for the term "desertization"; therefore, they have introduced the term "dïesïertizatsiïa. " This term has not entered the Russian language and we have not seen it outside the work noted above.
3.2 B.G. Rozanov's definition (cf. bibl. entry 52) is the most widely-used. He formulated it in 1977 when he wrote about the United Nations conference in Nairobi, and it can be found, occasionally somewhat modified, in a number of publications, including very recent ones (cf. bibl. entries 12, 60, 63, 90, 141). "Desertification is a natural or human-induced process of irreversible change in the soil and vegetation of drylands zones, towards aridification and a reduction in biological productivity. In extreme cases this process can lead to a total disintegration of the biological potential, and the transformation of the territory into desert."
3.3 Another definition is used by some scientists at the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad (cf. bibl. entry 3): "The intensification and/or expansion of desertic conditions constitute a process which leads to a decrease in ecosystem productivity; this decrease, in turn, leads to a decrease in pastoral resources, agricultural productivity and the quality of human life."
3.4 It is S.V. Zonn (cf. bibl. entry 146) who perceives the process of Desertification in the widest sense. In his opinion, it includes all processes of biological degradation whatever the cause and wherever they appear. According to this definition, Desertification can occur in any climate zone. S.V. Zonn identifies a number of Desertification types; in the Amazon there is the "technogeno-erosive" type, in the Maghreb the "erosive" type. However, Zonn's definition has not been accepted in CIS countries.
3.5 There are other definitions which interpret Desertification (opustynivaniïe) in a more limited way, but they are not widely accepted either. Three examples are noted below:
(i) Desertification is the process of the expansion of desert surfaces, notably due to sand movement. It occurs in a narrow band of semi-desert which directly borders on desert. This definition is rarely encountered, and then almost exclusively in the early specialized literature of the 1960's and 1970's (cf. bibl. entry 111). Although it is extremely rare in newer works, it has not disappeared, as is shown in the 1992 publication of Gorshkov V.S. and Losiev K.S. (cf. bibl. entry 91);
(ii) Desertification is the deterioration of the biological conditions of deserts (due solely to human activity), and their transformation into deserts devoid of life (cf. bibl. entries 38,65). It would be suitable in this case to use the term "desertization," or more precisely "desertization due to human activities;"
(iii) Desertification is a term covering an entire group of processes of degradation in arid and semi-arid ecosystems which result from irrational human activity.
3.6 The fact that these definitions emphasize human activity can be explained by the general conviction in Central Asia that it is not a natural evolution of the climate towards acidification; man is considered to be the cause of the degradation of the natural environment.
B. Theories and hypotheses
3.7 The theoretical considerations forming the basis of a systematic definition of desertification and the typology of the processes of desertification have bee