<title>Making land use choices for district planning. Agro-ecological land resources assessment for agricultural development </title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Back to contents - Next file
AEZ methodology - an overview
Any part of this set of computer programs and the corresponding data sets may be modified in the light of new knowledge or new objectives. The model is part of a larger district- and national-level planning tool and is expected to be expanded and refined with use.
The designations employed and the presentation of materiel in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations or IIASA concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries
M-59
ISBN 92-5-103545-8
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such pemmission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
(c) FAO 1994
Introduction
The potential for sustainable food production, including meat and milk, is determined by physical factors, primarily by soil and climatic conditions, and a complex interaction of socioeconomic, cultural and technological factors, such as farm sizes, level of farming and livestock inputs, management practices including soil conservation and enhancement, veterinary services, economic factors like market prices and access, credit availability, education and extension services. At any given point in time, there are limits to the sustainable levels of food crop and livestock feed production obtainable from any given land area, and hence limits to the human and livestock population that can be supported from any area.
Development of land resources to meet food needs of growing populations should be based on integral assessment and consideration of ecological, social and economic factors. Development policies in the past, while focusing on economic and social considerations, have largely ignored the ecological issues. Recognizing the critical importance of resource literacy, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), with the collaboration of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), developed a land resources data base and a methodological framework to assess food production and population supporting potentials in developing countries, FAO (1971-81, 1976a, 1978-80).
FAO has assisted member countries in finding rational solutions to various problems of land resources appraisal for planning sustainable agricultural development. This involves linking land use options with other development goals in such areas as food production, food self-sufficiency, cash crop requirements, population supporting capacity, issues of soil fertility constraints, soil erosion risks and land degradation. The AEZ approach was first applied in a global study of Land Resources for Populations of the Future (FAO/UNFPA/IIASA, 1983), which focused on the determination of ecological potential of land resources for food production and the appropriate policies for their management. Subsequently, the AEZ methodology has been extended, refined and utilized in national and sub-national assessments of land productivity and population supporting capacity in various countries, such as Bangladesh, China, Mozambique, Nigeria, the Philippines, Thailand. To further enhance the
AEZ methodology for national and sub-national applications, FAO, with the concurrence of the Kenyan Government and IIASA's participation, undertook an AEZ case study of Kenya. The Kenya study (FAO/IIASA, 1991) features various advances in AEZ procedures; these include the linkage to Geographic Information Systems (GIS), methodological refinements and development of a resources database. The enhancements encompass representation of multiple cropping systems, livestock and crop sector integration, assessment of fuelwood productivity, optimization of land use. A major GlS-oriented Kenya land resources database at the scale of 1:1 million and a PC and UNIX workstation based software system were developed in the case study. This analysis tool facilitates the integration of ecological, technological, social, demographic and economic recommendations for the appraisal of land resources of individual districts in Kenya for policy formulation and development planning.
The methodology to assess the food crop and livestock production potential includes the following principles which are, fundamental to any sound evaluation of land resources:
* an inter-disciplinary approach, based on inputs from crop-ecologists, pedologists, agronomists, climatologists, livestock specialists, nutritionists, and economists;
* land evaluation is only meaningful in relation to specific land uses;
* land suitability refers to use on a sustained basis, i.e., the envisaged use of land must take account of degradation, e.g. through wind erosion, water erosion, salinization or other degradation processes. Soil regeneration is assumed to be achieved by means of fallowing land, appropriate crop rotations and soil conservation measures;
* evaluation of production potential with respect to specified levels of inputs, e.g., whether fertilizers are applied, if pest control is effected, if machinery or hand tools are used (agricultural inputs and farming technology);
* different kinds of land use must be considered in the context of meeting national or regional food crop-mix and livestock products demand;
* different kinds of livestock feed resources must be considered, e.g., natural pastures and browse, sown pastures, crop residues and by-products and feed concentrates in the context of meeting seasonal and spatial feed requirements.
* land use patterns must be constructed so as to optimize land productivity in relation to political and social objectives taking into account physical, socio-economic and technological constraints.
Accordingly the application of the methodology in this work entitled "Agro-ecological Land Resources Assessment for Agricultural Development Planning: A Case Study of Kenya" is concerned with the determination of land use potentials of land resources in each of the 41 districts in Kenya, and the preparation of scenarios for optimal district land resources allocation as a tool in policy formulation and development planning. The Kenya case study is presented in two main reports supported by technical annexes which deal with details.
The first main report describes the computerized land resources database of Kenya and the crop, livestock and fuelwood productivity models developed for the estimation of potential productivity of land resources. It is supported by the following technical annexes:
1. Land Resources
2. Soil Erosion and Productivity
3. Agro-climatic and Agro-edaphic Suitabilities for Barley, Oat, Cowpea, Green Gram and Pigeon Pea
4. Crop Productivity
5. Livestock Productivity
6. Fuelwood Productivity
7. Systems Documentation Guide to Computer Programs for Land Productivity Assessment 8 Crop Productivity Assessment: Results at District Level.
This is the second main report on "Making Land Use Choices for District Planning". It describes how the results of the crop productivity assessment at district level are used in combination with technological, social, demographic and economic opportunities and constraints to formulate and analyse various scenarios of optimal land use to achieve specific objectives. It is supported by a User Manual, which is a guide to installing and running the PC version of the Kenya software. A demonstration version of the software package on diskettes is part of the User Manual. This report enables the reader to explore the Kenya-AEZ system in its various components, using the computer as an analysis tool as well as a learning tool. If a suitable computer is available, the reader is advised first to install the software and become acquainted with the menu options, and secondly make computer runs while studying the report.
AEZ methodology - an overview
Figure 1.1 gives a general overview of the flow and integration of information as implemented in the Kenya study. In the following explanations, which summarize the contents of the elements of the system, the numbers in brackets relate to the numbering used in Figure 1.1.
(1) LUT description: To define the fundamental objects of analysis which comprise the set of alternative activities available to reach specified objectives, the first step in an AEZ application is the selection and description of land utilization types (LUT) to be considered in the study. FAO (FAO, 1984) defines LUT as follows: 'A Land Utilization Type consists of a set of technical specifications within a socio-economic setting. As a minimum requirement, both the nature of the produce and the setting must be specified'. The description can best be prepared in a hierarchical structure that defines, for example:
* elements common to all land utilization types: typically such elements would include the socio-economic setting of a fairly homogenous region for which a number of land utilization types may be defined;
* elements common to certain groups of land utilization types: e.g. several land utilization types could be defined for a particular farming system. Holding size, farm resources, etc., would best be presented at this level of LUT description;
* elements specific to particular land utilization types: crop specific information such as cultivation practices, input requirements, cropping calendar, utilization of main produce, crop residues and by-products to be described at this level.
FIGURE 1 AEZ application: information flow and integration
The number of aspects that can be meaningfully included in the description as well as the amount and detail of quantitative information provided must match the needs and scale of the study. The Kenya study distinguishes 64 crop LUTs, 31 fuelwood LUTs and a synthetic grassland LUT, each at three levels of input. Similarly, 10 representative livestock systems are considered per input level.
(2) The term 'Crop catalog' refers to a computer representation of the quantitative aspects of the LUT description in a database format. The level of detail regarding the representation of different crop species and varieties in the database should match the study objectives as well as the sophistication of other methodological components and the scale at which the study operates.
(3) The assessment of alternative land utilization types is performed for a set of land units, i.e. areas of land with specified and distinguished characteristics. Ideally, the defined land units should represent unique and homogenous land management units. In practice, land units are often arrived at by super-imposing various thematic maps regarding aspects such as climate, soils, landform, slope, vegetation, present land use, social and economic characteristics, and administrative boundaries.
(4) To facilitate the storage and manipulation of complex spatial information, the maps are best entered into a computerized geographical information system (GIS).
(5) Additional data related to the mapped information, e.g. a description of the soil mapping units in terms of soil associations, soil phases and texture classes, landform, slope, etc., is kept in the computerized system in the form of attribute database files.
(6) Combining overlaid spatial information with the contents of relevant attribute files results in the creation of unique (in terms of a set of selected attributes such as thermal regime, moisture regime, soil type, slope class, etc.) geo-referenced extents of land units, termed agroecological cells, which form the basic unit of analysis used in AEZ applications. The collection of agro-ecological cells constitutes the land resources inventory (LRI). The detailed land resources inventory used in the Kenya study distinguishes some 90000 agro-ecological cells.
(7) The methodology used in larger scale regional or national AEZ applications for determination of agronomically attainable yields in an agro-ecological cell starts out from estimation of maximum agro-climatic yield potential as dictated by climatic conditions. Biomass accumulation is described in terms of photosynthetic characteristics and phenological requirements, to calculate a site specific constraint-free maximum yield. Then agro-climatic constraints are assessed to derive agronomically attainable yields taking into account yield losses occurring due to temperature limitations, moisture stress, pests and diseases, and workability. Attainable yields are estimated for different levels of management and inputs.
(8) Crops, grasses and fuelwood species, as well as livestock species have climatic requirements which must be known for suitability assessment. These include, for instance, temperature limitations for cultivation, tolerance to drought or frost, optimal and marginal temperature ranges for cultivation, and, for some crops, specific requirements at different phonological stages.
(9) To assess the suitability of soils for particular land utilization types, soil requirements of crops must be known. In addition, these requirements must be understood within the context of limitations imposed by landform and other features which, perhaps, do not form a part of soil but may have a significant influence on the use that can be made of the soil. Distinction is made between internal soil requirements of crops, such as soil temperature regime, soil moisture regime, soil fertility, effective soil depth for root development and chemical soil properties, and external requirements related to soil slope, occurrence of flooding and soil accessibility.
(10) Matching rules for comparing requirements of crops and livestock to the attributes of a particular agro-ecological cell are devised by experts and stored in a database.
(11) As a result of the agro-climatic and agro-edaphic matching procedures, each agro-ecological cell is rated in terms of several suitability classes with respect to all land utilization types relevant in that location.
(12) On the basis of crop suitability, the productivity assessment tries to capture important factors that impact upon the production levels that can be attained on an annual basis: production increases due to multiple cropping resulting from intensification of cultivation in space and time are taken into account in the analysis, as are possible productivity losses due to soil erosion. Since the productivity estimates relate to production on a sustainable basis, fallow requirements, to maintain soil fertility and structure and to counteract soil degradation caused by crop cultivation, are imposed depending on climatic conditions, soil type and level of inputs and management.
(13) The productivity assessment records input level specific production of relevant and agro-ecologically feasible cropping activities; the stored information includes amounts of main produce and by-products, input requirements and associated soil erosion. The algorithms applied impose a filter that eliminates activities that are ecologically unsuitable in the agro-ecological cell under consideration, too risky with respect to climatic uncertainties, environmentally unacceptable, or much inferior to other possible activities in this land unit in terms of both expected economic benefit and nutritional value. At this stage of the analysis a database is created that contains for each agro-ecological cell quantified information on all feasible land utilization types. This database lends itself to tabulating or mapping potential arable land by crop or zone; but more important, the database provides the necessary geo-referenced agronomic data for district or national planning
scenarios.
(14) The performance of livestock systems is estimated by describing a representative herd composition, by age and sex, fertility rates and mortality, and quantifying pro duction of meat, milk and other outputs in relation to different management levels and feed quality. Input to output relationships of livestock systems, expressed per reference livestock unit, as implied by feed requirements and resulting production of the total herd is recorded in a livestock systems productivity database for use in the planning model.
(15)Planning scenarios in the AEZ application are specified by selecting and quantifying objectives and various constraints related to aspects such as demand preferences, production targets, nutritional requirements, input constraints, cash flow constraints, feed balances, crop-mix constraints, and tolerable environmental impacts. Given the potentially large number of agro-ecological cells and number of activities to be taken into consideration, the objective function and the constraint set have been defined by means of linear relationships to allow for application of standard linear programming techniques.
(16) Different sets of assumptions, e.g. regarding population growth, availability and level of inputs, consumer demand, etc., are stored in the scenario catalog, a database used by the application programs.
(17) Output from the AEZ application report writer is kept in a scenario summary data base and can be linked to the geographical information system for visualization of the results.
Several of the steps sketched above will be illustrated and further explained in the following chapters. However, it is recommended to install the software system for hands-on practicing, as described in the User Manual.
The User Manual and software described in this Report are available from FAO Distribution and Sales Section, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy. Fax No. 396-52253152 or 5155. Email: Publications/Sales@fao.org.
<section>2</section>
Exploring Kenya-AEZ
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Exploring the land resources inventory
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (a)
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (b)
The first step is to install the PC version of the KENYA-AEZ software and go through the brief introduction to the file structure and menu options available using the User Manual. The software and the User Manual are provided as diskette files. Now we will start exploring the database and software system by doing some practical exercises. To print results from these exercises make sure the printer is properly connected, turned on and set to condensed mode (132 character page width). After starting the software the main menu (Figure 2.1) appears on the screen.
FIGURE 2.1 Main menu of KENYA-AEZ system
Exploring the land resources inventory
The second option under the main menu (SF2), LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY, allows for viewing the resource inventory, for compiling 2-way and 3-way cross-tabulation statistics, and viewing and printing these tables.
The land resources inventory brings together several layers of information on physical environmental resources and allows the creation of unique ecological land units (agro-ecological cells) within which landform, soil and climate conditions are quantified and considered nearly homogenous.
The climatic resource inventory of Kenya records both temperature and soil moisture conditions. The quantification of temperature attributes has been achieved by defining reference thermal zones. As temperature seasonality effects of latitude are minor, temperature zones are closely correlated to altitude ranges (Braun, 1982). To cater for differences in temperature adaptability of crops, pasture and fuelwood species, nine thermal zones have been distinguished, based on ranges of 2.5° Celsius.
Quantification of moisture conditions was achieved through the concept of reference length of growing period (LGP). Reference LGP is defined as duration (in days) of the period when temperature permits crop growth and soil moisture supply exceeds half potential evapotranspiration; it includes the time required to evapotranspire up to 100 mm of soil moisture storage (FAO, 1978-81). Growing periods which include a sub-period when precipitation exceeds potential evapotranspiration are termed 'normal' LGPs as compared to 'intermediate' LGPs with no such humid sub-period. The moisture period regime has been inventoried by means of three complementary attributes:
* number of separate length of growing periods within a year, summarized as a historical profile of pattern of length of growing periods per year (LGP-pattern). Twenty two such LGPpattern classes are recognized in the inventory;
* the mean total dominant length of growing period, i.e., the sum of mean dominant and associated length of growing periods occurring during the year. Fifteen LGP zone classes, thirteen spanning 30 day intervals each, plus an all-year-dry and all-year-humid zone, are distinguished;
* year-to-year variability of each length of growing period and the associated moisture conditions.
The map of mean total dominant LGP zones and the map of LGP-pattern zones, together with information (in table form) on length and probability of occurrence of associated growing periods, provide the historical moisture profile, compiled from data records of a large number of locations in Kenya.
The Exploratory Soil Map of Kenya (Sombroek et al., 1982), at a scale of 1:1 million, was used to compile the soil resources inventory. 392 different soil map units are distinguished, describing soil associations or soil complexes composed of dominant soils, associated soils and inclusions (390 map units) or relate to water bodies and major urban areas (2 map units). A mapping unit composition table has been provided (van der Pouw, 1983) containing percentage allocation of the map units by soil type, slope class, soil texture and soil phases. It also contains information derived from the legend of the soil map regarding landform and geology/parent material.
In addition to the soil and climate layers, six other layers of information have been incorporated in the land resources database, providing information on cash crop zones, forest zones, national park areas and game reserves, location of irrigation schemes, tse-tse infestation areas, and province and district boundaries.
The individual map layers were digitized and stored in a grid (raster) format of 1085 rows and 900 columns, each grid cell representing an area of one square kilometre. The land resources inventory combines both geo-referenced information as provided in the different map overlays and statistical information (percentage distribution) as contained in the soil mapping unit composition and slope composition tables. The compilation of the resource inventory includes:
* overlaying of map layers and creation of a GIS database file, and
* application of soil mapping unit composition and slope composition tables.
This process produced a collection of about 91000 data records, termed agro-ecological cells; these data records are unique in terms of the combination of land and climate characteristics. This level of detail ensures that each agro-ecological cell represents a fairly homogenous set of agroclimatic and soil physical conditions, as is crucial to adequately matching land unit properties with crop requirements.
From the coded information contained in a land inventory record it is possible to identify the respective grid raster points in the GIS to which an entry relates. Because of the disaggregation implied by the mapping unit composition table and the slope composition table, usually more than one land inventory record will refer to the same set of grid points. Therefore, the results to be transferred to the GIS must be aggregated to average values per raster point. 18 attribute fields are distinguished:
Field Column Field contents
1 1 - 2 province code; class values 1 to 8
2 3 - 4 district code; class values 1 to 13, depending on province
3 5 - 6 thermal zone; 9 classes
4 7 - 8 mean total length of growing period (LGP); 15 classes
5 9 - 10 LGP-Pattern; class values 1 to 22
6 11 - 13 Kenya Exploratory Soil Map unit; 392 map units
7 14 -16 soil unit code; class values 1 to 135
8 17 coarse material indicator; class values 0 to 6
9 18 -19 texture code; class values 1 to 34
10 20 -21 phase combination; class values 0 to 73
11 22 -23 slope class; class values 1 to 11
12 24 -26 slope gradient in 1/10 percent
13 27 -28 cash-crop zone indicator; 19 class values
14 29 forest zone; 4 class values
15 30- 31 irrigation scheme; 21 class values
16 32 Tsetse infestation; 2 class values
17 33 game park; 4 class values
18 34 - 41 cell extent; size of agro-ecological cell in ha
TABLE 2.1
AEZ cross-tabulation, thermal zone vs. forest zone
Field 3 (Thermal zone) versus Field 14 (Forest zone)
After ROW - Normalization
Forest THZ F1 F2 F3 Total
THZ 198.9 .2 .0 1.0 66.5
THZ 2 100.0 .0 .0 .0 9.9
THZ 3 99.5 .5 .0 .0 7.0
THZ 4 97.2 2.8 .0 .0 7.8
THZ 5 86.7 13.2 .1 .0 5.9
THZ 6 52.5 43.5 3.9 .0 2.2
THZ 7 47.9 52.1 .0 .0 .5
THZ 8 57.5 42.5 .0 .0 .2
THZ 9 100.0 .0 .0 .0 .0
Total 96.8 2.5 .1 .7 100.0
After COLUMN - Normalization
Forest THZ 
THZ 1 67.9 4.2 .0 100.0 66.5
THZ 2 10.2 .2 .0 .0 9.9
THZ 3 7.2 1.5 .0 .0 7.0
THZ 4 7.8 8.8 .0 .0 7.8
THZ 5 5.3 31.6 8.4 .0 5.9
THZ 6 1.2 39.1 91.6 .0 2.2
THZ 7 .3 11.3 .0 .0 .5
THZ 8 .1 3.2 .0 .0 .2
THZ 9 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0
Total 96.8 2.5 .1 .7 100.0
The land resource inventory (LRI) file is created by superimposing administrative, climatic, soil and land-use data contained in ten thematic maps. The maps are stored in raster format, i.e., data arranged in 1085 rows and 900 columns of square pixels, each representing an area of one square kilometre. Data is stored by row, from north-west to south-east. In this way, each map contains 976500 pixels, usually stored as one byte each, of which about 40 percent falls outside the national boundaries (in that case coded as pixel value zero). Note that the LRI must be recreated whenever one of the thematic maps is modified. The third item, CREATE INVENTORY, available in the sub-menu under main menu option seven (SF7), GIS-FUNCTIONS, is provided for that purpose.
Example 2.1: Cross-tabulation of land resources data. It provides statistics on the coincidence of pairs of classes of different land resource inventory attributes. For instance, to obtain a crosstable about the occurrence of forest zones according to different thermal zones, proceed as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the second option (SF2), LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY, and press < ENTER> 5.
Step 2: In the sub-menu presented to you, select option two, STATISTICS, and press <ENTER>.
Step 3: The program prompts for the first attribute field to be selected. Classes of this field will form the rows of the cross-table. Enter 3, to choose the thermal zone field.
Step 4: The program prompts for the second attribute field to be selected. Classes of this field will form the columns of the cross-table. Enter 14, to select the forest zone field.
Step 5: The program prompts for the third attribute field to be selected. This is optional and allows for 3-way cross-tables. Enter 0 to obtain a 2-way table.
Now, the program will start processing the land resource inventory and report on progress. Note that processing 3-way cross-tables of the entire LRI may take considerable time.
Depending on software configuration, up to three tables are provided:
(a) percentage of total area occupied by respective combinations of attribute values.
(b) row normalized percentages, i.e., distribution of extents with a particular class value of attribute 1 over the entire range of class values of attribute 2.
(c) column normalized percentages, i.e., distribution of extents with a particular class value of attribute 2 over the entire range of class values of attribute 1.
Table 2.1 shows row and column normalized results of cross-tabulating thermal zones versus forest zones in Kenya.
For instance, the row-normalized table shows that about half the area in thermal zone T7 (52.1 percent) is in forest class F1. The column-normalized table indicates that more than 80 percent (31.6+39.1+11.3 percent) of forest class F1 occur in thermal zones T5 to T7. The border row and column of the tables indicate the percentage of area of classes of attribute 2 and attribute 1, respectively. For instance, the first value in the bottom row of the cross-table shows that most (96.8 percent) Kenyan land falls outside the three forest zone classes; the first value in the last column indicates that about 2/3 of the country (66.5 percent) are in thermal zone T1 (warm tropics, mean annual daily temperature > 25° Celsius).
<section>3</section>
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (a)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The third option of the main menu (SF3) is used to generate tables of expected primary yield by crop type for all admissible combinations of pattern codes and length of growing period zone codes. Individual LGP-pattern component yields are added up using pattern distribution probability weights to arrive at expected average annual yields (under single cropping). In addition to average yields, expected output under best and worst climatic conditions is calculated. At this stage, the assessment does not yet consider edaphic constraints.
The yield generating module consists of a four-fold nested loop: over two broad soil unit types (Fluvisols and other soils), a range of LGP-pattern codes, and a range of length of growing period codes. The inner-most loop runs over a range of crop codes. Growth cycle requirements are tested against the number of days available for plant growth. Expected yield by individual LGP-pattern and by component LGP is computed and weighted by the probability of occurrence of each pattern; this results in average yields for given climatic conditions. Minimum, maximum and average yields are stored for use in crop suitability (SF4) and land productivity assessment (SF5). To generate yield tables for the currently selected level of inputs (low, intermediate or high), proceed as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the first option shown (SF1), DATABASE, and press <ENTER>.
Step 2: In the sub-menu on display, select option three (SF3), PREPARE DATA, and press <ENTER> .
Step 3: Return to the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the third option (SF3), ATTAINABLE YIELDS, and press <ENTER> .
Step 4: In the sub-menu appearing on the screen, select the first option (SF1), GENERATE TABLE, and press < ENTER > .
Step 4 will load the yield generating module and run it to evaluate yields for all possible combinations of LGP-pattern and component LGP.
Example 2.2: Calculating maize yields. In the LRI about 35 percent of Kenya is shown as belonging to LGP-pattern zone 13, LGP-pattern symbol 2-1. According to the pattern proportion table, these areas have two distinct growing seasons in 70 percent of the years, and one growing season in the remaining 30 percent. Over 80 percent of the land in LGP-pattern zone 13 has a mean total dominant LGP of less than 120 days. A small fraction of the area is indicated as having a mean total LGP of 210-239 days (LGP code 9). Let us consider, for instance, maize yields in that zone. According to the LGP-pattern rule table, LGP code 9 in LGP-pattern zone 13 has the following characteristics:
TABLE 2.2
Example of attainable maize yields at intermediate input level
Crop Growth
cycle
(days)
Maximum
yield
(kg/ha)
Thermal
zone
LGP[21]
(kg/ha)
LGP[22]
(kg/ha)
LGP[11]
(kg/ha)
Average
yield
(kg/ha)
Maize 1 70-90 2370 T1,T2,T3 360 1860 2540 2064
Maize 2 90-110 3510 T1,T2,T3 0 2530 3450 2806
Maize 3 110-130 4450 T1,T2,T3 0 3200 4350 3545
Maize 4 120-140 5320 T4 140 3500 4880 3914
Maize 5 140-180 5840 T4 0 0 5200
Maize 6 180-200 6440 T4 0 0 4120 0
Maize 7 200-220 6820 T5 0 0 4560 0
Maize 8 220-280 4490 T5 0 0 2500 0
Maize 9 280-300 4500 T5,T6 . 0 490 0
(a) 2 growing periods in 70 percent of years, with a longer component growing period, LGP[21], of 120-149 days (component LGP code 6), and a shorter component growing period, LGP[22], of 60-89 days (component LGP code 4).
(b) 1 component growing period in 30 percent of years, LGP[11], of 180-209 days (component LGP code 8).
In the yield generatin