<title>The economics of international agreements for the protection of environmental and agricultural resources</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Back to contents - Next file
We live in an interdependent world, and this means that sound national policies, on their own, cannot ensure that outcomes will be efficient: international fisheries may be overexploited, international groundwater resources may become depleted, potentially containable plant diseases may spread and forests and agriculture may he damaged by transboundary pollution. To ensure more efficient outcomes, international cooperation is required. And yet, as the allegory of the "tragedy of the commons" tells us, national incentives may prevent cooperation, even when every nation could be better off by cooperating.
This paper is a contribution towards understanding when cooperation could improve on nationalistic policy, in what areas cooperation has already been manifested and the determinants of successful cooperation. Contrary to the allegory of the commons, this paper shows that cooperative outcomes can be sustained under certain circumstances. This is encouraging, although the paper also argues that cooperation has not always been successful and identifies the features of certain problems - such as the number of countries sharing a resource - that help to explain why. While offering an analytical framework for examining cooperation, the paper also throws up a challenge. The challenge is to devise means for sustaining cooperation, even when the circumstances would seem not to support such an outcome.
T. Kelley White
Director
Policy Analysis Division
Chapter 1. Introduction
Many environmental and natural resources are shared internationally. Examples relating directly to food and agriculture include fisheries in international waters or fish populations, such as tuna, that move from one country's territorial waters to another's; marine mammals, such as whales and seals; terrestrial species, such as the vicuña, whose territory overlaps national boundaries; and the means of controlling plant diseases and pests. In each case, effective management requires international cooperation. The reason is simple. If countries care only about self interest. they will ignore the international consequences of their actions. When one country harvests tuna, it ignores the fact that its harvest leaves less for others to harvest. Failure on the part of one country to control the importation of pests may damage the crops of other countries in the region. In all such cases, all countries would be better off if they cooperated with each other.
Often, management of international resources affects food and agriculture indirectly. Depletion of the ozone layer and associated increases in ultraviolet radiation are expected to harm the fecundity and growth of marine organisms and reduce both the yields and quality of many crops. Similarly, acid rain emissions affect the productivity of lakes, forests and agricultural lands. Global climate change is likely to affect food and agriculture more than any other economic sector although the magnitude of its effects - especially at the local level - is difficult to estimate. Finally, the experience of Chernobyl shows that safety in nuclear power is also important to agriculture
Since the management of transboundary fluxes' the stratosphere and atmosphere requires international cooperation, it is clear that the distinction between cases where food and agricultural resources are shared directly and cases where the productivity of food and agriculture is dependent on the quality of a shared environmental resource is a technical one. Indeed, while the author is not aware of any study that has estimated the quantitative significance of both types of problem, it is possible that the latter problem is even more important for food and agriculture than the former.
The above environmental problems are examples of reciprocal externalities. If one country harvests more tuna, fewer tuna are left in the sea for other countries to harvest, and other countries are likely to respond to this action by adjusting their own harvest rates. In other words, every country is both the source of the problem and its victim. The reciprocal nature of environmental problems can play an important role in attempts to cooperate in managing the resource more effectively. For example, if all countries harvesting tuna agree to reduce their harvest levels, and one country cheats on the agreement, the others may retaliate by increasing their harvest levels. This retaliation serves to deter cheating and, hence, to support cooperation.
Some environmental problems involve unidirectional externalities.) An example is pollution upstream in country X affecting water quality downstream in country Y. Here, Y is a victim but not a source of the problem. Y cannot influence X's actions by dumping more pollution in the river. To improve the situation, Y may compensate X for the costs of pollution abatement. Alternatively, if X and Y are interdependent in some other way - perhaps through trade - Y may seek to link the issues. Y may respond to increased pollution from X by imposing a duty on imports from X. It is clear from this example that linkage holds certain attractions but may also be dangerous: the effect may be to lose gains from trade while not improving environmental quality.
The conservation of biological diversity is an example of a global environmental problem having unidirectional elements. Most of the earth's biological diversity is found in tropical rain forest countries.
These countries have an incentive to conserve some of their biological resources for nationalistic reasons. But they must accept sacrifices if they conserve all of their biological diversity and, hence, may be reluctant to do so. Other countries, however, benefit from conservation - partly because of the potential value of biological diversity in R&D and partly because of the value attached to the existence of biological diversity. The tropical rain forest countries have no incentive to take the well-being of other countries into account when deciding on their conservation programmes, just as in the above example country X had no incentive to take account of the environmental damage suffered by Y as a consequence of X's pollution emissions. The solution may be for countries that benefit from conservation to compensate the tropical rain forest countries for the incremental costs of conservation.
Compensation, however, reintroduces a reciprocal externality. If one country compensates a tropical rain forest country for the costs of conservation, a great many other countries benefit. The country paying the compensation has no incentive to take the full global benefit into account when deciding how much compensation it should pay. The same is true of all other countries that benefit from the conservation of biological diversity. Hence, there are incentives for countries to offer too little in the way of compensation. All the countries that benefit from the conservation of biological diversity would be better off if they cooperated in choosing compensation levels. As long as more than one country is affected by a unidirectional externality, the problem also has reciprocal externality elements. It is these that this paper seeks to address.
It should be noted that the problems discussed so far are not the only cases that may call for international cooperation. One country's policy regarding the environment may affect the well-being of other countries even if it does not affect the quality of the environment enjoyed by the other countries. In particular, actions by one country may affect the competitiveness of other countries. As an example, in the 1980s, Canada required inspection, counting and monitoring of all exports of unprocessed herring and salmon, ostensibly to protect these fisheries from excessive exploitation. The United States objected to the requirement, however, arguing that it contravened Article XI of the General Agreement on Tariffs end Trade (GATT) and that it was intended to protect the Canadian processing industry - at the expense of its United States rival - and not to conserve Canada's West Coast fisheries. A GATT Disputes Panel set up to hear the case ruled in favour of the United States.
According to Pearce ( 1992, p.14), "most commentators accept that Canada's use of the environmental argument was an attempted disguise of protectionism which the Panel rightly exposed". Had GATT not existed, actions of this kind might have invited retaliation by other countries in the form of further trade restrictions.
In some cases, the aims of international environmental protection and trade may conflict. A recent and well-publicized example concerns the 1988 amendments to the 1972 United States Marine Mammal Protection Act, which restricted the imports of tuna caught using a technology that kills more dolphins than allowed by United States standards. This unilateral action harmed a number of countries, especially Mexico. Mexico complained to GATT and, in this case, a Disputes Panel ruled that Article XX(g) of GATT does not allow restrictions that protect natural resources outside the jurisdiction of the country making the restriction. In contrast to the Canadian regulation, the United States action may have served to protect an international resource (the dolphin) and, hence, been justified on environmental grounds, despite the implications for trade. While trade issues may arise quite independently of the problems considered in this paper, a great many problems exist where trade and
environmental issues overlap.
Indeed, trade restrictions are sometimes employed by international agreements governing the management of shared resources. For instance, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer bars signatories from trade with non-signatories in chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), products containing CFCs or products made using CFCs. This trade ban serves two purposes. The first is to ensure that action taken by signatories to reduce CFC production is not offset by their imports from nonsignatories. The second is to provide an incentive for non-signatories to accede to the agreement. While the use of trade restrictions in this and other international agreements has not been taken to GATT, there is some question as to whether they are GATT-compatible. Clearly, questions of international trade can be important to the analysis of the collective management of shared environmental resources (Anderson and Blackhurst, 1992).
The essential point remains, however, that where countries might be made better off by cooperating in the management of shared resources, strong incentives exist for these countries to free ride on others. It is important, therefore. to know what can be expected of international agreements that codify collective management and how such agreements might be effectively negotiated. The purpose of this paper is to review the economics of international environmental agreements (IEAs) and draw Implications for the international issues that are relevant to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
Three chapters follow this introduction. The first of these reviews a number of IEAs that are already in force or are being actively negotiated and have relevance for food and agriculture while the second presents the theory of IEAs, focusing on how countries can agree to cooperate and sustain cooperation despite free rider incentives. Two kinds of problems are considered: the case of a reciprocal externality, such as the management of climate change or plant protection, and the conservation of biological diversity, which has elements of both unidirectional and reciprocal externalities. The final chapter returns to where the paper began, commenting on the ability of IEAs to improve upon the non-cooperative outcome.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 2. International agreements concerning food and agriculture
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
FAO, established by treaty in 1945 (Caldwell, 1984), is itself an example of international cooperation on common food and agricultural issues.
Specific issues have tended to be addressed through international environmental agreements, however. Table 1 lists the IEAs in which FAO has played an administrative role. The table was constructed by noting where FAO was explicitly mentioned in the agreement. FAO also has played a leading role in the negotiation of other agreements not listed here.
In this section, reference is made not only to the IEAs in Table 1 but also to other IEAs relating to food and agricultural issues. European Community (EC) directives and bilateral agreements are excluded from discussion. Although important, EC directives are negotiated within an institutional framework that makes their analysis different than that of IEAs generally, since many issues are negotiated simultaneously and repeatedly within the EC treaty structure. Similarly, bilateral agreements involve just two countries, and these are usually neighbours who regularly negotiate over other sets of issues.
Plant protection
Plant protection agreements are not concerned with the conservation of endangered plant species, but rather with the prevention of transnational spread of plant pests and diseases and with the control of trade in plants and plant products. Because the distribution of plants is localized, a number of regional agreements have been negotiated.
TABLE 1
International environmental agreements in which FAO has played an administrative role
International Environmental Agreement Dare of adoption Number of signatories Purpose FAO's role
Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean 1949 19 To improve management of the Mediterranean fisheries Council established within the framework of FAO
Convention for the Establishment of the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization 1951 31 To prevent the introduction and spread of pests and diseases of plants and plant products Coordinates with the established organization
International Plant Protection Convention 1951 81 To facilitate international cooperation in controlling pests and diseases of plant and plant products, and to prevent their introduction and service spread across national boundaries Coordinates convention and establishes a world reporting
Agreement for the Establishment on a Permanent Basis of a Latin-American Forest Research and Training Institute 1959 13 To establish institute to implement FAO's forestry programme in Latin America Institute placed under the auspices of the FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Eastern Region of its Distribution Area in Southwest Asia 1963 4 To promote research to control the desert locust in the region Commission Established within the framework of the FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Near East 1965 14 To promote research and control of desert locust in region Commission Established within Framework of FAO
International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 1966 19 To maintain tuna populations in the Atlantic Ocean at levels that sustain maximum sustainable catch Commission established to coordinate with FAO
Plant Protection Agreement for the Southeast Asia and Pacific Region 1967 22 To prevent the introduction And spread of destructive plant diseases and pests in the region Coordinates the Agreement
Convention on the Conservation of the Living Resources of the Southeast Atlantic 1969 16 To conserve and exploit rationally the living resources of the Southeast Atlantic Commission established to coordinate and cooperate with FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in Northwest Africa 1970 4 To promote research on and control of desert locust in the region Commission established within the framework of the FAO
International Tropical Timber Agreement 1983 48 Agreement between producing and consuming countries to promote tract and sustainable use of Tropical timber Along with other UN Organizations, FAO plays a coordinating role
Agreement on the Network of Agriculture Centres in Asia and the Pacific 1988 9 To assist in expansion of aquaculture development Organization established to have a close working relationship with FAO
Table 1 lists separate agreements for European and Mediterranean countries and for countries in Asia and the Pacific Region. Separate agreements also exist for other regions, including the Phyto-Sanitary Convention for Africa South of the Sahara (adopted in 1954 and signed by 22 countries) and the agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Quarantine of Plants and their ProtectionAgainst Pests and Diseases (adopted in 1959 and signed by 10 Soviet bloc countries).
Why are plant protection agreements needed? The principal reason is that protection by any one country will have little effect if its neighbours do not take similar measures. This is especially true of pests that are highly mobile, such as the Mediterranean fruit fly, or difficult to detect until their destructive effects have become apparent, such as the Dutch elm disease (Caldwell, 1984,p.192). Efforts by one country to control such pests would be costly to administer and would have little effect if its neighbours did not also seek to control the same pests. Before committing itself to a control programme, a country would have to be sure that its neighbours wanted to commit themselves to the same measures
Control of the desert locust
A number of IEAs have been established to control migratory locusts. Three of these are listed in Table 1; a fourth is the Convention on the African Migratory Locust Organization (adopted in 1962 and signed by nine countries).^ Control of locusts is vital to the agricultural interests of many countries. And because locust populations are localized, it is appropriate that the agreements concerning the control of locusts are regional. The need for such agreements is familiar: efforts by one country to control locusts within its own borders would be of little value if similar efforts were not undertaken by neighbouring states. For a country to commit resources to locust control, it must be confident that its neighbours are willing to undertake a similar commitment.
Forestry and aquaculture
Table 1 lists two forestry agreements. One is solely concerned with cooperation in research on the management of forest resources in Latin America and communicating this knowledge through an education programme. The other, the International Tropical Timber Agreement, is an agreement between producing and consuming nations to support research and manage forest resources sustainably.
A forest convention was being negotiated in the run-up to the Earth Summit to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, but was abandoned in 1991. In its place, a non-legally binding authoritative statement of principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests was negotiated. It is possible that this declaration of principles may serve as the starting-point for a future forestry convention.
Table 1 also includes an agreement on aquaculture. Like the forestry agreements, it is intended to coordinate research, training and information exchange. Cooperation in research is important because research has characteristics of public good. If one country gives another a piece of information, this does not reduce the amount of information held by the first country.
Fisheries conservation
Table 1 lists two fisheries agreements in which FAO has played an administrative role. Many others have been negotiated. including:
* Convention for the Establishment of an Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (adopted in 1949 and signed by six countries);
* Agreement Concerning Measures for Protection of the Stocks of DeepSea Prawns, European Lobsters, Norway Lobsters and Crabs (adopted in 1952 and signed by three countries):
* International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean (adopted in 1952 and signed by three countries):
* Convention Concerning Fishing in the Waters of the Danube (adopted in 1958 and signed by six countries);
* Convention of Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas (adopted in 1958 and signed by 34 countries);
* Convention Concerning Fishing in the Black Sea (adopted in 1959 and signed by three countries);
* Agreement Concerning Cooperation in Marine Fishing (adopted in 1962 and signed by six countries);
* Convention for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (adopted in 1970 and signed by 18 countries);
* Convention of the Conservation of the Living Resources of the Southeast Atlantic (adopted in 1969 and signed by 16 countries);4
* Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts (adopted in 1973 and signed by seven countries);
* Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries (adopted in 1978 and signed by 12 countries);
* Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (adopted in 1980 and signed by 27 countries and the European Community);
* Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in North-EastAtlantic Fisheries (adopted in 1980 and signed by ten countries and the European Community);
* Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean (adopted in 1982 and signed by seven countries and the European Community).
Because most of the agreements are concerned with all species of fish within a geographic area or with particular species, they limit the potential number of signatories.
In general, the fisheries commissions established by these IEAs collect data and carry out research necessary to advise on how fisheries could be more effectively exploited. They are often invited to make recommendations on managing the resource. For example, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, established by the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, may "make recommendations designed to maintain the populations of tuna and tunalike fishes that may be taken in the Convention area at levels which will permit the maximum sustainable catch".
Quite apart from the fact that "maximum sustainable catch" is generally not justified economically (for example, Clark, 1976), implementation poses great difficulties. The agreement stipulates that commission recommendations must be implemented by parties to the agreement, but only if parties do not "object" to the recommendation. If any party does object to the recommendation, that party is not required to comply with the recommendation. Clearly, stronger mechanisms are needed if these agreements are to succeed in more effective management of fishery resources.
Marine mammal protection
A number of IEAs are concerned with the management of marine mammals. These include the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (adopted in 1946 and signed by 24 countries), the Convention on Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals (adopted in 1957 and signed by tour countries) and the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (adopted in 1972 and signed by 11 countries).
The Whaling Convention is perhaps the best known of these agreements, but its fame results as much from its failures as from its successes. The
Whaling Convention was preceded by the 1931 Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, which banned commercial hunting of right and bowhead whales, as well as the killing of calves or female whales accompanied by calves (Lyster, 1985, p. 8). The earlier agreement had little effect, however, partly because it was not signed by five major whaling nations (Japan, Germany, Chile, Argentina and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics). The 1931 agreement did not establish a commission, and hence was not a flexible instrument for managing whaling.
The Whaling Convention was established by the International Whaling Commission (IWC), which sets quotas and regulates whaling methods. Perhaps the greatest success of the Whaling Convention was the commercial ban on whaling adopted in 1986. But that ban - as well as the Convention itself - is now under threat. While the Convention was set up originally to reduce current harvest rates in order to increase future rates, any country may sign the agreement, and the vast majority of current signatories are primarily concerned with bringing all commercial whaling to an end.
Like the fisheries agreements, the Whaling Convention does not impose harsh requirements on its parties. If a party objects to an amendment to the regulations governing the exploitation and conservation of whales, it is not bound by them. In effect, therefore, countries may do whatever they wish. However, two United States laws, known as the Pelly Amendment to the Fisherman's Protective Act of 1967 and the Packwood-Magnusom Amendment to the Fishery Conservation and Management Act of 1976, authorize the United States Government to take economic sanctions against any country whose activities diminish the effectiveness of the conservation measures of the International Whaling Convention. These sanctions include bans on fish imports and on fishing in United States territorial waters. As a result, in 1 983 the United States withheld 171000 tonnes (worth about US$55 million) from Japan's fish allocations within the United States 200-mile coastal zone in retaliation for Japan's
objection to the Whaling Commission's decision to halt commercial whaling in 1986( Lyster, 1 985).
The North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty, first negotiated in 1911,is among the most successful of all IEAs. The agreement was reached as the fur seal population was close to extinction. The seals were being hunted by the United States, Canada, Russia and Japan. Canada and Japan hunted the seals at sea, while the United States and Russia harvested their own breeding populations on land. Pelagic sealing was a particularly wasteful method of harvesting; many seals were killed without being retrieved, and most of the seals taken at sea were female. The 1911 treaty did not limit the total catch of seals, but it banned pelagic sealing. Since the United States and Russia had every incentive to manage their own populations efficiently (on the Pribilof islands and on the Commander, Robben and Kurile islands, respectively), the ban was expected to produce a substantial increase in the present value profit from the resource. Canada and Japan were compensated by being given a fixed share of
the total harvest of the United States and Russia.
The treaty also includes an important enforcement provision. If one party violates the agreement, the agreement becomes null and void. This is a strong deterrent to cheating, since all parties would be worse off without the agreement than with it. Although the agreement has been amended since 191 1, it remains in force today. The agreement is discussed further in the final chapter, "International environmental agreements reconsidered", (p. 43).
Animal welfare
Several European agreements concern animal welfare, including the European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes (adopted in 1976 and signed by 17 countries plus the European Community), the European Convention for the Protection of Animals for Slaughter (adopted in 1979 and signed by 10 countries) and the European Convention for the Protection of Animals During International Transport (adopted in 1968 and signed by 19 countries).
International cooperation is needed in these cases for two reasons: because consumers want to be confident that all the food they purchase satisfies minimum standards for animal welfare and because farmers who must comply with local laws do not want to lose competitive advantage to imports.
Bird protection
Since many bird species are migratory, the policies of one country regarding the harvesting of birds and the protection of their habitat affect the abundance of the species in other countries. Birds are valued for controlling pests that may harm agriculture, as a food source and also for aesthetic and ecological reasons.
Several IEAs are intended to protect bird populations, including the Convention for the Protection of Birds Useful to Agriculture (adopted in 1902 and signed by 12 countries), the International Convention for the Protection of Birds (adopted in 1950 and signed by ten countries) and the Benelux Convention on the Hunting and the Protection of Birds (adopted in 1970 and signed by three countries). The first two agreements have had little effect (Lyster, 1985), while the third has imposed quotas on the taking of particular species.
Terrestrial species
Two lEAs are concerned with the conservation of particular terrestrial species. The Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears (adopted in 1973 and signed by five countries) provides for the coordination of research programmes, restricts the killing and capture of polar bears and seeks to protect their ecosystem.
A number of agreements are concerned with the conservation of the vicuna, a relative of the llama, which has long been hunted for its wool. Wild populations are currently found in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru' and they once existed in Ecuador. The Convention for the Conservation and Management of the Vicuna (adopted in 1979 and signed by four countries) prohibits "the hunting and illegal trade of the vicuña, its products and derivatives within the territory" of the signatories. Like the polar bear agreement, IEAs regulating the conservation of vicuña, have been successful. Lyster (1985,p. 94) states: "It would certainly be hard to give the vicuña, more comprehensive international legal protection than it receives at present, and if the species does not prosper it would raise serious questions as to the worth of negotiating any international wildlife treaties at all."
Endangered species protection
Both polar bears and vicuña, are also cited in the appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (adopted in 1973 and signed by more than 90 countries). The CITES convention governs international trade in endangered species. It includes a list of endangered species and requires that trade be regulated by permits. Species cited in Appendix I are those that are "threatened with extinction" and by and large prohibited from trade, while Appendix II species are "not necessarily now threatened with extinction [but] may become so unless trade in specimens of such species is subject to strict regulation in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival." Appendix 11 species cannot be exported without a permit, and in issuing a permit the designated authority of the state must determine that the "export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species." However, import permits are not required for these species.
The most novel dimension of CITES is the regulation of trade between parties and non-parties. The agreement prohibits parties from trading with non-parties unless the latter produce documentation comparable to that required of parties. The large number of signatories is probably the result of this requirement.
CITES has come under strain recently because of a conflict between African nations seeking a ban on trade in African elephant ivory and those with better managed populations who would like trade to be continued.
Nature conservation
A number of IEAs are concerned with the protection of particular ecosystems. These include the Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife Preservation in the Western Hemisphere (adopted in 1940 and signed by 17 countries), the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (adopted in 1979 and signed by about 17 countries) and the Protocol Concerning Protected Areas and Wild Fauna and Flora in the Eastern African Region (adopted in 1985 and signed by about five countries). Others are concerned with nature in general and include the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (adopted in 1972 and signed by about 98 countries) and the Convention on the Conservation of Biological Diversity (adopted in 1992 and signed by more than 150 countries).
The Convention on Biological Diversity, signed in June 1992 at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, is largely intended as a vehicle for transferring resources from rich to p