<title>ADCP/REP/89/33 - Planning for Aquaculture Development</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The idea of an Action Plan to coordinate aquaculture development was conceived at the Fisheries Development Donor Consultation in Paris in 1986, following a special session on aquaculture potentials and constraints to development presented by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), which is a field project funded by the United Nations Development Programme, executed by FAO from its Headquarters.
The following report 'Planning for Aquaculture Development' is intended to assist in the preparation of such a Plan. It has been formulated by twenty four individuals who have a broad range of international and sectoral experience in the subject, acting in their personal capacities, at an expert consultation organized by ADCP. The meeting was hosted by Ittica Valdagri in Policoro, Southern Italy, in the facilities which were used for the annual training course for the Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Project, 1984-87. The meeting was held from 26 July-2 August 1988.
The participants recognize the constraints of this collective approach to planning development, knowing full well that the majority of identifiable needs for action are national, and in some cases even local, in origin. This is because aquaculture is not only a very diverse activity, which involves many systems and practices, and innumerable biological species, but also because it is a combination of technology and the equally important milieu of social, cultural, economic, and environmental factors which influence its acceptability and successful development.
The participants also recognize that the majority of identifiable needs are already being met to some degree by many national and regional efforts, and reinforcement of these efforts, where known, is mentioned. In some cases knowledge of sectoral activities in certain countries and regions was weak, thus constraining preparation of comprehensive background papers and subsequent synthesis. Furthermore, only limited consideration is given to the major uncertainties affecting the further development of aquaculture, such as the potential for increased investment in view of the continuing decline in the economies of many countries, especially in Latin America. However, in view of the limitations of national capital investment and external capital assistance, an effort to identify common national needs which would respond to cooperation and regional organization is justifiable and worth making. To this end, therefore, this report reflects the discussions and opinions of the
participants and not of any particular organization.
The target audiences of the report, which is intended as a non-organizational and impartial document, are predominantly government administrators in developing countries where aquaculture is recognized as a sector of increasing economic importance, and the donor community which has supported aquaculture development. It is intended to assist in guiding and coordinating their collective efforts in the next decade. In addition, the report is also intended for the NGOs and the private sector, who have opportunity and interest to work together with international development as well as for their independent benefit.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The following chapter has been prepared by ADCP to summarize the current status of aquaculture development and external assistance, and to describe the chronology of events which led to the expert consultation in Policoro.
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
The products of aquaculture also benefit nutrition and health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%) which is readily digested and immediately utilized by the human body. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a far higher percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage. Aquatic animals are a source of minerals, trace elements, and vitamins, and the fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates, particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol.
Aquaculture, the farming of both aquatic animals and plants, accounted for some 13% by weight (or 10 587 000 metric tonnes), and considerably more by value, of total products derived from the aquatic environment in 1985. Annex I gives world aquaculture production figures for 1985 and lists countries which presently lead production. Currently, about 70% of the total world catch of fisheries is used for human consumption.
It is probable that the development of the aquaculture sector will closely parallel agriculture rather than capture fisheries. Based upon regional trends in productivity growth for the past decade, and assuming some redistribution of cultured species between the regions, the indications are that aquaculture production will increase to some 22 million tonnes by the end of the century, or approximately twice the 1985 levels. Direct extrapolation of the current global growth rate (increases of 74% from 1975 to 1985) suggests that even this could be a conservative estimate. If these indications prove to be correct, if the same database is used, by the end of the century aquaculture could account for 20-25% by weight of total world fisheries production (capture fisheries plus aquaculture), and possibly in excess of 50% by value.
The economic and nutritional importance of aquaculture to developing countries is recognized by the donor community. This is reflected by the increasing relative proportion of international financial assistance now being given to aquaculture in the total given to the fisheries sector as a whole. The economic importance is also duly recognized by the private sector, and considerable capital investment continues to be made world-wide, particularly in the tropical countries where there are important advantages of suitable climate, and cheap land and labour.
Investment in the aquaculture sector comes in two principal forms, namely external capital assistance and private sector investment. External capital assistance may be either (i) "hard" loans, provided by the World Bank and the regional development banks; (ii) "soft" or concessionary loans, provided by the multilateral and bilateral development banks, multilateral donors, and bilateral aid organizations; or (iii) "grants", provided by multilateral and bilateral donors.
At the present time there are few hard loans being made to the sector. There are small aquaculture components in a few large programme loans being made to certain countries for development, and mostly for a line of credit. The great majority of loans are concessionary, to be used for capital construction, training, credit for producers, and management costs. The World Bank has provided over US$ 100 million in soft loans to the global aquaculture sector over the last decade, and its annual volume is increasing; the Asian Development Bank provides about US$ 10-20 million of assistance to the Asia region through long-term credit to national financial institutions, or through national projects which have a credit component; and the Inter-American Development Bank and African Development Bank have played a similar but smaller role. In addition, a number of other organizations, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), finance major construction and
provide lines of credit.
Grants, however, make the most significant contribution in building the national aquaculture sectors and, in several cases, provide almost all of the funds. Such grants are provided by the multilateral and bilateral donors and have been for (i) capital aid, and (ii) technical assistance. Both are invariably provided together, but much depends on the regulations and limitations of the donor. The principal multilateral donor is the United Nations (UN) system, but increasing contributions to the sector are now being made by the European Economic Community (EEC). Most of the organizations of the UN system are restricted in the form of their assistance, either capital aid or technical assistance, and some to only project execution.
The four major bilateral donors to aquaculture (in alphabetical order) are France, Italy, Japan, and the USA. Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom are also very active in technical assistance. The bilateral donors are not necessarily restricted in the form of their support.
Other avenues for providing assistance are food aid (through the World Food Programme and bilateral donors) in exchange for the construction of infrastructure necessary for aquaculture activities; and for direct technical cooperation or the execution of national activities through trust funds, as provided by such bodies as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco).
Between 1982-1985, the average annual capital aid to the global aquaculture sector was of the order of US$ 40-50 million, of which over half went to Asian countries. The average annual level of technical assistance has been of the order of US$ 20-30 million, of which again over half goes to Asia, closely followed by Africa if North African and Sub-Sahelian countries are grouped.
Together with the massive investment by the private sector in aquaculture, external capital assistance has established the industry in many countries throughout the last decade. Like any other technology, aquaculture began with limited government investment in research and development and pilot-scale production but subsequent capital investment has initiated the transfer from government into the hands of the private sector.
As noted above, grants are a most significant factor in building the capacity of the developing countries to manage and operate a viable aquaculture sector. They can be used for the construction of farms and hatcheries, and also for government research facilities, for lines of credit, creating extension services, training, education, research, and national administration. Therefore, capital grants are highly adaptive to meet specific national needs which vary from country to country.
The majority of grants are made through relatively short-term national projects. A current (but incomplete) list of aid projects (ADCP, Aid Profiles 1988) indicates that there are over 160 activities of all sizes operational in aquaculture throughout some 59 countries. Of these, Asia has half, and Africa and Latin America just over 30 each; the rest are divided between the Mediterranean region, the Near East, and the Pacific countries. In some cases, these are large multi-million dollar five year projects; in others they are no more than individual fellowships for research.
There are, in addition, grants made to individual countries through regional projects. Regional projects are effective in organizing particular activities in aquaculture to make the most use of relatively scarce manpower and structural resources, and concern themselves with long- and short-term training, research, and the exchange of technical information. More recently, regional projects have focused attention on government planning and administration. At the present time there are regional projects for aquaculture in Africa (1), Asia (4), Latin America and the Caribbean (3), and the Pacific (3). New regional projects are scheduled in 1989 for the Mediterranean (2), and West Africa (1). These projects are funded both by the multilateral and bilateral donors.
Finally, there are some 21 global and interregional aquaculture projects. The majority of these are research projects funded by bilateral donors. These projects are being carried out at institutions in both developed and developing countries on topics which have far reaching consequences. One project, however, undertakes interregional coordination of regional activities. This is the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), and it is funded by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The ADCP has been in existence for over twelve years and, with the mandate of the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture at Kyoto, Japan, in 1976, has been responsible for implementing the so-called Kyoto Strategy and its principal recommendations for training, multidisciplinary research, and information exchange through regional networks. These networks were subsequently identified and funded by UNDP and bilateral donors. For the first decade, the ADCP focused attention on the priority biotechnical issues. However, the Kyoto Strategy did not address the all-important characteristic of aquaculture, namely its great diversity. This, as subsequently described by the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture, was its principal weakness. Consequently, as the capabilities in these principal areas have been built up at the national level, the ADCP has re-oriented its focus for the last three years on the non-biotechnical issues of the sector, particularly national policy-making and
planning, marketing, investment, economics, and labour utilization, particularly the role of women in the sector.
Reference to aquaculture, particularly to the small-scale fish farming communities, was made at the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development in 1984. The special needs of these communities were recognized, together with small-scale fisheries and rural fishing, and the Conference approved a Programme of Action reinforcing the three principal components identified by the Kyoto Strategy, namely training, multidisciplinary research, and the development of an information network, and recommended continuation of the work of the regional projects unchanged.
The importance of the new issues being implemented by ADCP has been reinforced by the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture, a global study financed by UNDP, FAO, and the Government of Norway, which was published in 1987. While the Thematic Evaluation gave credit to international assistance for development of aquaculture world-wide, it was critical of the objectives, implementation, and monitoring of aquaculture projects. It specifically noted that "few donors have a well-articulated policy for their technical assistance in aquaculture ... (which is) ... reflected in hasty and uncritical attempts to transfer technology often not suitable to the needs of the recipient country".
The Thematic Evaluation recognized that the ADCP had an important role to play in aquaculture, "particularly in identifying and in monitoring the aquaculture assistance programme at a regional level. By distributing globally the information it assembles on a regional basis (partly through the regional projects) it will provide a basis for better international coordination of technical aid to aquaculture".
At the Fisheries Development Donor Consultation in Paris in 1986 a special session on aquaculture potential and issues for development was scheduled, and information was presented by the ADCP on the findings of the Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture. The ADCP was subsequently requested by the organizers of the Consultation to develop the work further, and to assist the donor community to identify and agree on technical assistance proposals at a global, regional, and sub-regional level, being cognizant of the recommendations of the Thematic Evaluation and other documents. With this objective in mind, the ADCP committed a significant part of its effort in 1988 to the preparation of this report on Planning for Aquaculture Development.
Planning for aquaculture, particularly in developing countries, is of the highest priority if its potential is to be realized before the competition for resources it requires, such as water and access to suitable sites, is lost.
Maximum use has to be made of investment, not only in capital but also in the efforts and time of human manpower. The resources have to be well spent, and this is not possible without identifying the greatest needs and opportunities, and developing the right strategies for cooperative responses. In brief, this is the purpose of the report. While the report itself represents an integrated set of identified needs for technical assistance to developing countries, its greater objective is to assist in guiding future investment, in its broadest sense, in the sector.
There are several intended beneficiaries of the report:
(i) All countries, but specifically developing countries:
· through identification of sectoral needs in both a regional and sub-regional context,
· through information about the sector in broad contexts,
· through resulting public and private investment.
(ii) Public investors, acting either independently or with international assistance, and private investors
· through identification of opportunities,
· through information about the sector.
(iii) Aid donors and institutions active in aquaculture
· through identification of opportunities for providing assistance,
· through identification of opportunities for cooperation and complementarity,
· through organizational planning to meet the changing needs.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 2. STRATEGY FOR AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
The following chapter, which has been prepared by ADCP, organizes the brief summaries made by the expert consultation at each sub-sectoral level. The summaries were prepared following the discussion in order to select and group key issues and opportunities which would respond to collective external assistance and intervention. The individual opportunities (65 in number) are described in Chapter 3 for seven geographic regions, namely Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, and the Near East. The connotation of "opportunity" is inferred in its broadest sense, namely the expenditure of capital, human resources, and time.
The opportunities are predominantly a group of identified needs or ideas for technical assistance to developing countries, which collectively will assist in guiding investment decisions primarily at the national level in both the public and private sectors. The opportunities are not all new, or are to be considered in isolation. Many complement or reinforce existing activities in the seven regions.
The priority for these opportunities is for those which respond directly to specific actions at the national level to meet a country's individual needs and objectives. Because of the great diversity of aquaculture and the variations in social, economic, and environmental conditions from country to country this is most important to recognize. However, many of these opportunities can be supported and at times best met through regional and sub-regional initiatives (such as the composite approach proposed for Latin America and the Caribbean, as resources of manpower and knowledge are scarce), while others may be met through interregional initiatives (for example, the framework for national policy and planning).
The 65 identified opportunities, for easy reference, are tabulated and described in Annex II. The following summaries have been identified for the corresponding actions through regional and sub-regional initiatives, and in some cases interregional, in support of these national opportunities and subsequent investment decisions. Not all these activities are equally important to all regions and sub-regions, and where appropriate this has been mentioned.
2.1 Consumption of Aquaculture Products and Marketing
The consumption of aquaculture products should be promoted. The majority of aquaculture products, which are fish, offer low-cost alternatives to either no animal protein at all or the high-priced products from land animals. Although poultry and some cheap white meats often compete with fish in price, fish offers the consumers choice of attractive variations, and almost all fish produced by aquaculture is sold fresh.
Aquaculture products are also highly nutritious. Compared with poultry and land animals they have a higher percentage of utilizable flesh and less wastage, with some exceptions (such as shellfish), as well as high levels of minerals, vitamins, and trace elements. Increasing consumption of all fish and fisheries products for the benefit of health is a priority, where feasible, in all countries where malnutrition is evident, and also in many countries simply for increasing national standards of health. This is also true of Asian countries where the average consumption of fisheries and aquaculture products is already high. In most regions all fisheries products compete with red and white meats, and poultry, and aquaculture products have competition from under-utilized natural resources of fish.
Almost all current national and regional projects are directed toward increased consumption for the benefits of nutrition. Few, if any, projects include specific activities which interface with the consumers.
Appropriate long-term action through education should be taken to promote fish consumption at the national level. This should begin in schools, especially in Africa, as this is where the greatest long-term impact will be made. Consumer education should be included in all national projects. Further supportive actions can be taken at a regional level to assist in organizing programmes of education. This is particularly important in Latin America, where fish consumption and aquaculture are not traditional.
Marketing information about fish and fisheries products must be expanded, particularly the coverage of aquaculture commodities. This is a priority in all countries seeking to increase consumption for national reasons and to create an industry, and again in all regions including Asia where products are already an integral part of all markets. Information important to buyers is the range of commodities and respective prices, and quantity and quality of the commodities, particularly their availability out of the traditional season.
For aquaculture marketing activities, emphasis should be placed on information which interfaces with the national producers. Again, few, if any, national projects include the collection and dissemination of marketing information for aquaculture products and this must be corrected.
As many countries export aquaculture products active support should also be implemented at the regional levels through existing services (such as the regional FAO INFOFISH network and GLOBEFISH) to separate aquaculture commodity data from fisheries commodity data.
Marketing information is also required about inputs into the industry. Supportive guidance should also be provided at the interregional and regional levels to encourage national activities to provide information about other key industry commodities, such as the quantity and price of seed (fingerlings, post-larvae, spat), and feed prices including fish meal.
Application of existing post-harvest technologies for aquaculture products is required. Introduction of traditional technologies to producers is particularly important, especially to maintain the quality of the products from remote areas and to safeguard public health. This is a priority common to all regions. A number of national projects and the regional projects in Africa and Asia include some specific activities in post-harvest technology (such as fish preservation, and depuration of shellfish), but at a low level.
Because of the diversity of aquaculture products, and the differing demands of local markets, the required post-harvest technologies vary from country to country (and possibly within country). At the national level action should be taken to apply the appropriate technical development in all projects which are involved in production. In most cases the economic infrastructure to transfer the technology has to be established. Assistance can also be provided regionally for disseminating general information on post-harvest technologies for the principal production species produced in the respective region.
2.2 Production
Increasing production of aquaculture in response to market demand is one of the highest priorities for the sector because of the economic importance. For most countries as their populations increase aquaculture products can reduce the widening gap between the national market demand for fish and the supply. This gap is presently exacerbated by the static growth of capture fisheries brought about by the diminishing natural stocks and the high cost of traditional fishing. Aquaculture products offer an immediate alternative source of a variety of fish and shellfish.
Increasing production of certain high value species for international markets is important for earning foreign exchange. It also provides employment, particularly in depressed and remote areas. Among poor rural populations where farmers pursue a number of agricultural practices, increasing food production through aquaculture adds to the household food and capital income.
Already many national projects and regional projects in Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Mediterranean, and the Near East, are active in demonstrating and encouraging production in support of national food security and economic benefits. These efforts must be expanded and must include testing of the social, economic, and environmental feasibility of aquaculture.
At the national level, activities which increase production in response to local market demands and the number of farmers operating in the sector, including the construction of production units, must continue to be given the highest priority. This is essential in all countries of Africa, the Near East, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, and the Pacific regions, and in those countries of Asia where aquaculture is not well developed.
New long-term approaches to increase production of low-cost fish through aquaculture and fisheries technologies are required for those countries and sub-regions where population growth is rapidly accelerating the gap between market demand for fish and all potential sources of supply, including traditional aquaculture. A number of countries in Asia and some in Africa are potentially in this position. Special priority should be given to the promotion of appropriate production systems, which are feasible from a socio-economic and environmental point of view, to enhance production in bodies of water which are not presently considered utilizable. Of particular importance is the promotion and management of culture-based fisheries (particularly in Africa and Latin America); of coastal lagoons (in Africa, Latin America, and the Mediterranean); and in open-water systems (potentially all regions).
These potentially useful enhancement programmes are long-term activities, involving organized producers working in association with systems-oriented research and development. Therefore, appropriate progressive actions must be taken:
(a) first at an interregional level to (i) prepare a catalogue listing available systems and practices of production, (ii) consider new approaches to production through an expert consultation, and (iii) consider and refine the findings of the consultation for transfer to specific test and demonstration sites;
(b) followed at sub-regional and national levels to identify and select the appropriate test systems and practices for the selected site(s), organize research and development, select participating institutions, select producers, and disseminate information;
(c) followed at a national level to organize further distribution channels as required.
2.3 Local Infrastructure
In all countries in all regions improving the ways of delivering appropriate extension information to the producers is required, particularly where new technology is involved. Extension is an important interface between the national producers and advancing technology. All the current national projects involved in production have a component of extension, and this practice must be continued. A number of the regional projects (in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and the Mediterranean) organize short-term courses on technical topics for government representatives responsible for aspects of national production.
Extension is a national function (and in many cases local) because of the diversity of aquaculture practices, languages, environment, and social and economic conditions. One immediate action at the national level is to seek wider involvement of agriculturists, particularly agriculture extension workers, to provide channels for improving the promotion of aquaculture in rural populations. However, support to the improvement of national extension can be provided at:
(a) the regional and sub-regional level to (i) organize and provide appropriate training for extension leaders at focal centres, (ii) transmit information about the concepts and importance of extension to senior management in government administrations through sensitization seminars, and (iii) assist in the translation of extension materials to national languages, and even local languages;
(b) with further support provided at an interregional level to (i) examine and analyse known effective extension services and catalogue, (ii) explore new approaches to extension, and (iii) disseminate new information to the regions.
The increased availability of good quality seed is important to the producers in all countries in every region. It is particularly important in Africa and Latin America where there is a shortage of hatcheries or the national hatcheries are inefficiently operated. It is also important in countries where farmers rely on the capture of wild seed resources for stocking. Many national projects are currently involved in seed production, but are not necessarily concerned with supporting the producers' requirements or producing sufficient to select for quality.
For the reasons as noted above (i.e. the diversity of products, local conditions, etc.), priority action must be taken at the national level to (i) upgrade existing seed production facilities through capital investment, (ii) encourage private investment in hatcheries, and (iii) train farmers for the responsibility of producing their own seed requirements.
Further support should also be provided at the regional and sub-regional levels, particularly in Africa and Latin America, and in the countries of Asia which are not yet advanced in aquaculture, to (i) organize and provide appropriate training for hatchery managers and technicians at focal centres; (ii) organize technical cooperation between countries to share expertise, and (iii) produce and disseminate technical information about hatchery technology to national sectors.
2.4 Rational Infrastructure
Research, both fundamental and applied, remains one of the highest priorities for the development of the sector world-wide. This report does not go into detail regarding research needs and priorities, because of the broad range of regional expertise which is required for the task. However, a special session was devoted to the subject of "International Research in Aquaculture: organization and management of international assistance" (see Annex IV). It was noted that in 1989 there will be an inter-organizational study on fisheries research, including aquaculture, and it was felt that the recommendations of this and other studies on aquaculture research (by CGIAR) will clearly outline the needs of the aquaculture sector and the priority research required for development.
The need for more research particularly applies to Asia, which, in spite of the great breadth and depth of the aquaculture sector in the region, continues to be constrained by the lack of research information. But the need 