<title>ADCP/REP/88/32 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can be (and in some cases is already being) met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This third regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries, territories and free associations of the Pacific, namely Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Truk, Yap), Fiji, French Polynesia, the Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, the Republic of Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna, and Western Samoa. Previous surveys dealt with eleven Middle East countries, and East Asia.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Stephen Nelson in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries and territories of this vast region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the third of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
The nations and island territories which make up the region of the Pacific have neither individually nor collectively much importance as far as global aquaculture production is concerned. For the most part aquaculture production data, like that of other commodities, are included and lost in the regional association 'Asia and the Pacific'.
In spite of its anonymity, compared with that of its important status in neighbouring Asia, aquaculture in the Pacific region is not without some tradition. The ancient Polynesians had considerable understanding of the natural history of useful marine food fishes which enabled them to practise a simple form of husbandry and management in coastal ponds they constructed within the coral reefs. Furthermore, the ownership of fish ponds and fish was an important symbol of chieftainship. Few of these ancient fish ponds remain in production, and in recent years the islanders have applied modern practices onshore.
The Pacific Region which forms this survey is 'made up of the Pacific Islands and the countries of Australasia.
Considerable geopolitical changes have occurred among the Pacific Islands within the last two decades. Predominantly, reference to the Pacific Islands infers the islands of Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia, and excludes islands which are integral parts of other nations, for example, Hawaii. The independent island nations are the Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Truk, Yap), Fiji, the Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, the Republic of Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu, and Western Samoa.
American Samoa and Guam are territories of the USA, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is a commonwealth of the USA.
The Cook Islands and Niue are free associations with New Zealand, and Tokelau is a non self-governing territory under New Zealand.
French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Wallis and Futuna are all territories of France.
The countries of Australasia which complete the regional survey are Australia and New Zealand.
The economic and natural resources of these nations and territories for aquaculture vary enormously. At the extremes there are the rich land mass and coastal resources of continental Australia, and the one-island nation of Nauru of 21 km^2. The rest, for the most part, are nations made up of (often) many hundreds of small islands, most of which are atolls, with small populations and distributed over vast distances which makes inter-island transportation costly. Furthermore, the need for aquaculture production for food for island communities is not always important. Although many island populations are under-nourished, the majority have adequate resources of animal protein in the way of natural resources of marine fish and shellfish.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKET
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
Fish and shellfish are important sources of dietary protein throughout the Pacific. Fish are high in protein (17-20%) and supply important vitamins and minerals, such as calcium and phosphorus. Fish are especially important within the region among populations inhabiting small oceanic islands where long-standing traditions of reliance on marine resources have developed and where other sources of animal protein are scarce. In other countries within the region, fish consumption is increasing in light of the knowledge that the lipid fraction of fish contains largely polyunsaturated fatty acids, a dietary factor which aids in reducing blood cholesterol levels.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
As a result of the intimate associations between the populations of Oceania and the sea, the per caput consumption of fish and shellfish is high within the region, and a wide variety of fishes and invertebrates is consumed. These include species from pelagic, nearshore, benthic, coral reef, lagoon, mangrove, seagrass, and freshwater habitats.
High-value species, such as lobsters, shrimp, abalone, and oysters, are relatively more important in Australia and New Zealand, while nearshore coral reef species of fish and invertebrates are predominant in the diets of the peoples inhabiting the smaller islands of Oceania. Freshwater fisheries in the Pacific Islands are moderately developed only in Papua New Guinea, for tilapia, and in Fiji, for freshwater clams.
Food production through commercial aquaculture has been developed in only a few nations and is generally associated with the level of economic development rather than with per caput consumption.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The percentage of the daily protein consumption is affected by a number of factors, the principal one being the availability of fish. Fish is often more important in the diets of coastal populations than for inland populations. In Vanuatu, for example, fish and shellfish constitute 51% of the dietary protein of coastal populations but only 27% of the protein consumed by inland populations. In essentially non-monied economies, availability of fish may be a major determinant of the level of consumption. In monied economies the price of fish relative to other protein sources and the flexibility of the consumer's available finances also contribute to determining the levels of fish consumption.
The available data (Table 1) demonstrate that, on average, the people of the Pacific islands have access to a substantial amount, 10 to 50 kg per caput per year, of fish available for consumption. A recent village household survey conducted in Yap state of the Federated States of Micronesia showed that about 75% of animal protein consumed is fish, and that approximately 90% of the fish consumed comes from the artisanal sector.
In the island nations with low population densities there is generally little economic incentive for the development of aquaculture for local markets. However, in Western Samoa, the population has grown rapidly and over 50% of the fish consumed is imported; this has stimulated interest in commercial aquaculture.
In spite of the relatively high average availability of fish in the Pacific islands in general, there are populations in inland areas with limited access either to coasts or to large rivers. For example, about 85% of the population of Papua New Guinea lives inland, and some villages suffer from protein deficiencies. In such areas, nutritional deficiencies could be alleviated in part through the development of subsistence fish culture. Aquaculture development to address such problems has been initiated for carp in the highlands of Papua New Guinea and for tilapia in parts of Fiji.
In Australia and New Zealand fish and shellfish comprise a relatively small proportion of the food consumed. It is estimated that in Australia about 2% of household expenditures is spent on seafood, and fish is eaten in restaurants more often than in the home. However, even in these areas the per caput consumption of fish, much of which is imported, has been increasing in recent years. Per caput consumption of seafood in Australia is estimated to be 7.5 kg per year. With large domestic markets and significant imports there is considerable economic incentive in the development of aquaculture in these countries, and the farming of aquatic organisms is considered to be among the promising "sunrise" industries.
1.4 Gross market data
The characteristics of the major markets for fisheries products in general vary greatly within the region. In part this reflects the sizes of the domestic markets as indicated by population estimates. The country with the largest number of people within the region is Australia, which has a population of nearly 16 million. This is several times greater than the populations of the next largest countries, Papua New Guinea or New Zealand, which have populations of between 3 and 4 million each. The other countries and territories within the region have populations ranging from 18 000 in the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands to just over 700 000 in Fiji (Table 2).
Markets depend not only on the size of the population but also on the purchasing ability of the consumers. This is reflected somewhat in a country's GNP. Within the region Australia has the greatest GNP of over US$ 171 thousand million. Although New Zealand and Papua New Guinea have populations of similar size, the GNP of New Zealand (over US$ 24 thousand million) is approximately 12 times that of Papua New Guinea (US$ 2.5 thousand million), and vastly greater than such countries as Tonga (US$ 70 million) or Kiribati (US$ 30 million) (Table 2).
Simple national statistics belie the reality of the size of the countries, and the population distribution. The 23 countries, territories, and commonwealths included in this survey are made up of over 1 000 islands and atolls, many only inhabited temporarily, or not at all. They range in size from Australia, with its continental land mass of 7 682 300 km^2, down to the island nation of Nauru of 21 km^2 (Table 3). Fiji is made up of over 400 islands; Tonga of more than 170. The nation of Kiribati, with its 33 islands, is dispersed over an area of 5 million km^2 - or two-thirds the area of Australia. Consequently national statistics, which are averaged data, at time misrepresent the conditions and markets of people in remote and poorly linked communities.
The domestic markets are greater in Australia and New Zealand than for any of the other countries and territories within the region. Also, major exports of aquaculture products for human consumption occur only in Australia and New Zealand. For areas such as Guam, French Polynesia, and New Caledonia, with smaller domestic markets but with economies supported by tourism and other external sources, the aquaculture enterprises are addressing moderately to highly priced products to supply domestic needs and to reduce reliance on imports.
In other less-developed areas such as Papua New Guinea and Fiji, fish production is primarily aimed at family and village markets through subsistence and artisanal aquaculture, although the development of commercial aquaculture for prawns and shrimp continues.
In addition to the production of fish and shellfish for human consumption, there is interest within the region in producing a number of non-food marine products. Markets for non-food exports are being addressed by the development of pearl culture and the production of seaweeds for use in the phycocolloid industry. These activities are particularly attractive in areas where fish for nutrition is abundant and cheap, and where opportunities for generating income are limited. For example, the culture of pearls has been successful in Australia and in a number of atolls of the Tuamotu and Gambier islands of French Polynesia, and in the Cook Islands. Also, cultivated seaweeds for use in the phycocolloid industry have been marketed from Kiribati and Fiji. Both pearl culture and seaweed culture are being explored at a number of other locations within the region. In addition, Australia has a substantial market for ornamental fish; about 5 million goldfish are marketed annually, of
which two-thirds are imported from Southeast Asia.
1.5 Specific market data
In Australia and New Zealand the markets targeted are those for relatively high-priced commodities both for domestic consumption and for export. The major markets for New Zealand's fishery exports are Australia, Japan, and the United States of America (USA).
Australia's fishery imports are primarily from New Zealand (fresh and chilled products), South Africa (smoked fish), and North America (canned fish). Australia exports primarily to Japan but also to Taiwan PC (Province of China), the Federal Republic of Germany, Saudi Arabia, and others.
Guam and New Caledonia are the only other two countries within the region with significant industrial production of fish and shellfish for domestic consumption. Guam's production of finfishes (Asian catfish, milkfish, and tilapia) with the exception of limited exports to Nauru and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, is marketed locally either live or chilled.
In New Caledonia penaeid shrimp are the major items of production. These high-value products farmed through aquaculture are currently marketed locally and appear on the menus of the hotels and restaurants. Expansion of production in this area is targeted for the international market.
Throughout the island nations one of the most favoured marine fish caught naturally, but also considered suitable for culture in coastal ponds, is the milkfish. The price differentials between islands has created a trade, but also furthered the interest in farming practices. For example, milkfish are abundant in the Cook Islands, but the prices range from NZ$ 5/kg in outer island retail markets to NZ$ 6.5/kg on the main islands. In the Federated States of Micronesia the ex-vessel prices are US$ 1.30-2.20/kg for local fish, but imports have been known to resell for as much as US$ 6/kg. In Hawaii (USA) the current market prices of milkfish, both natural and pond stocks, are about US$ 3.60/kg (ex-vessel US$ 2.05/kg). In Palau the price is US$ 2.53/kg retail, and in the Solomon Islands, where it is not so popular or available, it is -only about US$ 0.75/kg.
Milkfish juveniles (8-12 g size) are also used as baitfish by the tuna industry.
1.6 Information for the trade
There are few regional publications dealing with aquaculture products. Aquaculture marketing and trade information is covered to some degree in Australia in "Austrasian Aquaculture", published by the Australian Aquaculture Association, and the "Fishing Industry News Service (FINS)", published by the Fisheries Department of Western Australia. In New Zealand there is "Catch", "Freshwater Catch", and "Shellfish Newsletter", all published by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries.
The Pacific region benefits from its proximity to the large aquaculture sector in Asia, and the innumerable marketing information sources available. However, the data are not always relevant to interest and species of the Pacific.
The principal marketing information service in Asia (and the Pacific) is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services (Africa, Arab Countries, Latin America, in addition). The network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin called "Trade News", in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International", (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles on market analysis, new products, processing, packaging equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the Pacific region.
A fifth member of the service is the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations' computerized system of fish marketing called "GLOBEFISH". This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored in an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet, aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC), which is based in Thailand, produces a Newsletter. This often carries feature articles on marketing of aquaculture products in the Asia and Pacific region, and processing and post-harvest technology. It also produces articles for the consumer on fish and fisheries products.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
In the Pacific region as described by the survey there are no consumer-related, technical assistance projects. Most of the countries and territories within the region which usually receive bilateral or international aid have little aquaculture production. A small project focusing on marketing of giant clams has been identified as a priority by the governing board of the Center for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture in Hawaii (USA), but is not yet funded. In addition the FAO/Government of Japan's South Pacific Aquaculture Development Programme recently sponsored a cultural anthropologist from the University of Guam to look at the socio-economic factors which might affect the success of a planned milkfish culture project on Mitiaro in the Cook Islands.
The most important technical assistance project in the sub-sector for the Pacific region is in the proximal region of Asia. This is INFOFISH, a marketing information and advisory service specializing in Asian and Pacific fisheries. INFOFISH is part of a network of marketing services established by FAO in four regions (see 1.6). It was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. Malaysia, the host country, provides office facilities and support staff. Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet INFOFISH serves the sector directly, and its publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products which are also relevant to aquaculture development in the Pacific.
Other externally-funded regional projects which indirectly serve the aquaculture sub-sector in the Pacific include the Regional Fish Market Studies conducted jointly by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)/FAO South China Sea Programme on important fishery commodities, such as shrimp and tuna; and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Post-Harvest Technology Project, assisted by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Fish culture in the Pacific island communities has been traditional for centuries. Although practising little more than careful fish husbandry, the Polynesians were observant of behaviour and understanding of the life cycles of the food fishes of the reef, particularly the mullet and the milkfish, and skilled in the construction of coastal ponds. Relics of ancient Polynesian fish ponds still exist around many islands throughout the Pacific, and some have been refurbished for modern use due to the revitalized regional interest in aquaculture. However, traditional culture relied on the natural productivity of the ponds to provide food for the fish, but modern practices require the provision of natural food or artificial feeds for maintenance -resources which are not always immediately available or cheap in remote island communities.
With few exceptions, the characteristics of aquaculture production in the region are dictated by the proximity of sparse populations living close to the sea. There are few large urban populations, and most of these are also coastal or within easy distance for the transportation of marine Fisheries products. The emphasis on aquaculture production is therefore on marine species, both fish and shellfish, due to the traditional market preferences as well as the most suitable and exploitable environment.
In spite of the large continental land mass of Australia the interior is predominantly arid. A few river systems offer potential for culture but the indigenous species are migratory, and Tasmania, because of its southerly position, has added advantages similar to New Zealand. The poor communication and transportation systems of Papua New Guinea limit development to small coastal urban areas, although the freshwater resources of the high interior encourage some rural development with selected freshwater fish. New Zealand, because of its climatic range and fast-flowing and short river systems, has an environment which encourages the greatest development for freshwater and anadromous fish, and also for shellfish on the coast.
The islands of the Pacific are characterized by three different types of environment. There are the high islands (French Polynesia, Western Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, etc.) with at times abundant freshwater resources; the low islands (American Samoa, Cook Islands, Solomon Islands, etc.) with some freshwater and limited agricultural space; and the oceanic atolls (Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, etc.) with no freshwater resources and greatly exposed. The natural environments of the three island types greatly dictate their potential for development.
Finally, typical of all island communities worldwide, inter-island transportation costs are high. Consequently aquaculture production for trade has to focus on high-value products, specifically those which are peculiar to the region. Alternatively production has to focus on popular and cheap indigenous species for local markets.
2.2 Regional production data
The range in the region's present economic development of the aquaculture sector is reflected in the variation in both volume and type of aquaculture production between the many countries. For example, some artisanal and subsistence fish culture is practised in the Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, the Kapingamarangi and Pingalap atolls of the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands; also in the rural areas of Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Tonga. Modest commercial aquaculture production of high-value fish and shellfish for organized markets within the region is limited to Australia, Guam, New Caledonia, and New Zealand. Data summarizing production of fish and shellfish for each country or territory in the region are presented in Table 4.
In both Australia and New Zealand the greatest contribution to total aquaculture production is from the culture of oysters and mussels. Commercial salmonid (trout and salmon) culture is well established in both countries. In Australia several other species are cultured including some freshwater fish, freshwater crustaceans, pearl oysters, and marine shrimp.
Production is much less in other areas of Oceania. Milkfish (Chanos chanos) and tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus, and Oreochromis niloticus primarily) are cultured in several locations. Commercial production of these species occurs primarily on Guam and in Kiribati. Most of the commercial aquaculture production of Guam is currently from the culture of tilapia and milkfish with a smaller contribution from the rearing of Asian catfish (Clarius batrachus). The culture of pearls in French Polynesia has been successful, and the industry has grown rapidly.
A list of species produced in the region is given in Table 5.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
A diversity of species is cultured throughout the region in relatively small volumes. Consequently a wide variety of aquaculture practices are used, ranging from intensive and semi-intensive systems for producing salmonids and marine shrimp, to extensive systems for the culture of fish, giant clams, seaweed, and pearl oysters.
The individual practices for producing fish and crustaceans cover a wide range of technological sophistication. High-technology systems include the culture of salmon in offshore cages, which are established and expanding in both Australia (particularly in Tasmania) and New Zealand, and the culture of marine shrimp in onshore ponds at high densities (20 t per ha) in New Caledonia and French Polynesia. Less intensive practices are used in the commercial pond culture of tilapia, milkfish, and Asian catfish on Guam, and in the production of freshwater prawns and fish in Australia, French Polynesia, and a number of other islands. Subsistence level culture practices exist in Papua New Guinea for carp, in Kiribati for milkfish, in Fiji for tilapia, and in Yap proper of the Federated States of Micronesia for tilapia.
Mollusc culture methods vary among countries and territories within the region. The commercial culture of oysters in Australia and New Zealand is accomplished by stick culture, or bag cultivation on rocks. Mussels are grown attached to lines suspended from the surface. The culture of pearl shells in French Polynesia is based on collection of spat from the wild with grow-out on hanging lines. On the other hand, the methods for the culture of giant clams which are being explored at the Micronesian Mariculture Demonstration Center (MMDC) in Palau and at Honiara in the Solomon Islands, involve production of juveniles in land-based hatcheries and nurseries with the subsequent transfer of juveniles for grow-out in reef and lagoon habitats.
Within the Pacific island nations there is considerable interest in the development of culture systems suitable for application in remote locations. For example, projects aimed at development of reef and lagoon-based culture of giant clams (Tridachnidae) have been undertaken at Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Solomon Islands, and Australia, although commercial production has not yet been achieved. Similarly, regional interest in the production of commercial seaweeds for the phycocolloid industry has been stimulated by the successful development of reef-flat culture techniques for Eucheuma in the Philippines. As cultivated seaweeds can be sun-dried, stored for extended periods and shipped by boat, seaweed cultivation is particularly suitable for development within Oceania. However, to date only limited commercial production has been achieved within the region, specifically in Fiji and Kiribati. The culture involves growing
the thalli by tying them onto monofilament lines in suitable habitats. The harvested seaweed is then dried in the sun, packed, and shipped to a processor. Approximately 30 t of dried seaweed was produced in Fiji in 1985. Also applicable to remote locations, the commercial production of pearls has been successful in a number of atolls within the Tuamoto and Gambier island chains of French Polynesia.
2.4 Producers in the region
Recent data (1986) from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) indicate that in Australia between one and two thousand people are engaged in oyster cultivation. There is also a large number of oyster (149) and mussel (346) producers in New Zealand. Producers of other species for consumption are relatively few, although several farms have been established both in Australia and New Zealand to produce salmon in ocean-cage systems. In New Zealand, there are 46 companies engaged in salmon culture either by means of ponds (19), ocean ranching (15), or sea-cages (12). There are a few farms in Australia producing trout, freshwater crayfish, and other freshwater fish. A well-developed pearl industry, valued at A.$ 50 million and employing approximately 300 people, exists in Western Australia.
The culture of marine shrimp is established at several locations within the region. There are 26 shrimp producers in Australia (OECD data), and other commercial shrimp farms are found in French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji.
There are only a few farms currently active on Guam, and they are producing primarily tilapia and milkfish. The recent establishment of a government-owned hatchery facility is expected to relieve the constraint imposed by lack of seed for stocking, and other farms are expected to begin or resume production of freshwater prawns in the near future. A number of freshwater prawn farms which were operative several years ago on Guam had ceased operation because of the difficulties in obtaining post-larvae for stocking.
From a variety of sources, the following active commercial producers of fish and shrimp were identified within the region apart from those in Australia and New Zealand. The list is not exhaustive. In French Polynesia, Aquapec Farm, Tahiti, produces marine shrimp; as does Sodacal Shrimp Farm, Noumea, in New Caledonia, and Ravi Ravi Prawn Farm Ltd. in Fiji. In Guam Inarajan Aquaculture Enterprises, Liu Island Farm, Tsai's Farm, and Wang's Farm, all produce tilapia, milkfish, and Asian catfish. In the Marshall Islands Reimers Enterprises produces giant clams. There is also a commercial Macrobrachium (freshwater prawn) farm in the Solomon Islands.
In French Polynesia in 1986 there were 24 private companies and 91 cooperatives engaged in pearl culture in the Tu