<title>CF Note 4: Community Forestry: Herders' Decision-Making in Natural Resources Management in Arid and Semi-arid Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
In 1986, within its Forestry for Community Development Programme, the FAO Forestry Department published a Forestry Paper entitled Tree Growing by Rural People. It presented various facets of the state of knowledge about tree-growing as it relates to community forestry i.e. forestry designed to benefit the rural tree growers/managers. However, although some of the most interesting future opportunities for community forestry lie in improving management of existing trees rather than in creating new resources, this document covered only partially the topic of tree and woodland management by rural people. It did not fully explore how rural people manage single trees or communal woodlands and how they manage their other resources in relation to trees and woodlands. Further effort was necessary to broaden and deepen the knowledge base on local management issues. In order to improve the success of management projects, more complete data and analysis was also needed on what knowledge
rural people have already developed and the dynamics of their tree resource management strategies in response to changing policies, pressures and opportunities. Finally, more thorough understanding was to be developed of the results and impacts of various attempts to support rural people in the efforts to manage these resources.
Dr. Maryam Niamir, a range management specialist, has undertaken the first step in the process of filling this information gap as it relates to arid and semi-arid areas of Africa. She has reviewed an extremely wide range of literature, established contacts with researchers and analyzed the information from a perspective enriched by her own research among herders of Senegal. In this document Dr. Niamir has ably provided descriptions of a range of (but certainly not all) knowledge and management systems used mainly by African herders. The development of this study was supported by the Community Forestry Unit, and by an interdepartmental working group and a number of outside reviewers. It has been suggested by this group of experts that this study be further enriched through selected case studies to update and enlarge the information base. It would also provide the basis for training materials which will assist development practitioners in recognizing the importance of local
technical knowledge and management systems for the design and implementation of successful community forestry activities.
This study is to be followed by similar research on decision making in resource management of peoples with other economic strategies. Similar documents are forthcoming on shifting cultivation, on private tree management looking at spatial arrangements (including indigenous agroforestry) as well as management of single trees for production of various products and communal management of woodlands. It is hoped that this series of studies will prove useful in pointing out the importance of local knowledge and resource management strategies as one step to more effective support to rural people in their effort to improve their current and future wellbeing through better tree and woodland management.
M.R. de Montalembert
Chief, Policy and Planning Service
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 LKMS in the development process
1.2 Some definitions
Endnotes
This report fits into an overall objective of helping the FAO analyze the role that local knowledge and management systems (LKMS) of natural resources can play in FAO's development projects and programmes. The approach of this report centers on a literature review of existing information on arid and semi-arid Africa. This includes North Africa, the Sahara, the Sahel, the semi-arid parts of the Sudan zone, and the arid zones of southern Africa. A few pertinent examples from other areas are also provided.
The main emphasis is placed on the use and management of natural resources, primarily vegetation, but also water and wildlife. The majority of production systems in these arid zones in one way or another rely on livestock (ranging from settled agropastoralists to continuously mobile nomads). Thus, pastoral systems, defined as any production system that relies for more than 10% of its output on livestock, is the main focus of the report, but other production systems that rely on resources in their natural state, such as hunting, gathering, fishing, and wood collecting, will also be considered.
Most of the research done on LKMS has been on systems of cultivation (e.g. see Hans Carlier's recent bibliography "Understanding traditional agriculture"^1). The studies on pastoral systems were often meant not as studies of LKMS per se, but answered the needs of the disciplines that engaged in the study. Nevertheless, such studies have been instrumental in debunking many myths about these systems. However, no study has ever tried to pull them all together into a structure suitable for analysis. This literature review is intended to fill this gap. It is also intended as a necessary precursor to further work by FAO on LKMS, such as case studies, analytical studies, and training programmes.
This report was initiated by the Community Forestry Unit of the Policy and Planning Service of the Forestry Department of FAO. It is one of a series of studies designed to clarify local decision making, priorities, and knowledge in the management of tree and forest related resources. This report has benefited from a collaborative approach between technical experts from several divisions and services of FAO; namely, Community Forestry Unit, Forest Resources Division, Grassland and Pasture Crops, Land Tenure, Farming Systems, and Environment Groups. Much of the literature on which this report is based, are unpublished papers and otherwise obscure documents, that were collected over an 8 month period as a result of assistance and collaboration from a large network of development workers, academicians, and students. Their contribution is greatly acknowledged.
1.1 LKMS in the development process
After almost half a century of development activities in the arid and semi-arid lands of Africa, we are no closer to finding solutions to pressing problems such as economic stagnation and environmental degradation. The many reasons for the failure of development in these areas has been amply documented elsewhere². Some of the salient points are inappropriate technologies, inappropriate or incomplete research, and lack of or inappropriate management. These problems have led some development workers to propose a closer linkage between traditional agricultural systems and knowledge, and modern, scientific technologies. Although LKMS has been the subject of academic concern ever since anthropologist started their studies in Third World countries, it is only recently that its potential role in development has come under consideration.
Contrary to what the term may imply, "traditional" or "local" knowledge is not necessarily simple, does not occur in a vacuum, is ever changing, and very often borrows from the outside^3. Although systems and knowledge may appear constant in the short run, it is rare to find systems that have remained unchanged for centuries. Even the Dina land use code of the Macina Fulani (see section 2.3.3) is now different from when it was originally established in the mid 1800's^4.
An understanding of LKMS reflects a greater need and willingness to consider particular problems and potentials at the local level. LKMS is not well suited to developing scientific universals that are generalizable across a wide range of situations, but it allows a greater understanding of the heterogeneity (or "ecological particularism")^5 of local conditions.
Much (but not necessarily all) of LKMS is based on accurate, detailed, and thoughtful observations collected and passed on over many generations. "Farmers are well-informed decision makers" who combine information and techniques to maximize production and minimize risk^6. Much can be learnt from the local people which may prove useful for development efforts. Modern technology usually comes in bits and pieces, and in order to fit it effectively into and build upon the local system, we need to have a thorough understanding of the LKMS^7.
In the past 10-15 years, efforts at helping the small producer have had little positive impact because of the failure to seriously incorporate popular participation into the process - either inappropriate innovations were put forward, or the project or programme ended up supporting the least appropriate groups in the community^8. The study of LKMS followed by incorporation of LKMS into developing adaptable technologies, can be effective means to increase the extension agent's and development worker's sensitivity to local needs, and stimulate meaningful dialogue between all participants in the development process^9.
But perhaps, one of the most important advantages of using traditional systems is that they contain mechanisms (if still viable) "which promote relatively equitable access to the resources by the weaker and poorer members of society"^10, thus furthering our goal of reaching the poor rural populations.
It is important not to romanticize LKMS. We need to redress the balance, but not to end up in the opposite extreme. The increasing call for studying LKMS is not a "sterile collectors' mania for bits and pieces of local lore"^11, but a genuine attempt to see what role LKMS can play in the development process. "A sentimental belief in 'traditional values' and a gut feeling that the 'people know best' without knowing why and under what circumstances, will be... unhelpful and damaging to the prospects of rural development in the long run"^12.
A combination of formal science and LKMS, or "technology sharing" between the two^13 may prove to be an effective development approach. Paul Richards expressed it quite well when he said "... an idea borrowed from the people, developed by the agronomist [or ranger or forester] and returned to the people again is much more likely to be adopted than something totally alien to the culture"^14. A combination of LKMS and formal science can draw on the strengths of both. Traditional decision making is flexible and fluid (both in time and in its objectives) because it depends on changing circumstances, but it lacks planning powers. Modern planning has fixed goals, objectives and techniques, but needs periodic feedback mechanisms to provide it with flexibility.
But not all LKMS remains intact. There are those that are still successfully in use, but often only very locally; those that are still in use but no longer meet the increased pressure of changing land use and other socio-economic changes; and those relatively recently abandoned for various reasons^15. Whether traditional systems should be revived or modified, and the optimum mix between formal science and LKMS needs to be worked out in the field because it depends on the aspect being studied, the social conditions, the phase of R & D^16, the logistical means, and above all, the viability of the LKMS. Viability, in this context, is meant to include both the degree of survival of the LKMS, and its appropriateness to the present-day constraints and development needs.
In combining traditional and modern systems, several advantages can emerge. The development worker concerned with natural resource management, gains an additional constituency, recruits personnel with profound knowledge of local areas who can provide lessons on long term adapted resource strategies. The local people gain the legal recognition of their ecologically-sound traditional land use practices, see appropriate utilization of their traditional lands, and gain new advocates at the national and international level^17.
Just as development workers in the area of cultivation systems are turning to LKMS for help, there is an increasing call for pastoral development projects and programmes to set aside old myths and to consider the value of pastoral LKMS for development.
1.2 Some definitions
In this paper, LKMS will refer to the local, folk repository of technical knowledge and management systems, and is differentiated from "formal science" which refers to western style science. The definition of the related term "ethnoscience" appears to differ among researchers. Some authors equate it with LKMS ^18, whereas others define it as the study of LKMS^19. In this report, the term "ethnoscience" will be avoided.
Much has been written and said about pastoral production systems, and yet, we are still far from agreeing upon a uniform set of terms to describe them all. In part, this problem stems from the great heterogeneity and overlap between different systems, so that it is hard to categorize them under standardized definitions.
Pastoral systems, hunting-gathering (including fishing), and "sylvo-transhumance" are the main production systems within arid and semi-arid lands. Many production systems can be classed as "transition" systems (in a classificatory sense, not necessarily evolutionary). Pastoral systems can be grouped under two main types: transhumant, and agropastoral. Transhumant systems involve migration between regular seasonal areas. They include "nomadic" systems, but this term often falsely connotes "anarchic" movements, whereas most if not all migratory systems involve some kind of regular movement, at least between dry and wet season areas, or between pastures and salt licks, etc. These can be divided into short and long transhumance, which are distinguished by the distances travelled, length of stay in one place, and amount of herd splitting (see BOX 1.1).
Agropastoral systems are defined as those that, in addition to livestock production, involve some form of crop cultivation. These range from the transhumants who are opportunistic farmers (they plant a crop on their way north to wet season pastures, and harvest it on their way south), to sedentary farmers who raise only a few livestock, and do not transhume. And in between are many different degrees of transhumance, number of livestock raised, type of crops planted, etc. (see BOX 1.1).
BOX 1.1
The groups that practice long transhumance will generally spend only a small part of the year at their permanent homestead (where there is usually a permanent well), and/or will leave only a small part of their livestock there. Otherwise they move between wet and dry season pastures that may be more than 100 km apart. In general, pastoralists of north Africa, who have to escape both the snow and cold weather of the mountains and the heat of the plains, will go from the Sahara foothills and mountains in the summer to the lower, mediterranean plains in the winter^23. In East and Southern Africa, the transhumance pattern is generally between highlands and lowlands, for example among the Basotho of Lesotho^24, the Borana of southern Ethiopia^25, and in Madagascar^26, or between the plateaux and floodplains, as with the Maasai of Amboseli^27, Lozi of Northwest Zimbabwe^28, and the Twich, Ghol and Nyarraweng Dinka of Kongor (Sudan)^29. Transhumance in West Africa and the more arid
parts of the Sahel is generally north to south following the rains, such as the majority of the Fulani, but in parts of Benin and Cameroon, pastoralists transhume between highlands and lowlands^30.
Short transhumance is usually a feature of agropastoral groups who have large number of livestock, but in a few cases fully pastoral peoples can be classified as such. For example the Somali living in Ethiopia live along the river for most of the year, but will transhume a short distance to salt licks and calcareous savannas^31.
Transhumants who are "opportunistic" farmers usually live in the more arid parts of Africa. They plant millet on their way north with the rains, and leaving it to the vagaries of nature and other men, will return only in time to harvest whatever has successfully ripened. Some examples are the Baggara of northern Sudan^32 and the Moors of Mauritania^33.
Agropastoralists who practice some form of transhumance will usually split their herd, leaving the "milk" herd permanently at the homestead, and sending the rest on short transhumance. Some examples are the Ngok Dinka of Abyei^34, the Tonga of southern Zambia^35, and the Twareg and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso^36. But many other agropastoralists have only a few livestock, and do not send them on transhumance. They generally do not consider meat as important as cereals, and milk is drunk only by women, children and the herd boys. Examples are the Lowiili of southern Burkina Faso^37, and the Kikuyu of Kenya^38.
There are still a few hunter-gatherer groups in Africa, such as the Bushmen of Kalahari, the Pygmies of the former Belgian Congo and French Equatorial Africa, and the Dorobo of northern Tanzania^20. Their mobility pattern is shaped both by the availability of water and that of wild foods, although at least among the Bushmen the latter tends to be more important^21. Some consider hunting and gathering to be "an anachronism from the days of sparse population and endless territory"^22 implying that they will gradually disappear, but recent trends (see section 4.2) suggest that these groups tend to retain much of their traditional production system while diversifying into livestock or crop production.
Another form of pastoral production can be called "sylvo-transhumance". Although the example comes from Iran, it is worth mentioning, if only to raise the question of its existence in Africa. The Lutfi of southern Iran herd shoats between highlands and lowlands, but will also cultivate semi-wild, non-irrigated orchards of almonds, figs, grapes, walnuts, and rose bushes, which they tend, and harvest the products for sale in urban centers, during their annual transhumance^39.
Endnotes
1. Carlier 1987.
2. For example, Sandford 1983.
3. McCorkle 1986; Warren 1986, p. 1.
4. Sandford 1984, p. 1.
5. Richards 1985, p. 10.
6. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, p. 265.
7. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, pp. 264-265.
8. Richards 1985, p. 17.
9. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 318.
10. Odell 1982, p. 6.
11. Chambers.
12. Richards 1980, p. 192.
13. Guggenheim & Fanale 1976, cited in Howes 1980, p. 347.
14. Richards 1975, p. 110.
15. Stigter 1987, p. 5.
16. Howes 1980, p. 328.
17. Brownrigg 1981 cited in Clad 1985, p. 47.
18. Knight 1974b, p. 61; Knight 1980, p. 215; Richards 1980, p. 192.
19. Warren & Meehan 1980; Leff 1985, p. 265; McCorkle 1986, p. 129.
20. Allan 1965, p. 260.
21. Campbell 1971, p. 109.
22. Biesele 1971, p. 66.
23. Despois 1961, p. 225.
24. S.D. Turner, Maseru, Lesotho, pers. comm. 1988.
25. Helland 1982, p. 246.
26. Ba 1982, p. 19.
27. Western & Dunne, 1979, p. 76.
28. Gluckman 1951, p. 9.
29. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 3.
30. Ba 1982, p. 19.
31. Guillaumet 1972, p. 76.
32. Adams 1982, p. 263.
33. Wilson 1986, p. 25.
34. Niamir 1982.
35. Allan et al. 1948, p. 117.
36. Barral 1977, p. 58.
37. Goody 1956, p. 29.
38. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 18.
39. Amanolahi 1986, p. 359.
<section>3</section>
2. LOCAL KNOWLEDGE AND SYSTEMS OF NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
2.1 Descriptive and predictive knowledge
Endnotes
2.2 Management practices
Endnotes
2.3 Organization of management
2.4 Analysis
Endnotes
This chapter attempts to provide as wide a cross section as possible of the different types of LKMS among the peoples of arid and semi-arid lands of Africa. It first discusses the descriptive knowledge: how they use their natural resources, how they name and classify them, and how they understand the inter-relationships between the resources.
In a second section, the discussion focuses on how the local people manage (harvest, process, store, etc.) their natural resources on a daily basis, and what impact these practices have on the natural resources. It touches on traditional herd and range management practices, management of trees and shrubs, water, hay and fodder, and other resources including wildlife and wild plant gathering.
In the final section, the social, economic, and political organization and control over natural resources is discussed. It covers a brief view of production systems and strategies, natural resource tenure, the occurrence of reserves and protected areas, and the means by which these rules are enforced.
2.1 Descriptive and predictive knowledge
2.1.1 Forms of utilization of natural resources
2.1.2 Descriptive knowledge
2.1.3 Ecology and biogeography
2.1.4 Analysis
The study of descriptive knowledge, the way people describe their physical environment, can provide insights into how local peoples categorize and perceive their environment. It shows what the people consider important and practical. We can gain an understanding of how much control they perceive as having over the elements, and what they base their future expectations and predictions on. In this section, a brief review of what they use natural resources for, is followed by how they name, classify, and describe physical elements, and how they perceive ecological interrelationships.
2.1.1 Forms of utilization of natural resources
All natural resources in pastoral areas are used for both productive and non-productive uses. Water, perhaps the most important item in an arid environment, is used for both human and animal consumption, cleanliness, coolness, fishing, and certain rituals. Soil is used for pottery, for making adobe bricks (in the case of settled or partially settled agropastoralists), for extracting iron and copper by specialized guilds, and as salt licks for livestock. But by far the most diverse use is made of plant, and to a lesser extent wildlife, resources.
Plants provide food, fuel, fodder, timber and fibre for tools and construction of houses and fences, crafts, dyes, musical instruments, weapons, utensils, medicine, and other ritual products. In addition, they are used for shade, as landmarks for orientation in space, for salt and oil, to build smoke fires to keep insects at bay, to extract poisons, as a source of drinking water, as sugar, to make alcoholic beverages, etc. (see BOX 2.1).
BOX 2.1
Of the many studies on the uses of plants among pastoralists, a few can be mentioned as examples. Among the Mossi and Basi agropastoralists of southeast Burkina Faso, young boys gather hay for calves, medicinal plants which their father tells them to gather when necessary, and smoke producing plants to ward off insects at the corral^6. The Lugbara of northwest Uganda collect a certain plant, from whose ash they obtain salt^7. The Tonga of Zambia harvest Dactyloctenium aegyptium, Brachiaria spp, Panicum spp, Echinochloa spp, Rottboellia spp, Urochloa spp, and wild sorghum as cereals during famines, and supplement food with leaf relishes. These provide them with sources of vitamins, minerals, proteins and fats. They also use plants for tools, building material, fibre, salt, medicine, poisons, etc.^8 During the drought of 1972, the Twareg of Niger ate wild seeds and leaves, and searched for seeds in ant and termite hills^9. The seeds of waterlilies are used by the Dinka of
southern Sudan to make beer^10.
The Bushmen of Kalahari eat mangetti nut which has 5 times the calories and 10 times the protein of most cereals. This nut makes up two thirds of the vegetable diet of theakung bushmen. The /Gwi bushmen do not have access to drinking water for long stretches of the dry season and get it from the tsama melon and rumen of animals^11. The Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan harvest many annual grasses for food and beer (D. aegyptium, Echinochloa colona, Panicum laetum, Eragrostis pilosa, and Oryza breviligulata). Cenchrus biflorus and Tribulus terrestris seeds (and leaves of latter) are used only during famine. Herders eat wild fruits on the job. Plants are also used for sugar, flour, nuts, and medicine^12.
Many studies have been done on the form of utilization of plants among pastoralists^1. They show that plant gathering occurs from the northern Sahara to the more humid zones^2. Hunter-gatherer groups are more dependent on wild plant resources as permanent source of food than pastoralists^3. The latter often will use it as a food supplement, relish or snack in normal times, and as emergency famine food during droughts, but other non-food uses are essential features of their daily life, for example among the Tonga of Zambia^4, and the Mbeere of Kenya^5.
Although use of wild plants by pastoralists is usually for self-consumption, some families in each group will specialize in collecting and selling them. For example, one Wodaabe Fulani family from Niger specializes in collecting medicinal plants and selling them in the early dry season on their transhumant route into Mali, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea^13.
Almost all plant species are used for something, making it difficult to write some plants off as "unimportant" or "undesirable", as is usually done in most reseeding and revegetation programmes. For example, among the Tonga of Zambia, of 222 species studied, 93% had a use^14. The diversity of plants used for food and medicine alone can be high. For example, among the Pokot of Kenya, out of 307 plant species identified by botanist, 20% were used for food, and 39% for medicine^15.
Animals and insects are used for food, tools, and indicators of ecological dynamics. However, their consumption as food among pastoralists is often accompanied by taboos that restrict the consumption or killing of certain species to certain groups of people. For example, among the Turkana some animals are not eaten because of supernatural powers or because of ancestral taboos^16. Among the Zaghawa, although insects, locusts, caterpillars, eggs, and honey are eaten by all, only non-circumcised children and members of the blacksmith caste can eat rabbits, and small birds^17 (see section 2.2.5 for more on taboos).
The diversity in the use of animals is usually less than in plants, and can vary even among neighboring groups. For example, among the Turkana, 103 out of 148 mammals and birds are eaten, whereas the Rendille only eat 6 species, all ungulates^18.
2.1.2 Descriptive knowledge
2.1.2.1 Climate
2.1.2.2 Soils and geomorphology
2.1.2.3 Plants and vegetation types
2.1.2.4 Water
2.1.2.5 Livestock
2.1.2.6 Wildlife
2.1.2.7 Traditional veterinary and human medicine
2.1.2.8 Measurement systems
2.1.2.1 Climate
The local knowledge of climatic patterns, their variability in space and time, and the ways in which it is predicted, forms an indispensible part of the information the pastoralist and farmer need to survive. Our study of the detailed "weather lore" of local people is important because it reflects the great spatial variation in tropical rainfall^19, as well as how they have organized their daily agricultural (farming and herding) tasks to fit the climatic patterns. The local calendar is more flexible than the western calendar (i.e. does not necessarily have a set number of days per season) because it is linked to both climatic variability and agricultural activities^20.
The classification of climatic events into seasons and sub-seasons ranges from very detailed categories to a simple system of a few classes. No matter what the actual climatic pattern (and in arid and semi-arid Africa it can vary from one rainy season to two separate rainy seasons), the minimum number of categories appears to be three seasons (e.g. the Fulani of Yatenga, northern Burkina Faso^21), and the maximum 8 (e.g. the Wodaabe Fulani, whose eight categories are related to both climatic patterns, and forage phenology and value^22). The majority of the Sahelo-sudanian pastoralists recognize 4 or 5 seasons (e.g. the Twareg of Niger^23, Fulani of the Niger River Delta^24, Fulani of south central Mauritania^25, the people of western Chad^26, and the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan^27).
Local knowledge can vary within the same ethnic group, especially if it is a large group dispersed over a large area, such as the Fulani. For example, the Fulani of Yatenga recognize only 3 seasons^28, but the Fulani of the Niger River delta distinguish 4 seasons based on rainfall patterns, not flood patterns^29, and the Wodaabe Fulani of Niger recognize 8 seasons^30. Given that the climatic pattern in these three areas are not dissimilar, the variation could be due to either different information eliciting techniques among the researchers, or due to cultural influences (or both).
The etiology of the traditional calendar can provide useful hints on how agricultural activities are organized. The names of the climatic categories usually refer to a prominent climatic characteristic (e.g. rains vs. dry), specific agricultural activities (e.g. dispersion of herds during mid rains) or social events that are conducted at that time (e.g. marriages). A good example in point is the Turkana of northern Kenya^31.
Prominent drought years are well remembered. For example, the Moors and Fulani of Mauritania still remember the 1913 drought, the former calling it after Boscia senegalensis (because they had to eat its fruit) the latter calling it rice, because they got famine aid from the French^32. The Turkana remember drought patterns well, maintaining that only about one year in four or five has a 'good wet season'^33.
Climatic predictions are based on countless years of accumulated observations. In some cases, they may be accurate, in others not. For example, the Rendille of northern Kenya base their predictions on the constellations of stars, lunar phases, cloud patterns, but also the viscera of animals^34.
There are predictors (indicators) for the onset of rains, the quality of rains, the end of rains, droughts, etc. These indicators can range from the movement of birds, frogs, ants, and other fauna, to changes in plant phenology and meteorological conditions such as changes in air temperature, lightening patterns, etc. (see BOX 2.2).
BOX 2.2
The Turkana of Kenya say that several birds (ground hornbill, green wood hoopoe, spotted eagle owl, and night jar) and frogs are prophets of rain^35. In western Kenya people use indicators of frogs, birds, white ants, lightening and rise in swamp waters to forecast rainfall^36. In Zaria, Nigeria, certain birds indicate a drought^37. In northeast Tanzania, the indicators of beginning of rains are (in order of frequency of response): increase in temperature, lightening, change in patterns and behavior of birds, insects and mammals, and three different types of plant changes (flowering, new leaves, grass wilting). In the same area, forecasts of end of rains depends mostly on meteorological factors (ie. drizzling or steady rainfall, wind strength, temp change, etc.), but also fauna (e.g. bee swarms, birds changing color) and flora (ripening of seeds, decline in bamboo fluid, etc.)^38.
The Fulani of Mauritania predict seasons by the position of the stars; for example, when the big dipper "jungo niiwi" is directly above (ie. August) then it is time for the most abundant rains, and when its tail is pointing to the top then it is the end of the rainy season^39. In western Nigeria, farmers start planting when the new leaves of the baobab tree (Adansonia digitata) and Chlorophora excelsa appear, and when the "konkoto" bird stops singing^40.
The quality of the rainfall (i.e. its quantity and distribution overtime and space) is usually evaluated after the end of the season, based primarily on meteorological factors. For example in northeastern Tanzania, some factors are the distribution of rains, fogs, sunshine periods, etc.^41. Only one record was found of the prediction of the quality of rainfall; namely, the Kamba farmers of Kenya believe that a rainbow means no or little rain will follow^42.
The knowledge of weather patterns can vary among different people in the same community. Not everyone will know the same level of detail. For example, among the Somali, the "cilmi curraaf" are the ones who have vast knowledge of both local weather lore and traditional medicine^43.
In order to effectively use the LKMS on climate, we need more information on how far in advance the local people make forecasts, and the standard deviation of accuracy of forecasts compared to actual events^44.
2.1.2.2 Soils and geomorphology
All records indicate that the knowledge of soil types and their quality and potential for agricultural use is quite high among pastoralists. In many cases, the soil classification system is very similar to the one used by formal science (e.g. see BOX 2.3), but it often tends to be detailed only if a particular use is made of the soil type^45. Thus it is very closely linked t