<title>ADCP/REP/89/35 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This fifth regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of West Asia, namely Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. A regional survey of the countries of East Asia is the subject of another ADCP document. The division of the countries in East and West Asia is based on the division established by the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Dr. S.C. Pathak in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of this highly active aquaculture region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the fifth of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
Asia, of all the continents, plays the most significant role in world aquaculture production. Fish farming is a traditional and age-old practice in almost every Asian country. Over 80% of the total aquaculture production globally comes from Asia. The estimated world aquaculture production in 1986 was 11.09 million tonnes (t), of which Asia alone produced 9.05 million t.
This survey describes the regional aquaculture sector in 12 West Asian countries. These countries are:
Bangladesh
Burma
India
Indonesia
Kampuchea
Malaysia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
By comparison with the East Asian group of countries (which includes the leading global producers China, Japan, Republic of Korea, and the Philippines) the West Asian region produces less than 750 000 t. This figure is in fact confused by the contribution of India which, for many years, had been recorded at about 1 million t. However, it is known that much of this is from inland fisheries, some of which are supplemented by aquaculture through annual stocking programmes.
Although aquaculture is as much of a tradition in continental West Asia as it is in East Asia, the diversity of aquaculture in the region is produced by the range in environmental characteristics and individual resources of each country. The Maldives for example has no need for aquaculture as a group of oceanic islands with ready access to marine resources. Nepal on the other hand is a land-locked country very dependent on its freshwater resources.
In general terms, the countries of Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka have preference for freshwater culture, and the countries of Burma, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, place more emphasis on brackishwater and marine culture.
In addition to variable but good resources for aquaculture, the region has many diversities. Individual populations range from the high of 751 million in India to the low of 200 000 in the Maldives. There is the high per caput GNP in Singapore of US$ 7 260 to the low of US$ 70 in Kampuchea but, compared with the group of East Asian countries, the GNP of most of the countries in the West region is low (below US$ 600 per caput). However, each country invariably has natural assets for aquaculture in terms of water resources, coastline, ox-bow lakes and, most importantly, the liking of fish and fishery products.
In spite of their high aquaculture profiles these countries are predominantly classified as developing countries. Like those countries of East Asia they are characterized by high population growth rates, low incomes, low levels of education, health and personal consumption, and low levels of infrastructure development and industrialization.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
Fish and shellfish are particularly important in Asia where they contribute significantly to human food needs, particularly to those individuals in densely populated countries at risk of under-nutrition and malnutrition.
The nutritional quality of fish and shellfish is similar but somewhat higher than that in meat and dairy products (milk), and less than that in eggs. The protein content of most fish species varies between 15-20%; fat content varies more widely than protein, water, or mineral content.
Fish provides a good combination of amino-acids well suited to human nutritional requirements. Fish is particularly high in lysine (in which cereal proteins are relatively low) and sulphur amino-acids; this makes it extremely efficient in supplementing the low protein/high carbohydrate diets of most of the countries in the region. A relatively small amount of fish protein in combination with a cereal-based diet therefore enhances the nutritional quality of the cereal protein and improves the overall quality of the diet, including the taste.
In addition, fish and fishery products are high in vitamins (particularly A, B and D), a good selection of minerals (especially phosphorus, calcium, and iron), trace elements, and iodine in the marine species. The high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids also contributes significantly to essential fatty acid requirements important in some cases in lowering blood cholesterol levels.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
In some parts of the West Asia region described in this review a number of countries, like India and Nepal, have a significant part of their population which is vegetarian by habit and religious belief, and there is no interest in land animal proteins and little in fish.
The countries of the region can be divided into four groups on the basis of per caput meat consumption per year (1985 data):
- two countries (India and Sri Lanka) have annual meat consumption below 2 kg per caput,
- three countries (Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the Maldives) have consumption more than 2 kg but below 5 kg per caput per annum,
- four countries (Burma, Kampuchea, Nepal, and Pakistan) have consumption more than 5 kg but below 10 kg per caput per annum, and
- three countries (Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand) have consumption greater than 10 kg per caput per annum.
The range in the region is wide. In Singapore, for example, where the individual Gross National Product (GNP) is high (US$ 7 260), the meat consumption is 73.91 kg per caput per annum.
In some countries the natural preference for, or availability of, meat and poultry reduces the consumption of fish and fishery products. In Kampuchea, Pakistan, and Singapore the consumption of meat is about eight times greater than that of fish and fishery products. In Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Thailand it is the converse. The largest fish consumer compared with meat is the Maldives (16.9 to 1 ratio) followed by Sri Lanka (9:1).
For most of the region the geographical location of the population and availability of products play the most decisive role in characterizing consumption habits. For example, people living in the coastal areas have access to and preference for marine fish and shellfish products. In India 97.8% of fish production is consumed in coastal states which support some 50% of the total Indian population. However, in the north east and east of the country, and in Bangladesh and Nepal, where the rainfall is high and large resources of freshwater are available, the traditional preferences are for freshwater fish.
Although shellfish are widely available in the region, particularly marine shrimps and molluscs which are all heavily fished, there is little national consumption except in the immediate vicinities of the fisheries, and then mostly by the fishermen and their families. The prices are beyond the reach of the indigenous population and the majority of shellfish are exported because of their high value on international markets. Some are exported to countries within the region. On the whole all large populations throughout the region have access to fish, and particularly freshwater fish.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The nominal fishery catches and annual consumption of fish and fishery products vary greatly in the region (see Tables 1 and 2). Consumption is above 40 kg/y in the Maldives; 20-40 kg in three countries (Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand); 10-30 kg in three countries (Burma, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka); and is below 10 kg in the other five countries of the region (Bangladesh, India, Kampuchea, Nepal, and Pakistan). Obviously per caput consumption is influenced by population density and other factors. In India and Nepal, for example, a sizeable percentage of the population is vegetarian; and in Bangladesh it is reported that the fishermen themselves consume about 60% of the total marine and inland fish production.
In Pakistan the marine catch is marketed fresh, frozen, or processed, but freshwater fish is mostly sold fresh. Marine shrimp is the major item (86%) of the total export trade which is principally with Dubai, Germany, Fed. Rep., the Netherlands, Hong Kong, Iran, Japan, New Zealand, UK, and USA. Processed fish products, particularly dried and salted, are exported to Sri Lanka and countries in the Middle East, such as Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Pakistan's export production of 187 000 t in 1985 earned a total of P.Rs. 1 299 million which was the country's third largest foreign exchange earner. The Government has banned importation of fish and fishery products.
Bangladesh earned about US$ 86 million through exports of marine shrimp, frog legs, and frozen fish in 1985, mostly to Belgium, Germany, Fed. Rep., Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Thailand, UK, and USA. The country also exports freshwater and other cultured products to Middle East countries. The fishing industry is third in the list for producing foreign exchange earnings.
Nepal has no official exports of fish but much cultured fish is reported to find its way to nearby markets in India. Aquaculture centres in the country supply Chinese carp broodfish for culture purposes and also pituitary glands for induced breeding. These go to Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Pakistan under TCDC arrangements. Imports into Nepal are also prohibited. All the trade in Nepal is with freshwater fish. The country's total production is over 8 000 t, of which production through aquaculture is about 50% of the total.
In Malaysia more than 60% of commercial landings are consumed as fresh fish. In 1983 about 12% of landings were processed for consumption, particularly dried, salted, or smoked; 36% of landings were used for fish meal and fish sauce. Malaysia is a net importer of fishery products (about 8%) to meet the national demand of 758 300 t; about 75% of imports are from Thailand, and the rest from Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Japan, and other countries in the region. In 1985 total imports were over 218 000 t, valued at US$ 277 million; exports were over 159 000 t, valued at US$ 192 million. Principal export markets are Singapore, Thailand, Japan, Europe and Australia. Fishing and fish trade are important in the national economy. In 1982 overall contributions from the industry toward GNP was about 2%. The country has increased its aquaculture production which is estimated to be over 52 000 t. This has been due to increases in brackishwater production of molluscs, especially
cockles.
In India it is estimated that the demand-supply gap of fish in domestic markets, presently 1 million t, will increase further by the end of the century in spite of increased inland fish production; brackishwater fish production currently supplies 57% of the total demand. Compared with the internal markets, exports of marine products are rapidly rising. From a total of about 20 000 t (I.Rs. 24.6 million) in the early 1950s the export of marine fishery products is now about 85 000 t (I.Rs. 4 600 million). The major share of the export trade is in crustaceans, particularly marine shrimp and lobsters. There is also an international trade in seed for aquaculture; India exports about 40% of its fry catch of marine shrimp to Japan and 25% to the USA. The adult shrimp catch is also exported to these two countries, in addition to Malaysia, Singapore, and others. Until 1986 India was the largest exporter of shrimps in the world, but in 1987 aquaculture production enabled China, Taiwan
PC, and Thailand to overtake India. Each of these countries exports over 20 000 t of shrimp per annum to the USA (1986 data).
In India fisheries output is constantly increasing and is about 3.5% per year over the last five years. Contributions from aquaculture have been rising and now stand at about 23% of total fish production, of which freshwater production contributes 21% and coastal aquaculture 2%.
In Indonesia the foreign exchange earnings through fisheries have increased to over US$ 250 million, from a mere US$ 7 million in 1970. Earnings from marine shrimp exports are over 70% of the total, with the rest from tuna, marine fish, frog legs, jelly fish, and ornamental fishes. Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, and the USA are the main markets for Indonesia's products. In 1985 Indonesia exported about 186 000 t of crustacean and molluscan products with a value of US$ 324 million. The country's fishery production has increased on average about 4.5% per annum, with inland fish production at about 2%. It is currently over 500 000 t, about 25% of the total fishery production. In the inland sector the contribution of aquaculture is increasing and capture fisheries have dropped from 62% to 42% in the last decade.
Thailand exports frozen shrimp principally to Japan, and USA, but with smaller markets in Australia, France, Germany, Fed. Rep., Hong Kong, Singapore, and UK. The total marine shrimp exports to the USA is currently over 1 000 t. Thailand also exports molluscs and freshwater shrimp to Japan and countries in Europe. It also produces fishmeal and exports it to Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and other Asian countries. Thailand also imports molluscs; about 15 000 t in 1985.
1.4 Gross market data
About 1.27 thousand million people live in the West Asia region as outlined in Table 3, or about 27% of the world's population. More than half (781 million) live in India which, together with Bangladesh (103 million), Indonesia (165 million) and Pakistan (100 million), make up some 90% of the regional total.
Apart from Thailand (51 million) and Burma (37 million) the remaining countries are comparatively unpopulated. Malaysia (16 million), Nepal (16 million), and Sri Lanka (16 million), are similar in total population but not in population density; these are followed by Kampuchea (7 million) and Singapore (2.5 million). The people of the oceanic Maldives number about 189 000.
Only Singapore can be considered as having a developed economy with a high GNP of US$ 7 260 per caput. None of the other countries can be even considered as having a medium level GNP (US$ 3 000-6 000) or developing economy. Malaysia (US$ 1 990) and Thailand (US$ 850) are in the low range (US$ 600-3 000). The rest can only be considered as very low (below US$ 600), with Indonesia (US$ 540), Pakistan (US$ 380), Sri Lanka (US$ 360), India and the Maldives (US$ 260), Burma (US$ 180), Nepal (US$ 160), Bangladesh (US$ 130), and Kampuchea (US$ 70). Compared with the countries of East Asia, the West Asia group is considerably poorer on average (see Table 3).
1.5 Specific market data
In a region of twelve countries spread over a wide geographic area with a variety of aquatic resources the consumption of fish and fishery products cannot be easily generalized. For example, in the colder regions (Nepal) there are preferences for coldwater fishes. The people of Bangladesh and West Bengal in India eat most of the indigenous species but their preferences are for the freshwater Indian major carps and some riverine fish, such as hilsa. The people of northern India (Punjab, Himachel, Pardes and Harayana), Pakistan, and Thailand value the native cat fishes more than the carps, but the trouts, schezothorax, and mahaseer are preferred in the colder regions of India (Jammu and Kashmir) and Pakistan. It has been reported that the demand for trout, for example, in that region may be as high as 50 000 t per annum.
The people of Thailand have probably the greatest market range of products, making use of the variety of products available. There are demands for the high-value catfish and snakeheads, gouramis and others. A variety of molluscs are in demand, such as cockles and mussels, as well as marine shrimps and freshwater prawns. Fish is mainly sold fresh in local markets, and there are good transportation networks by boat, road, or rail to supply urban centres and the large wholesale market in Bangkok where most aquaculture products are brought. However, the long distances between production centres and markets in the country reduce the prices to the farmers.
In Indonesia and Malaysia there are preferences for marine shellfish species, including cockles, green mussel, oysters, horse mussels, etc. In Singapore there is a variety of choice as much is imported; all the local fish production is consumed. Marketing activities in Malaysia are in the hands of the private sector; the catch is sold to either agents, wholesalers, or retailers, or direct to the consumer. The wholesalers dominate the trade.
In most Asian countries fresh fish in any form is preferred to frozen, processed, or canned products. In some small areas of Bangladesh, Burma, India, and Nepal, for a number of reasons, there is a demand for special products such as sun-dried, smoked, or preserved fish.
In the Maldives, where domestic consumption of fish is high (40 kg/annum), the only choice is oceanic fish and skipjack is preferred.
In India, as well as in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, fish is marketed through many different channels and outlets. In addition to the usual hands of wholesalers, commission agents, and private vendors, there are also marketing distribution channels and outlets in the fishermen's cooperative societies and the individual State Fisheries Development Corporations. National markets for marine shrimps and other high-value cultured products are not established in spite of the production of these products.
In Kampuchea, the Maldives, and Sri Lanka market data regarding trade in natural and cultured products are not readily available. In Sri Lanka fish caught from the large tanks or reservoirs are mostly sold to the consumers by vendors who control the prices. Fish are sold in numbers rather than by weight and are therefore classified by size. The fishermen, who are organized in associations or cooperatives, have a better bargaining position with the middlemen for prices.
Shrimp exports from Burma have increased during the last three years to about 4 000 t, with exports to Japan, the USA and some to Europe.
The importation of fish and shellfish to Singapore establishes far higher price ranges than found elsewhere in the region, and the demand is for live products. For example, live red grouper (US$ 25-30/kg) and black grouper (US$ 15-28) are the preferred fish and command top prices; snappers and sea bass (US$ 12-17) are next. Live banana prawns are US$ 27-30, and dead only US$ 18-20. The red tilapia when alive can fetch US$ 10-12, but has little value dead.
The region has a number of common marketing problems for its aquaculture produce. For the most part the transportation systems are poor. Production locations are often inaccessible at times with long distances to market centres. There is a lack of marketing infrastructure for both wholesale and retail markets. The large percentage to the middlemen and commission agents, which can be about 65% of the price to the consumer (including transportation costs), reduces the price to the farmers. Also many of the markets are in poor condition. India, for example, has some 132 marketing terminals but these are greatly in need of modernization. Also the trade is overloaded with agents and retailers.
The lack of good infrastructure in many countries has led to a rapid rise in fish price indexes. In India, for example, the index of fish and fishery product prices to other basic food commodities has risen since 1950 to 1985 by a factor of 18. The average of all wholesale prices has been only 7.6 times during the same period, with standard food articles 6.7, and meat 12.7. Similar changes have occurred in Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in Asia (and the Pacific) is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services (in Africa, Arab Countries, Latin America, in addition to Asia). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called "Trade News", in four languages. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International" (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called "GLOBEFISH". This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, which is based in Thailand, produces a quarterly Newsletter in English. This often carries feature articles on marketing of aquaculture products, and processing and post-harvest technology. It also produces articles for the consumer on fish and fisheries products.
Other publications in the region (India) are Indian Seafoods (produced in Cochin), together with Krishi vigyan patrika (for marine products). Fishing Chyme Vishahapatnam, and Mach (Bengali) Kalynai. These are all obtainable through subscription.
As most of the high-value products are exported out of the region, other marketing resources on the periphery are important. The Japanese External Trade Organization (JETRO) publishes marketing reports and disseminates them to its offices outside Japan. These reach the trade after many weeks. The Japanese Marine Products Importer Association produces a monthly leaflet.
Eurofish Report is a fortnightly review (published in the UK) of European fisheries and world fishing news. In addition to items of current news in the industry, including aquaculture, it contains data of supplies and prices of commodities, including aquaculture products.
Many of the international markets are covered by Seafood Business (USA), Seafood International (UK), and Il Pesce (Italy). All these commercial publications are available through subscription and, in addition to prices and market trends, etc., often have relevant articles about aquaculture production world-wide.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The most important technical assistance project in the sub-sector in the region is INFOFISH - a marketing information and advisory service specializing in Asian and Pacific fisheries. INFOFISH is part of a network of marketing services established by FAO in four regions (see 1.6). It was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. Malaysia, the host country, provides office facilities and support staff. Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet INFOFISH serves the sector directly, and its publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products.
Another externally-funded regional project which indirectly serves the aquaculture sub-sector is the ASEAN Regional Post-harvest Technology Project. Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand are all members of ASEAN. The project is funded by the Canadian International. Development Agency (CIDA).
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) conducts a number of regional fish market studies, and the FAO/UNDP South China Sea Programme (which continues at a much-reduced level) produces reports on important fishery commodities in the region.
The UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) sponsored study tours on post-harvest handling, marketing, and consumption of aquaculture products in China for senior fisheries officials from Bangladesh, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand, in collaboration with the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC), Agence pour la Coopération Technique, Industrielle et Economique (ACTIM), and l'Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la mer (IFREMER).
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Aquaculture production in the West Asia region is influenced mainly by geography (see Table 4). However, the long traditions of aquaculture in the region, and the agricultural and rural backgrounds of large numbers of people, have enabled relatively modern technologies to be readily applied and made productive. In addition, apart from the vegetarian habits of some religious sects, the majority of the people in the region like fish and grow them wherever possible.
The continental countries of Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Pakistan, together with the insular Sri Lanka, all have preferences for freshwater fish. Because of its northerly position and altitude Nepalese like the cold water fish from the river systems, but in the flat terrain there are some 5 000 ha of natural lakes and about 1 400 ha of reservoirs in which it is possible to produce warmwater fish. Sri Lanka, on the other hand, has few natural freshwater bodies but has established fisheries in some 140 000 ha of irrigation reservoirs or tanks through aquaculture. It also has some 1 700 km of coastline, large tracts of which are flat and suitable for the construction of ponds.
Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan have good water resources with extensive rivers and flood plains, most of which have man-made lakes and reservoirs for irrigation projects for agricultural development. Bangladesh has no large lakes but innumerable ox-bow lakes (about 292 000 ha) and reservoirs (90 000 ha). Unfortunately much of the delta region is still subjected to flooding which is costly for the construction and maintenance of fixed structures, such as coastal ponds. India has many natural lakes (0.72 million ha) and inland reservoirs (3 million ha), most of which have been adapted for fisheries through stocking programmes and which are now independent fisheries in their own right. However, many of these lakes are stocked with seed each year to supplement the natural production. The long coastal areas of India are also suitable for the development of marine and brackishwater species. Pakistan is drier, its river systems are shorter, and its lakes are not available for
aquaculture. It has about 80 000 ha of reservoirs created by the large irrigation systems which have been constructed.
Burma, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand, although physically part of the Asian land mass, have preferences for marine fish and shellfish. With the exception of Kampuchea and Singapore, all have extensive coastlines of more than 2 500 km in addition to good freshwater resources. In addition to its rivers Burma has some 33 000 ha of lakes and 80 000 ha of reservoirs; Malaysia has 10 000 km^2 of reservoirs; and Thailand has 300 000 ha of lakes and 225 000 ha of reservoirs, as well as extensive brackishwater coastal areas. Singapore is the exception. With limited coastal and freshwater areas, and its restrictions on the use of available land, the country has confined its coastal development to four sites and a few long-existing coastal enclosures. Its interest in freshwater fish production is directed mainly at the high value aquarium fishes rather than food fish. Kampuchea also has a limited area for coastal development but it has one river system and about 10 000
km^2 of lakes.
Indonesia is predominantly an island population with a strong tradition in coastal fish culture. Many of its coastal areas are already established as productive aquaculture zones. Inland there are innumerable lakes totalling 1.7 million ha, and some 27 000 ha of reservoirs. Its natural rivers are few and short.
In spite of these extensive water resources in the region for possible aquaculture, like the other countries of Asia there are many competing uses. Agriculture is the principal sector in most of these countries. The large urban populations require large quantities of drinking water and new industries also make demands on water resources. However, much is being done in the development of aquaculture but the systems and practices are still traditional and extensive. They require little in the way of costly inputs, and they are also labour intensive. In the last two decades modern, semi-intensive and intensive systems have been developed in some locations for high-value products. There is considerable interest in the use of floating cages and net-pens in lakes and man-made reservoirs, which are available in most countries and which are often n