<title>ADCP/REP/89/41 - Aquaculture and Risk Management</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Risk Management is a practical technique for establishing and maintaining profitability of aquaculture enterprises.
Aquaculture, like all food producing industries, is a high risk business, not only because of its dependence on the survival of large numbers of living organisms in captivity (many of which are still only one or two generations from wild stocks), but also because of its dependence on the skills of man, the efficiency of machines, and the clemency of the physical forces of nature. However, like all high risk businesses, it is attractive to entrepreneurs because some practices can provide a quick and highly profitable return on investment.
For the last two decades, enterprises in aquaculture have been preoccupied with technology. Now chat the industry is rapidly becoming stabilized, and production of a number of important species has focussed on one or two practices, the next decade will become preoccupied with increasing farm efficiency through the application of modern management methods. Among these is risk management. The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) is producing this guideline document on risk management, which is not purported to be the definitive work on the subject, primarily for the benefit of producers to assist them in becoming more efficient and to reduce their risks.
However, the practice of risk management is not only beneficial to producers. It is equally important to government administrators who are responsible for the national sector. Appropriate actions on the part of administrators to avoid risks to the national industry include concern for a national policy, appropriate legislation, and the provision of information. Consequently, the ADCP is also directing this document to them in support of their growing aquaculture industries.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Importance of Profitability
1.2 The Reality of Risks
1.3 The Concept of Risk Management
1.1 The Importance of Profitability
The purpose of all aquaculture enterprises is to produce aquatic animals or plants at a profit. All operational processes and management decisions are therefore directed to that end. If there are disruptions in production, through accidents, poor management decisions, or for any reason, then profitability is in jeopardy. The welfare of the saleable aquatic animals or plants produced on the farm is therefore the most important activity of all individual aquaculture enterprises, and the focal point of all attention by the farmer and his employees.
However, as in other agricultural industries, profitability is not only influenced by activities on the farm. Food producers as a whole recognize two additional processes which influence profitability of their enterprise. These are (i) post-harvest handling and marketing activities, and (ii) the preparation of the product by the consumer. Thus, in addition to their own personal responsibility for growing a healthy animal or plant on the farm, producers have a continuing vested interest in the responsibility of others to market quality fresh products and prepare popular dishes for the final consumers. Unfortunately both of these activities are also potentially vulnerable to risks which prevent their final objectives being achieved, and thus reduce potential profitability for the middlemen and the producers.
In summary, the economic survival and strength of the aquaculture industry as a whole is entirely dependent and subordinate to the principal tasks of producing, marketing, and preparing quality aquatic products profitably and without risk. Fortunately, good farmers and industrial "middlemen" know the likelihood of these risks occurring. Through their experience they select the appropriate management technique to avoid or minimize these risks, and to keep all three activities on the most profitable course. This is the essence of risk management.
1.2 The Reality of Risks
Any process, by definition, involves a change or a series of changes over time. A process can be natural or man-made. The degree of change from the beginning to the end of a process is dependent on many factors. In the case of man-made processes, such as those characteristic of manufacturing industries, the end is almost certainly predictable, but for the processes of nature there are many factors which make the end unpredictable.
Most natural physical and chemical processes take place slowly over extremely long periods and therefore have the appearance of stability and predictability; on the other hand, biological processes, which by definition deal with life, occur over short periods of time and are highly susceptible to change or misdirection.
It is not possible, with a high degree of statistical certainty, to expect that the simplest biological process will achieve its predicted end in its appropriate time. There are too many hazards or risks, even at the level of the lowest forms of life. Some of these risks are totally beyond the control of the process. Almost every life form is part of the dynamic food web of nature. It is estimated, for example, that in nature only one egg out of ten thousand from the female flatfish survives to become another breeding adult. The risks to any one biological process are therefore so numerous and varied that they are almost impossible to catalogue, or to describe their magnitude, or to predict their frequency of occurrence.
Aquaculture is an industry built on biological processes. As pointed out in Section 1.1, it is an industry entirely dependent on the welfare of aquatic animals and plants which have to be produced and sold to generate profit. Consequently, by deduction, it is an industry which must be classified among a group of high risk food producing industries, which include meat, poultry, and cereal production, and market gardening.
1.3 The Concept of Risk Management
A high risk industry is not necessarily one which must be avoided by investors. Invariably high risk Industries provide significant opportunities for high and/or rapid returns on investment. But it is obvious that the investment has to be carefully researched first, and the risks of the venture carefully weighed. Thereafter, the venture must be watched with constant vigilance. A technique for constantly monitoring and evaluating an investment, and its risks, is called "risk management".
Because of not one but three biologically-dependent activities (as identified in 1.1), which may occur between a farmer and his profits, aquaculture is recognized as a high risk industry. It is therefore important that the farmer is highly circumspect in his identification and management of the most likely risks to each of the three processes, and the commercial consequences. A grasp of the economic dimensions of potential risks which threaten each process is critical. The skill of the farmer in placing a value on each risk influences its priority and therefore the attention paid to its control. This is invariably the determining factor in the success or failure of any farming venture.
The "common sense" school of management recognizes that for every process there is a group of potential risks which can be identified individually and given priority. In many cases they can be avoided by careful attention; for example, fire is well known to be a major cause of death and injury, and the chances of escaping and saving property are greatly enhanced if early warning of fire is given. It is therefore sensible to have smoke detectors in the farm buildings.
There is another group of risks which also can be identified but which can be excluded from consideration, either because their incidence is beyond any reasonable human effort (or expense) to control, or because the chances of their occurrence are too statistically insignificant to consider. For example, in the fish farming world it is not worth a farmer analysing every bag of fish feed before use on the theory that it may be contaminated. The chances of contamination are so small that they are outweighed by the cost of testing and the loss of feed tested. Therefore, to lessen the risk more cheaply the farmer makes certain that the feed is purchased from a reliable manufacturer. Equally, the statistical chance chat an aeroplane will fall on a farm is so insignificant that the risk can be discarded.
It is relatively easy, at both the personal and the commercial levels, to identify those risks which are either beyond human control (and expense), or statistically insignificant. However, there remains a large "grey" area of potential risks. Some of them can be identified with care, and an attempt made to value them. The aquaculture producer can then attempt to manage them for the benefit of himself and his business.
The process of managing risk is based on the individual analyses of three fundamental activities, which are taken in sequence, and subsequent synthesis of the results into a programme of management action. The three activities are:
- Identification of risk, or discovering the source(s) from which a potential risk may arise,
- Measuring risk, or evaluating the impact on an individual or an organization in the event of a potential risk occurring, and
- Managing and controlling risk, or selecting the most effective method(s) to deal with a potential risk.
These three components have, in turn, many sub-components. These all must be reviewed and analysed when a risk management exercise is undertaken. Guiding the farmer in making a review and analysis, and formulating a risk management strategy, are the subjects of the following sections.
<section>3</section>
2. IDENTIFICATION OF RISK
2.1 Business Risks
2.2 Pure Risks
Aquaculture is an industry of great diversity. This is because there are a large number of species produced (almost 200 species of aquatic animals and plants are recorded by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and there are many systems and farming practices which vary according to different resources in different parts of the world. Consequently any attempt to produce a simple framework for the identification of the most common risks is not easy, even within a genera of animal or plant species. For example, the risks of trout production in Denmark are substantially different from those in Italy; and the risks for cage farming salmon in Scotland are different from those in North America or in New Zealand. Similarly, in the Philippines the risks of onshore pond production of milkfish are different from those of shrimp production.
In addition, the exposure to different types of risk can change during the life cycle of a species. These differences may be subtle if the species has a simple life cycle, or they may be dramatic if the species has a complex life cycle with major metamorphoses. The pre-smolt production of young salmon in the freshwater hatchery stage, for example, has risks greatly different to those during grow-out in offshore marine cages. Consequently there is a range of differences in terms of risk between one species and another, and each with its own sub-set of associated risks.
Fortunately, despite all the complicating differences arising out of the peculiarities of species and life histories, there is a substantial number of components of production which are common from one practice to another. For example, moving water in a controlled way is a common denominator of many production practices; so too is the treatment of water in hatcheries, such as heating, filtration, and sterilization. The engineering associated with the mooring of structures in the sea is a common element of several practices in the industry, for example, sea cages used for marine fish farming or floating rafts for growing molluscs. Similarly, although all aquatic animals and plants have different life histories, many species are subjected to the same pathogens, fungal infections, and parasites which, for farming purposes, may often require the same biological and chemical treatments.
Finally, equally common to all production systems and practices, and which have no relationship to species or life history, are the pure risks, such as the climatic perils of high winds, unusual wave forces, floods, drought, abnormal temperature conditions, and natural hazards of earthquakes and volcanic activity.
The following framework summarizes the principal areas of risk faced by the farmer in the pursuit of profitability in the aquaculture industry. They are separated into (i) business risks, that is, risks directly related to the business of producing aquatic animals and plants; and (ii) pure risks, that is, the risks of life and business in general.
Business risks
1. Production risks
(i) Operational risks
Risks which interrupt the production cycle, such as mechanical failure, failure of technical processes, late delivery of supplies and services
(ii) Technological risks
Risks associated with lack of adequate technology, such as hatchery propagation, or lack of technical information and expertise
(iii) Financial risks
Risks due to government financial policies, use and dependence on government policy instruments, terms of credit, changes in operational costs
(iv) Social risks
Risks due to actions of special interest groups, such as environmentalists and conservationists
2. Market-related risks
Risks due to loss of product quality, lack of market information, actions of third party (the marketing middleman)
3. Consumer-related risks
Risks due to loss of consumer appeal, health regulations, actions of third party (the consumer)
Pure risks
(i) Physical risks of nature
Risks due to extreme climatic and meteorological conditions (wind, flood, drought, earthquake, volcanic action)
(ii) Social and political risks
Risks due to theft, malicious damage, and fraud
(iii) Liability
Risks due to legal actions against the farm
The examples are far from exhaustive but they indicate the principal types of risk for each process which are important for farmers in the aquaculture industry to consider. In their own right, each area is worthy of identification and should be given appropriate thought in the context of the particular operations of each individual farm, its location, the market system, and the target consumers of the product. To neglect this exercise possibly creates a third risk category, namely management risks, which would identify elements of poor planning and poor business control.
2.1 Business Risks
2.1.1 Production risks
2.1.2 Market-related risks
2.1.3 Consumer-related risks
The business risks are those directly related to the production of aquatic animals and plants, and the associated commercial business of the industry. The risks are conveniently sub-grouped into three activities or processes described earlier, namely production on the farm, marketing, and preparation for consumption.
2.1.1 Production risks
Production risks are the principal concern in the daily routine of the farmer, as the production process is his sole responsibility. There are many and varied risks in the production process which can reduce profitability, compared with those which may occur in the subsequent processes of marketing and consumption.
Production risks can be conveniently categorized into (i) operational, (ii) technological, (iii) financial, and (iv) social risks.
(i) Operational risks
A large number of farms have failed to attain profitability in one or more years because of accidents or major disruptions in the production process. A principal cause of disruption in daily operations is often mechanical failure of plant and equipment. Mechanical failure is an area of weakness which requires expert engineering assistance.
The most important plant and equipment on the farm are those maintaining life-support systems, for example, those which deliver water, or provide aeration and oxygen. Farms can be divided into two types depending on their systems for life-support, namely (a) those which depend, to some degree or other, on the natural movement of water bodies to deliver water (such as gravity flow, tidal movement, and wind-assisted circulation), and (b) those which require water delivered by mechanical means.
The former include the simple ongrowing practices which are located in natural water bodies and watersheds, and which do not require any mechanical or human intervention to deliver water. Among these operations are floating cages, submerged cages, floating rafts, net pen enclosures, and self-sustaining ponds. Although these practices have some specific risk management elements of their own, such as appropriate moorage systems and pollution, they are all considered relatively simple and uncomplicated in terms of their life support system.
The latter, those which require controlled water delivery, include operations relying on artificial ponds, tanks, raceways, and all hatchery complexes. All have inherent risks of mechanical failure. Failure may be with pumps, pipework, valves, any heaters or filters, or water treatment processes. It may be primary mechanical failure of components themselves, or mechanical failure due to a break in utility services (electricity, gas, and mains water), or fractures in the system due to accidents (caused by physical damage or sudden low temperatures). Risks associated with mechanical life support systems are significant for the farmer to a high degree.
A number of farming practices are not dependent on regular water delivery but function on water treatment and recirculation. A life support system is even more at risk of failure when there are a number of mechanical components. For example, recirculation systems are often constructed as "package" units, with all mechanical components having back-up components and safety systems. However, these only add to the mechanical complexity of the system and increase the risk of equipment failure almost exponentially.
Life support systems using mechanical recirculation have a use on farms, for example, in cases where water resources become suddenly and unexpectedly limited. They are also of use for "low-density" activities, such as quarantine tanks and broodstock tanks, and also in stock transportation. However, with life support systems for high-density production the risks of mechanical failure are high, and there are greatly increased biological risks associated with them. They are used invariably in locations where water resources are in short supply, and when the high-value of the product justifies the initial large capital investment and operating costs.
The risk of disruption in daily operations of the farm's life support system is alleviated to some degree by the automatic alarm system. However, automatic alarm systems are themselves mechanical devices capable of failure. Furthermore, they invariably only monitor a limited part of a site. Alarm systems also require a human response, and by the right individual capable of dealing with the problem quickly. Although useful to the mechanical operations on a farm, alarm systems often provide a false sense of security.
The alternative or supplement to the automatic alarm is the interested and well trained reliable watchman (who may have the secondary job of site security), with a telephone or radio link to the farmer or technical staff.
The life support system is the principal system of the farm, and must function constantly. The response to any mechanical failure of the system must be fast, and the action taken must be appropriate. Automatic alarms have a role to play but must be used judiciously. Watchmen and employees must be trained on the interpretation of each alarm, and the consequential actions required.
There are a number of routine activities in the daily operation of any farm which may be described as "hazardous" to the stock, and create risk. Typical hazards are those which expose the stock to a new environment, albeit temporary; for example, all handling activities required for such things as injection of veterinary medicines to treat pathogenic organisms, counting, weighing, measuring, or transferring stock around the farm, and also the use of chemical baths.
Finally, yet another potential breakdown in the smooth operation of the plant is the lack of supplies, particularly seed from hatcheries, and feed from manufacturers. It is vital that the farmer has prompt delivery of quality seed at the time required, and it is necessary that a farm has facilities for the proper storage of feed and other supplies.
Risks to lost production through disruption in the production process can be alleviated by livestock insurance. Insurance is a proven technique for the farmer to divert risk (see Section 4.3). However, as production risks are so diverse some underwriters will often only agree to share the risk, and often restrict the cover in various ways. The stock mortality insurance market which exists at the present time is relatively sophisticated, both at underwriting the risks to stock and applying the technique of risk management.
(ii) Technological risks
Aquaculture is a new technology, and the industry is still emerging. It cannot be assumed that the risks associated with aquaculture production are the same as other advanced and established businesses, such as agriculture, horticulture, or fishing. Comparisons are meaningless. However, it is interesting to compare man's level of knowledge of the natural history and biology of a few key aquatic species produced by aquaculture with those of certain domesticated land animals, cereals, or vegetables. For example, if it is assumed in relative terms that about 75% of the biology of the human is known, then probably about 50-60% of the biology of the major domestic land animals, poultry, and crops is known. But the knowledge of the biology of the aquatic animals and plants probably ranges from 20% (for such as the salmonids, and carps), down to 5%.
Even if this comparative quantification is only indicative of a relationship, it illustrates the lack of information which the farmer has about aquatic crops which are intended to give profits on his investment. His lack of information is compounded further by the dimension of water in which he has to work, and all its physical, chemical, and biological ramifications involved in the production equation.
The inadequacy of aquaculture technology is a significant risk to the industry at the present time. For example, the farmers themselves have the greatest need for information which will improve and guarantee farm production. Technological information is of prime importance to the future of the industry. It is up to the individual farmer to make certain that he is well informed about those technical developments which will help him reduce his risk. Production risks are increased where a high level of biotechnical skill is required, but is not readily available. In Japan, Taiwan Province of China (PC), and the USA, some years ago, it was remarkable to note how many new farms located themselves as close as possible to centres of research and development, thus reducing the risk of technical ignorance.
(iii) Financial risks
Many financial risks are common to all business enterprises and therefore might be considered "pure risks" (see Section 2.2). However, there are always some conditions which make them peculiar to the aquaculture industry, and therefore they must be considered by the farmer as factors which can influence the profitability of the enterprise.
Aquaculture farmers, like agricultural farmers, invariably require repeated loans. In addition to loans for capital construction, the farmer usually requires initial operational loans. These may be followed by short-term loans for annual supplies of seed, feed, new equipment, or expansion. Thus the government monetary policy is important (see Section 5.1). For example, government measures to control inflation or high interest rates on loans obviously have a bearing on the farm's profitability.
The government's policy toward a new industry, such as aquaculture, may include a number of non-fiscal incentives for the farmer. These may include grants for development, development infrastructure (such as industrial zones), government equity shareholding, government insurance, leasing of facilities, and even compensation schemes. There may also be subsidies for construction, equipment, and supplies, labour and manpower schemes, and price support. Finally there may be credit on advantageous terms through quasi-government credit schemes, special loans with deferred repayment schedules, and loan guarantees. One or all of these non-fiscal incentives may be available to the farmer and, where economically sensible, they should be used.
Similarly the government often implements a number of fiscal incentives for a new industry with a special policy toward duties, taxes, and quotas. Typical fiscal incentives include duties on physical inputs, import-export duties of products, corporate taxes and income taxes, including tax exemption on commodities earning foreign exchange, quotas, and levies on sales.
It is important for the farmer to determine continuously the extent to which these non-fiscal and fiscal incentives are making the farm operations profitable, as government incentives are usually removed once the industry is established.
Governments may also support the developing industry through a number of valuable services, such as market services (market information, intelligence, promotions, etc.), and technical services (research and development, extension, technical training schemes, etc.). Again, these are to be taken advantage of by the farmer, but with the recognition that these services will not necessarily be there for ever. A change of government, or changes in government policy, are risks to the utilization of capital by the farmer.
The farmer has also to be aware of changes in the industries which are peripheral to aquaculture, and which will influence his profitability. For example, changes in the prices of fish meal, a staple of the majority of animal feeds, will change the price of the feed he purchases. Increases in the price of fuel will increase not only his transportation costs, but also general energy costs for pumping water, and heating water in the hatchery. Changes in salaries and wages obviously alter the monthly balance sheet.
The profitability of any farm is closely tied to the farmer's management of capital and cash flow, but also to his overall financial awareness of other changes going on about him which have a direct or indirect effect on the profitability of the enterprise. The farmer will continue to need short-term credit to maintain the operation, and the lending institutions must make certain that credit is always available.
The lending institutions, to-date, have made little attempt to understand the intricacies of farm operations and their capital cycles, and invariably offer credit with terms they normally apply to land-based farmers, or fishermen. As a result, the lending institutions have made a number of inappropriate investments in the sector because of their conditions for the loans. In most instances these losses could have been avoided by a risk management assessment first. Risk management has a great deal to offer the well-informed farmer and the lending institutions in terms of the utilization and management of investment capital.
(iv) Social risks
National goals for the aquaculture sector in many countries, and the individual profitability of many farms, are invariably programmed through a series of development phases. This projected expansion, when considered in its entirety, is making considerable demands on natural resources. As a result, many other industries, equally important to the economies of countries and local areas, now compete openly and vigorously for the same resources.
The principal competitors of the aquaculture industry are those industries which also require water and adjacent space (such as electrical generation, agriculture, forestry). But aquaculture is also facing increasing competition for both inland and coastal waters and space from tourism and recreational industries. Furthermore, all are subject to the increasing demands of the environmentalists who want no industrial development at all around these natural resources.
Disorganized and ill-considered expansion often brings social resistance to any proposed development, as well as hostility from other economic competitors. For example, there is already evidence of social hostility against the aquaculture industry in parts of Europe and North America. Typical accusations are unsightliness and smell of farms, dangers to wildlife, and hazards to navigation. Social unacceptance is often exacerbated by the speed with which any new industry develops in its formative years, mainly because society does not readily embrace substantial short-term changes. The corollary, the impoundment of agricultural land, occurred over many hundreds of years and therefore caused no general social unrest.
In many European countries, at least, all "land" below high water lines belongs to the crown or state, and the general public has full right of access - a right regarded as sacrosanct. Any impoundment of tidal and offshore areas of the sea, or any restriction of the right of access to public coastal lands and inland water bodies, for the purposes of production of aquatic animals and plants is proving to be unacceptable and results in public outcry.
For the individual farmer social problems may result in the non-renewal of a lease (if he does not own the property), or limit important expansion plans. They may also lead to the loss of rights to take water for the farm, or to install costly water treatment to purify farm effluents. These are all risks to his business.
Social behaviour may also effect the individual farmer in other ways. For example, again mostly in the developed world, a zealous group of "animal rights" activists have caused damage by illegal actions, including the release of fish from cages. They have also been responsible for the release of minks from farms, for the release of dolphins from aquariums, and animals from zoos and medical research centres. Potentially such a group is local, and a small risk to farmers as a whole, but a risk none the less, particularly if there is an organized and concerted effort against, say, salmon farmers.
There are obvious risks to the future of the industry if farmers do not get reasonable access to the key natural resources of water and adjacent land. Once again these risks can be alleviated to some degree by better information. It is important that farmers as a group are well informed about other industries in the region, and programmes for development. However, it is also necessary for governments to be equally informed about the aquaculture industry, and allocate resources appropriately. A number of countries, for example, Hong Kong and Singapore, have zoned offshore areas solely for the use of the aquaculture industry, and in the USA a number of industrial marine parks have been developed where farmers have a reserved area for farming, and share communal water delivery systems with other farmers and other industries.
2.1.2 Market-related risks
In theory, once the production process has ended, and the healthy live animal has left the farm gate (or the on-farm processing plant), and payment has been made, the product is no longer the responsibility of the farmer. This, under normal circumstances, would be the end of his risk. In practice, unfortunately, this is not the case. The farmer is still exposed to risks which may change the quality of his product until purchased by the consumer. If the quality changes, then both the consumer and the marketing middleman will not make future purchases, and this obviously will have an influence on the profitability of the enterprise.
These risks the farmer now shares with the marketing middleman, as the middleman is also dependent on a satisfied consumer. Therefore, to avoid the risks of loss of quality of his product, and the loss of future consumers, it is important that the farmer works with a marketing system and middleman whom he can trust to handle his product correctly. Some farmers, of course, choose not to take this risk, and process and retail their product to the consumer directly, either at the farm gate or in local urban markets.
Aquaculture products, particularly those which are known to the market as "seafood", are gaining substantial ground i