<title>ADCP/REP/89/42 - A Preliminary Review of Selected Legislation Governing Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
At the Expert Consultation on Planning for Aquaculture Development, held in Policoro, Italy in 1988 (see ADCP/REP/89/33), the participants put forward an integrated set of opportunities for technical assistance to developing countries. The opportunities were predominantly a group of identified needs or ideas, which collectively would assist in guiding investment decisions, primarily at the national level in both the public and private sectors.
One of the vital needs of national sector management was legislation in support of aquaculture. Few developing countries at the present time are enacting legislation dealing with aquaculture, other than regulations regarding the importation of species (as guided by their respective regional fisheries commissions). There are no projects currently directed toward the development of appropriate national legislation for the sector.
The Consultation noted that although legislation was a national responsibility, action was required first at an interregional level to identify and classify aquaculture legislation and to provide general guidelines.
To this end "A Preliminary Review of Selected Legislation Governing Aquaculture", commissioned by ADCP, has been prepared by staff of the Legislation Branch, FAO Legal Office in Rome.
In the preparation of this review, primary reliance has been placed on the materials available at FAO in Rome, supplemented by further materials received from a number of sources. Given the breadth of the laws which might impinge on aquaculture, only a visit to individual countries would ensure that all relevant laws, as well as the most up-to-date versions, would be located. As this was not a practicable option, the study has necessarily been characterized as a preliminary review at this stage, even though it is novel in approaching aquaculture from a comparative viewpoint, as well as drawing information from a wide number of different countries and varied legal systems.
Every care has been taken to rely on the latest information available, but in a study of this kind it is inevitable that occasionally reliance will have been made on an out-of-date law. The Legislation Branch particularly welcomes being kept informed of recent developments concerning aquaculture legislation.
One of the ideas behind the preparation of this Preliminary Review was the hope that it would lead to an expert consultation on aquaculture legislation, mainly to assist countries in developing guidelines for the elaboration of the legal issues which desirably should be addressed in formulating aquaculture legislation. This might in appropriate circumstances lead to the formulation of model provisions on certain aspects of an aqua-culture law, and taking into account the requirements of different systems - common law, civil law, centrally planned or free market. Ideally this might then be followed by action at the regional and sub-regional levels to (i) transfer such model provisions into comprehensive guidelines for nations within the region to use or amend as appropriate for their own use, (ii) organize meetings amongst groups of nations to discuss legislation for issues of common interest (such as introduction of species, genetic conservation, water resource use), and
(iii) provide expert assistance when required.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
Whereas the legal regime of marine fisheries has been the subject of considerable attention as it has evolved since 1945, the legal regime of aquaculture has tended to be neglected in comparison. However, aquaculture is increasingly being seen as an important method of improving food production, and there are impressive statistics on the increased volume of production in recent years. For these, and no doubt other reasons, it is timely to examine the legal regime governing this activity.
The purpose of the present study is to examine the legal regime of aquaculture, focusing in particular on the key legal issues governing this activity. In addition to some general matters discussed in the introduction, these are: the general place of aquaculture in the legal system, access to and use of water and land, environmental aspects, including fish disease, import of live fish and the introduction of non-indigenous species.
It would have been impossible to have considered all or even a majority of the laws concerning aquaculture throughout the world. The approach adopted, therefore, was to consider at least the laws of particular countries reflecting the differences between common law and civil law systems, developed and developing societies, and centrally planned and capitalist societies.
Because information was not available for many countries, and because the quality of information was also variable, relevant examples have been included wherever appropriate in this study.
Although this has inevitably resulted in some unevenness in the information underlying this study it has enhanced its overall value, not least by enabling attention to be drawn to examples of laws not otherwise conveniently available.
At this stage, it has also not been possible in every instance to relate the nature of the legal regime to the importance of aquaculture activity in a particular country. It is possible that a country could have an advanced aquaculture sector, but have virtually no direct legislation on aquaculture, the regulation of the activity being found in, for example, laws regarding land, water and environmental control. At another extreme, it is possible that a country could have an elaborate legal regime for aquaculture, but very little aquaculture activity. In both situations, as well as any existing within those two extremes, it would be necessary to obtain more information about the aquaculture activity in individual countries before a judgement could be made whether the particular legal regime was effective. In many instances, this can only be ascertained by visits to a particular country.
It is, furthermore, important to distinguish between different types of aquaculture, for the applicable national rules sometimes vary according to which type is under consideration: mariculture, sea cage farming, sea ranching, may well depend primarily on the general marine fisheries law (which may or may not address those questions specifically), aquaculture (often referred to as fish farming, fish culture, etc.) that utilizes public lands may depend primarily on the laws affecting the public domain or water resources laws while aquaculture occurring entirely on private land may depend primarily or even exclusively on the land laws, the water laws and environmental laws.
As will be seen, national laws do not always cover what they otherwise appear to be intended to cover, and difficult problems of interpretation can arise.
An important result of this study is to assist in identifying the legal issues which will need to be addressed in setting up an aquaculture regime. It will also, it is hoped, assist in identifying possible obstacles to aquaculture development. For example, the absence or scarcity of laws directly regulating aquaculture might lead to a situation where the existing land or water laws could unintentionally amount to a disincentive to undertake aquaculture development, by imposing multiple or conflicting obligations.
It will also be self evident that unlike the legal regime of marine fisheries, international law issues have only a marginal impact on aquaculture.
Where the activity in question is inland and in the vicinity of the border of another nation, there is the theoretical possibility that upper riparian use might have harmful effects across the border, or that a water table straddling a boundary is affected adversely by aquaculture activity, in which case international environmental law questions might arise. Otherwise inland aquaculture activity will be a matter of domestic law. In bays and creeks, and river mouths, the coastal state can impose such regulations as it wishes on aquaculture, whereas in the territorial sea, internal waters enclosed by newly proclaimed straight baselines and the EEZ, certain navigational rights for foreign vessels will need to be respected.
If a coastal state engages in ranching of the living resources, the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea will need to be considered, especially if the species are anadromous (e.g. salmon) (Art. 66) or catadromous (e.g. eels) (Art. 67). Also if offshore structures are established for aquaculture purposes, these will be subject to control by the coastal state whether they are in the territorial sea (Art. 21) or in the EEZ (Art. 60).
The present study does not intend to give a comprehensive review of the world legislation on aquaculture. This would have required an enormous amount of time and information. Based on the work of the Legislation Branch of FAO and in close collaboration with the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), the main objective of this paper is a preliminary review of the variety of legal problems raised by aquaculture and its development.
<section>3</section>
1. AQUACULTURE IN THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
1.1 The place of aquaculture in the legal framework
1.2 The definition of aquaculture
1.1 The place of aquaculture in the legal framework
1.1.1 Countries with a specific set of rules on aquaculture
1.1.2 Countries with some specific aquaculture legislation
1.1.3 Countries with an enabling law
The activity of aquaculture is by nature multidisciplinary and multiform; this reality is also reflected in the legal approach to it. One of the main conclusions to which this comparative study on aquaculture leads is that there are a number of ways in which a state and its legal system could deal with aquaculture. In fact, as stated by a publication from the African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC), "aquaculture lacks a firm legal status of its own, it being classified neither as agriculture, nor animal husbandry, nor truly fishing (capture fishery)" ^1^/. This is confirmed by a preliminary analysis of the consideration given to aquaculture activities by the legal systems examined in the course of this study.
^1^/ African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Introduction to Aquaculture, ARAC/87/WP/11.
A false idea about aquaculture consists in saying that it is a quite new activity and that, therefore, it is very understandable that most of the countries have not yet elaborated a legal framework in which it could operate. According to this view, aquaculture could be compared to the medical developments on human embryos and the new legal questions they raise.
However alluring this explanation could be, it must be clearly pointed out that it does not correspond to reality. The technique of aquaculture has been known and used for centuries. Furthermore, in a certain number of developing countries the culture of fish was introduced by the colonial power. Thus, in Rwanda, the Belgian administration set up a number of aquaculture and fish pond establishments, but it is impossible to find a single legal instrument dating back to the colonial era which refers to aquaculture. On the other hand a country like Mexico took a stand at a very early stage. In 1883 a book was published on the "Ideas on the importance of giving a vigorous promotion to Pisciculture and Aquaculture in the Country". The publication led a few years later to the adoption by the Mexican Government of a "Regulation for the development of pisciculture in the Republic" (27 May 1891). The regulation intended to give the legal foundations for an expansion of pisciculture.
The above text included, inter alia, provisions on application and petitions, authorization of establishments, fish transport, periodical reports, etc.
The example demonstrates that aquaculture and its legal implications were at the very least examined one hundred years ago. Indeed, it would be reasonable to assume that customary land tenure practices in traditional societies would almost certainly regulate aquaculture in some way. The lack of specific laws and regulations on aquaculture must then be attributed to other reasons. One of the objectives of the present study is to assist in identifying them and also to enquire into the need for a legal regime to govern aquaculture activity.
As said before, the legislative responses to aquaculture are variable and are not necessarily related to the existence and the development of an aquaculture industry. The main countries examined in this review can be divided into three categories depending on how their existing legislation deals with aquaculture. The three categories are as follows:
1.1.1 Countries with a specific set of rules on aquaculture
In this category we can find most of the western developed countries and some centrally planned states. Thus, countries like Canada, the USA, New Zealand, Norway, France and Ireland have a variety of legislation dealing directly with aquaculture and/or with certain types of it.
In New Zealand, for example, licences are required to operate all aquaculture ventures, and legislation is embodied in "The Marine Farming Act" and the "Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations" of 1983. New Zealand recently adopted policies for importing exotic species into the country for aquaculture. It is interesting to note that for many years New Zealand legislation prevented aquaculture development, particularly for the culture of salmonids, and there were strict regulations protecting the indigenous species and the inland fisheries for sport fishing ^1^/.
^1^/ The information on New Zealand is from the Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific, published in 1988 by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme in Rome.
Similarly, France has a comprehensive set of aquaculture laws. The French legislation distinguishes between aquaculture done in freshwater ^2^/ and in marine water ^3^/. In addition to those basic texts France has a certain number of texts dealing explicitly, at least in part, with aquaculture in general or with certain forms of it. Thus salmon-breeding is mentioned as being an "installation classée" (classified installation) by the law on the subject and therefore is subject to a special procedure ^4^/. Similarly, different regulations deal with the question of shellfish breeding in particular from the environmental point of view ^5^/. The legal regime set up by those legal instruments will be analysed in further detail in the following sections. At this stage it is worth noting that France felt the need to provide for different legal regimes for the two main types of aquaculture, i.e. in freshwater and in marine water. It is also interesting to note that whereas freshwater
aquaculture is embodied in the Rural Code which is a general and basic text dealing with most of the activities taking place in the rural environment, mariculture is regulated by a decree independent from the general Fisheries Law. A similar situation can be observed in Spain where, after a long debate, a specific Act on Marine Culture has been adopted ^6^/.
^2^/ Under the legal regime set up by the Law No. 84-512 of 29 June 1984 concerning freshwater fishing and the management of fishing resources and the Decree No. 85-1400 of 27 December 1985.
^3^/ Whose activities are regulated by the Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations as modified by the Decree No. 87-756 of 14 September 1987. A third method of aquaculture being experimented with and practised by French aquaculturists is the so called "offshore mariculture". The expression intends to cover any activity of aquaculture in the open sea. The legal problems that such an activity raise are different in some important respects compared to "traditional" aquaculture. In particular, international law can affect in some way the development of this type of aquaculture. Presently, France has no specific legislation on this question, however the legal implications of development of aquaculture in the open sea are being studied by French lawyers (see in particular a study by the CEDEM (Centre de Droit et d'Economie de la Mer), Les problèmes juridiques de la pisciculture en mer ouverte, contrat IFREMER 1989, Université
de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté de Droit et des Sciences Economiques, Brest, 270 p).
^4^/ Loi No. 76-663 du 19 juillet 1976, sur les installations classées pour la protection de l'environnement modified and completed by the Law No. 85-661 of 3 July 1985; also relevant is the Decree No. 82-756 of 1 September 1982.
^5^/ Arrêté fixant les conditions techniques auxquelles doivent satisfaire les établissements ostréicoles habilites a expédier ou vendre directement les huîtres, Journal Officiel, numéro complémentaire du 6 juillet 1978.
^6^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June 1984, Marine Culture, B.O.E. No. 153, of 27 June 1984.
This could indicate that these States feel that freshwater aquaculture can be more easily assimilated to a traditional activity, like, for example, animal husbandry; whereas mariculture differs from capture fisheries to such an extent that it cannot be put on the same footing.
It can also be argued that the interdependency between inland fisheries and aquaculture calls for a unique text governing both activities. An example of this approach is Hungary where the basic principles of aquaculture are set up in the consolidated text of Decree-Law No. 30 of 1977 on fishing ^1^/. According to the Hungarian authorities, this text "is the general framework of aquaculture legislation in Hungary, however in most parts it deals with open water fisheries, both commercial and sport. It should be mentioned that it is very difficult to separate aquaculture and inland fisheries activities. These two sectors are in very close connection and interdependency/utilization of the same resources, stocking programmes, intensive-practical aquacultural utilization of natural water-bodies, etc...." ^2^/. Nevertheless, Hungary has also enacted several specific regulations on water use and supply for aquaculture purposes ^3^/.
^1^/ Executive Order No. 44/1977 of the Minister of Agriculture and Food.
^2^/ Letter from the Ministry of Agriculture and Food in response to our request for information on aquaculture legislation in Hungary (21 August 1989).
^3^/ Order No. 1/1979 of the President of National Water Authority on supply of water for irrigation and pond farming purposes. Ordinance No. 5/1976 of the President of National water Authority on determination of water quantity for irrigation and pond farming. Order No. 3/1984 of the President of National Water Authority on determination of sewage penalties.
New Zealand, France and Hungary illustrate then, although with different means and objectives, a similar approach to aquaculture. Those countries decided that aquaculture was peculiar and important enough to justify an important set of rules devoted to it. This category of countries is however in a minority, in particular even amongst the developed countries. As for developing countries, very few, apart from some Asian States (e.g. the Philippines), have developed a comprehensive legal response even if aquaculture is dealt with in their laws.
1.1.2 Countries with some specific aquaculture legislation
This category needs to be viewed in a restrictive way. Only countries which have enacted a particular act and/or regulation dealing with aquaculture are included. Therefore the number of States in this situation is more limited than might have been thought at a first glance. A good illustration of this can be provided by the Asian countries where a number of legal instruments deal with aquaculture.
That having been said, "in most cases, however, existing legislation has a broad application, i.e. laws and similar regulations have been enacted to cover fisheries in general and not just aquaculture in particular" ^1^/. On the other hand a certain number of developing countries, while they do not have a law covering all the different aspects of aquaculture, have one (and in some cases more than one) legal text dealing with a certain type of aquaculture or a specific point related to this activity. In Singapore for instance, the Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981, done under the Fisheries Act, provide for a legal regime for fish culture undertaken "upon the seabed within the territorial waters of Singapore" ^2^/.
^1^/ Excerpts from an ADCP document, see note 2.
^2^/ The Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules 1981, Sect. 2.
A more probative example of a country with specific aquaculture legislation is given by Ecuador. This country is the leading producer of farm-raised shrimp in the western hemisphere with 1 300 farms, 100 hatcheries, 100 000 hectares in production and an annual heads-on production of 70 000 metric tonnes ^3^/. To regulate this very profitable activity, the Government of Ecuador enacted, in 1975, an ad hoc Regulation on the breeding and culture of aquatic species ^4^/. However, the scope of this regulation was clearly to provide a legal framework for a very precise type of aquaculture: i.e. marine shrimp culture. In reality, the Regulation established a legal regime for the use of the beaches and the bays ("zonas de playas y bahías") which are the areas in which shrimp farming is booming. Therefore the main intent of the text was to fix clear rules for the use of those coastal areas, which, being part of the public domain, are not susceptible to any private ownership ^5^/.
^3^/ This information has been taken from the Aquaculture Digest 1988.
^4^/ Reglamento para Cría y Cultivo de Especies Bioacuáticas No. 12771 de 5 de septiembre de 1975, Registro Oficial No. 889 de 1975.
^5^/ Article 5 of the Regulation 12771/1975 "Siendo las zonas de playas y bahías, bienes nacionales de uso publico, quienes desearen utilizarlas en cría y cultivo de especies bioacuáticas, deberán solicitar y obtener la correspondiente concesión de ocupación".
The above mentioned goal is clearly illustrated by the fact that all provisions included in section II of the Regulation dealing with the legal regime of the concession, constantly refer to the "zonas de playas y bahías". While appearing comprehensive Regulation 12771/1975 is indeed limited to a certain type of aquaculture (marine shrimp farming) and focused on a specific question (access to the public land via the system of concessions). Consequently an Ecuadorian aquaculturist who would like to know the general legal principles regulating his activity cannot rely solely on his knowledge of Regulation 12771/1975 but will then have to scrutinize the other relevant legal instruments.
In fact, it appears that most of the countries which have adopted a specific act or regulation dealing with aquaculture did so in order to respond to a precise need. In Singapore and in Hong Kong, taking into consideration their very limited size, ^1^/the crucial question was to regulate the access to water and land in order to avoid possible conflicts. In Ecuador the new legislation was a response to the uncertainty regarding the legal status of the coastal areas (there seemed to be a contradiction between the Maritime Police Code and the newly adopted Fisheries Act of 1974) and to stop illegal settlements on those zones ^2^/.
^1^/ In Hong Kong, the Marine Fish Culture Ordinance enacted in 1980 designated 26 marine culture zones within which all marine culture activities could be undertaken. Since 1983 some 50 offshore farms have been relocated into these areas.
^2^/ The introduction to the Decree No. 482 amending the Maritime Police Code gives a good account of the reasons underlying the new Regulation 12771, "Considered that hatcheries or conservation or fattening reservoirs of bioaquatic species have been established occupying beach and bay areas in clear ignorance of pertinent legal dispositions and that it is necessary to normalize this situation and to harmonize the dispositions of the Maritime Police Code with those of the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Law of 12 February 1974, published in the Registro Oficial No. 497, of the same date; that it is the task of the State to sustain the development of the country's fisheries activities by encouraging cultivation and breeding of bioaquatic species, utilizing its wealth and natural resources, establishing tax systems and special development measures in favour of the development of this sector of fisheries; that the rights established generally by the Maritime Police Code
for occupation of beach and bay areas are too onerous for the concessionaries concerned in consideration of the space needed for breeding and cultivation of bioaquatic species becoming thus too elevated" (unofficial translation).
Nevertheless, and however partial it may be, it is interesting to observe that a certain number of countries, and in particular developing states, gave consideration to aquaculture by the adoption of a special legal instrument on it.
1.1.3 Countries with an enabling law
(a) Basic laws including some provisions on aquaculture
(b) Countries with an enabling clause on aquaculture
This is certainly the category which includes most of the countries reviewed and in particular most of the developing countries. The title "countries with an enabling law" intends to cover all the countries which have a basic law, usually the Fisheries Act, for (a) setting up some principles on aquaculture, or (b) investing the legitimate authority with the power to regulate aquaculture. In both cases the basic legal instrument was meant to give a first input to a subsequent law, which, in general, was never elaborated. The major consequences of this lack of follow up are either the impracticability, and therefore the uselessness of the provisions, or, in the worst cases, the supervention with respect to aquaculture, of ambiguities and contradictions between the newly adopted basic law and the existing legal framework.
(a) Basic laws including some provisions on aquaculture
A certain number of developing countries fit into this category. Usually the presence of aquaculture takes the form of a section or a section in the basic Fisheries Act ^1^/.
^1^/ In this respect we can give the examples of Portugal, section III of the Decree-Law No. 278-87 of 7 July 1987 fixing a "quadro legal regulamentado do exercicio de pesca e dos cultivos marinhos em águas sob soberania e jurisdicao portuguesas". Mauritania, Title IV of the Ordonnance No. 88/144/PCMSN portant Code des Pêches Maritimes. Congo section VII of the Law No. 015/88 of 17 September 1988 réglementant la pêche maritime en République Populaire du Congo. Peru, Title III of the Ley General de Pesquería, Ley No. 24790 of 5 January 1988. In Colombia the situation is a bit different. In 1974, the Colombian Government adopted a quite innovative National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Protection of the Environment. The Code is divided in two books. The first one concerns the environment. The second book is devoted to the property, the use and the environmental importance of renewable natural resources and it therefore includes aquatic resources. Part X of the
Code (Arts. 266 to 288) defines the different activities of the fisheries and aquaculture.
Further it is certainly not pure coincidence that most of the Fisheries Acts which include special legal provisions on aquaculture are fairly recent. It seems that States now feel obliged to take into account aquaculture from a legal point of view without necessarily seeing any difference between culture and capture fisheries ^2^/.
^2^/ However, the trend is not uniform. A country like Senegal which very recently enacted a whole new law on marine fisheries (Loi No. 87-27 of 18 August 1987, portant Code de la Pêche Maritime and five implementing decrees) makes no mention at all of marine culture. A similar situation exists in Mauritania where in spite of an enabling clause of the Maritime Police Code, the new implementing regulation contains no provision on marine culture or any other form of aquaculture.
Notwithstanding this formal common pattern the situation is quite different from country to country. In Peru, the General Fisheries Law (No. 24700 of 5 January 1988) includes a whole title containing six articles directed to aquaculture. The law defines the activity of aquaculture and the different forms it can take. As we will see later in this study, the Peruvian Law is one of the few to have defined aquaculture according to the literal meaning of the word. Further to those definitions the title on aquaculture includes a policy article (Art. 25) and an article setting up the basic legal framework in order to have access to water and/or to land. According to Article 26 of the Law, the concession is necessary if it implies the use of public land or water. When the activity takes place on a private property the sole administrative authorization is sufficient. We can therefore say that the Peruvian Fisheries Act provides the basic legal framework for aquaculture activities. In
Portugal the Decree-Law 278/87 regulating fishing and mariculture in waters under Portuguese jurisdiction establishes a legal regime for the setting up of a mariculture farm (authorization and permit) and for the use of public water and land (concession and permit) ^1^/.
^1^/ Decreto-Ley No. 278-87 que fixa o quadro legal reglamentador do exercicio da pesca e das cultivas marinas em aguas sob soberanias e jurisdicao portuguesas, Title III, Arts. 11 and 12. For its part the new Federal Fisheries Law of Mexico of 27 November 1986 contains a section XI dealing specifically with aquaculture in all its various forms.
On a slightly less elaborate level we can give the example of the Congo. Here section VII of the Marine Fisheries Law of 1988 provides very limited requirements with respect to aquaculture. The law restricts itself to an ambiguous definition of aquaculture ^2^/; it further states that any aquaculture activity has to be authorized by the Minister of Fisheries and that a concession from the administration in charge of the area must be obtained ^3^/. Two articles on the possible taxation of aquaculture farms and giving the power to the Minister to issue regulations on the conditions of aquaculture activity complete this section ^4^/. The section on aquaculture in the Congolese Fisheries Law in fact raises more questions than it solves. For one thing it is not very clear if the provisions it contains are directed only to mariculture or to any form of aquaculture, including freshwater aquaculture.
^2^/ Loi No. 015/88 réglementant la Pèche Maritime en République Populaire du Congo, of 17 September 1988, Art. 47.
^3^/ Ibid., Art. 48. Another example of an insufficient consideration given to aquaculture is provided by Honduras. According to the authors of a report on the state of aquaculture in the country, " 139. En Honduras no hay disposiciones especificas de tipo legal que regulan la acuicultura. La Ley de Pesca contiene un capitulo muy resumido, que establece normas para el fomento y expansión de la acuicultura, sin hacer distinciones sobre la actividad y menos regular los procedimientos para aprovechamiento, comercialización, etc. Por el momento, el Estado aplica por analogía la Ley de Pesca y otras afines para normar la actividad acuícola." in Diagnostico sobre el Estado de la Planificación Acuícola en Honduras, by Noemí Luna and Rosa Duarte, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Diciembre de 1988.
^4^/ Ibid., Arts. 49 and 50.
On the one hand the Fisheries Act intends to regulate fishing activities in the marine waters ^1^/. On the other hand Article 50, giving to the Minister the power to regulate aquaculture, does not seem to restrict itself to marine culture ^2^/.
^1^/ Ibid., Art. 1 "La présente loi a pour objet d'organiser, de protéger et de contrôler l'exploitation des ressources naturelles vivantes se trouvant dans les eaux marines sous jurisdiction Congolaise".
^2^/ Art. 50 "Des arrêtées du Ministre charge de la pêche maritime détermineront les conditions d'exercice de l'activité aquacole en République Populaire du Congo". Another ambiguity is raised by the fact that Art. 48 of the Fisheries Act speaks of the "Ministère charge de la pêche" whereas Art. 50 evokes the "Ministère charge de la pêche maritime". See also the Mauritanian Marine Police Code, Art. 34, where there is a similar uncertainty.
In fact the Congo can be placed in the second ca