<title>A field guide for project design and implementation - Women in community forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has a long standing interest in forestry as a resource for rural development. Within the last decade, industrial exploitation and population pressure have led to the degradation of large areas of forest land. Rural peoples who rely on these forests and their outputs have been put at risk. In 1977, FAO started a special action programme, Forestry for Local Community Development, that sought to address the needs of rural people. The programme's philosophy was to support rural people who could benefit from forestry related activities in their efforts to improve their well-being. Conceptually, policy for forestry was about, for and by the people.^1
Rural women are major caretakers and users of forests. Each day they walk long distances to gather fodder and fuelwood. They seek out fruits, nuts and small creatures for food for their families. They use bark, roots and herbs for medicines. Trees provide shade, beauty and environmental protection for their homes. Thus, trees and forests play a major role in their daily lives. Unfortunately, most forestry programmes are organized by men who may not understand women's relationship to forests. Forestry has typically been a man's profession and it is hard for many foresters to perceive of women as being competent in this field. Moreover women's needs regarding the forest often differ from those of men.
Rural women confront obstacles that limit their ability to participate in community development programmes. They frequently lack the self-confidence or a forum in which to speak up publicly for themselves and for their families. They often lack access to child care, credit, education and land tenure, which limits them more than it limits the men of their own families. These obstacles prevent them from being heard and from achieving a more powerful role in accessing and making decisions about tree and forest resource management.
In 1986 the FAO Community Forestry Unit developed a publication for policy makers, Restoring the balance: women and forest resources, that identifies issues and points out the importance of considering gender when designing community forestry programmes.^2 This field guide translates Restoring the balance into a manual for those who design and implement forestry projects. It focuses on practical ways to include women in project design and implementation and is meant to be a tool to facilitate discussion, offer options and promote action on behalf of women and forestry. It has been produced by the Community Forestry Programme as part of the FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This field guide was written by Mary Rojas, Associate Director of International Programmes at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA. It is one of a series of studies and publications by the FAO Community Forestry Programme, with support from the FAO/SIDA Forests, Trees and People Programme, a trust fund programme coordinated within FAO by Marilyn W. Hoskins, Community Forestry Officer. Funding for publishing was also provided by the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD).
<section>3</section>
What is community forestry and why include women?
Ideally, community forestry activities are those that:
- recognize the intimate relationship of women, men and the trees that surround them;
- build upon local knowledge of women and men about management and uses of forest resources;
- take into consideration the forest and tree resource needs of the various community members and focus on increasing the benefits from forests for rural women and men, especially the poor;
- involve rural women and men in project identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
Community forestry has challenged foresters, forest services and forestry schools to re-think their roles and broaden their concept of forestry to include goals relating to trees as a resource to satisfy local needs. For many foresters this means a new perspective; one that enables them to design forestry programmes that are more relevant to their countries' overall development priorities.
Throughout community forestry, there are two themes:
- community forestry uses a systems approach and draws on many fields such as anthropology, agriculture, nutrition and law;
- community forestry focuses on the interaction of people with trees and forests.
The long walk home - gathering fuelwood in Nepal
The links between trees and economic, cultural and environmental factors of people's lives are seen in three crucial areas:
- Trees have an impact on rural women and men by providing products which satisfy basic needs of the family;
- Trees affect the economic lives of rural peoples by providing income and jobs;
- Trees have an important role in protecting and enriching the environment.
The ways trees perform these three functions for people may be different, depending on the person's socio-economic status, age and socio-cultural environment. Additionally there are some differences which are largely gender specific.
For example, in some cultures certain tree species are considered men's trees; others are considered women's. Women and men often have different views of the importance of various forest resources. A woman's first concern may be to find enough tree and forest products to satisfy the immediate family needs. Men's first concern may be for forest products that are primarily sources of cash.
Although many women are also interested in cash, in some areas they may not be allowed to participate in forest based income generating activities. In fact, even where both men and women may earn money from forest products, those sold by men and women often differ. But there is no universal generalization and information cannot be transferred from one area to another even about which gender will harvest or sell a specific product.
Watering seedlings in a Thai nursery
In Indonesia, for example, rattan is harvested in certain areas by women alone, in some areas by men alone and in still other areas by men and women together. A rattan project in any area would need to confirm the gender of their specific client. Although women generally collect domestic fuelwood, in some areas men are involved in this task. Studies show, however, that men generally have a less active role in collecting wild foods (other than hunting wild animals) and use tertiary tree products somewhat less than women. The point is that, in light of important differences in men's and women's use of forest resources and the general lack of project input on the part of women, it is essential that women's needs be specifically examined.
Jamaican women have persuaded men to support reforestation
Women's needs require special consideration:
- because women are active users and managers of forest and tree resources, but as forestry is considered a man's field, women's roles are often invisible to project designers and to policy makers;
- because women and men often have differing uses for forest resources, which influence their motives for participating in various forestry activities;
- because women may have special cultural constraints in regard to land and natural resources (beyond those that men have), which may hamper their ability to participate in decision making and project activities;
- because of simple justice and equity.
This document assumes that the reader is familiar with data gathering tools and project design and does not pretend to be a guide to rapid appraisal or project formulation. Instead it gives ideas on how those designing and implementing community forestry projects can enhance their work by more actively considering women.
If community forestry activities and programmes are to be successful they have to be designed in a manner sensitive to the range of needs of women in mind. In order to ensure that projects achieve their immediate purposes and their broader socio-economic goals, and in order to maximize the economic returns on project investment, those who design and implement projects will need to:
- see women;
- ask women the right questions;
- implement a process to include women.
<section>4</section>
Seeing women...
Seeing women through secondary sources
Seeing women through community observation
Seeing women in local systems
Seeing women through other disciplines
Women have been called "invisible labourers". Their work is often not counted in formal labour statistics because:
- women's work is often home-based or within the "informal sector", such as street vending;
- both women and men may deny that women "work" in some regions, due to custom;
- much work is simply assumed to be done by men, such as farming and forestry, and women's participation is overlooked.
Secondary sources, community observations, learning about local household systems and using other disciplines besides forestry can all help make women visible.
Seeing women through secondary sources
As much as possible, consult secondary data which show seasonal labour, resource availability and support services for women and men.
Many times, however, this information will not be available at all and, if it is, it is not disaggregated by gender. Recognition of the importance of this data is a first step toward making it available and a first step in making women, their work and needs, more visible.
Hut construction in Senegal - making use of natural materials
Seeing women through community observation
Driving, walking, or riding through an area in a leisurely manner with the outline of a project in mind and some pertinent questions to consider can yield a great deal of information.
Simply looking and knowing what to look for can give a project design team a new view of women's roles within the community.
THE TOWN OR VILLAGE
The first questions are: Who are the people? Who looks prosperous and who less prosperous? What are women, men and children doing? Also, what institutions such as schools, religious buildings, health facilities and markets - are visible? Who works in these institutions - men or women? - and who uses them?
ALONG BACK ROADS
The project planner should observe: Who are the people? Who are in the fields? What are the women doing? What natural resources are visible? What trees, bushes, plants and flowers? And which of them seem to be close to the homestead?
THE TREES
If trees are in fields or around homes, which trees are they and what are their functions? Were they planted, protected or just left there? If they were planted, were they planted by seed, cutting, transplanted from elsewhere or seedlings raised or purchased from a nursery?
Who in the family selected the trees, who planted them and who has the right to fruit, leaves, branches? Who can cut the trees down? Who in the family has control over land use decisions?
Seeing women in local systems
In designing a community forestry activity, the local systems and the responsibilities and benefits for women and men within those systems will need to be understood. Only then can one be aware of motives for and constraints to participation by different community members.
Insights can also be gained regarding the possible effects of participation.
A rural family lives within a system composed of four basic parts:
- the household and its individual members
- the livestock and in some cases wildlife;
- the crops; and
- the natural vegetation including trees and forests.
These parts interact with one another and with the community at large. Asking certain questions can help clarify each part and its relationship to women and trees.
THE HOUSEHOLD
The planner needs to know who makes up the household: husband, wife and children? Husband, wives, grandparents and children? A woman and her child?
In many regions, the extended family makes a definition of "household" difficult. In one area of Africa, the definition became "those people who eat from the same pot" or "use the same cooking fire". Whatever the definition, it should be used consistently by planners.
Female heads of household need to be counted. However, in many parts of the world it is a matter of honour that a man be counted as head of household even though he may be absent because of death, divorce, migration, or abandonment. Different forms of living arrangements, monogamy, polyandry, consensual unions and polygamy, have different implications for different family members depending on age and gender.
The planner needs to know who makes up the household
A first wife may have privileges of land tenure that the third wife does not have. An older woman often has more freedom and decision making power than does a woman of childbearing age. A man may own a tree, but the women may control its leaves or fruit.
Further questions: what household tasks are performed - for example, provision of water and fuelwood, cooking, child and health care - and by which members? Are the right persons being asked for information?
Men, perceived as heads of house hold, are often interviewed for projects. In Haiti, many men identified no household problem in obtaining water or fodder. Only by interviewing their wives was it learned the women walked five kilometres in search of both. In the hill areas of Nepal, men are responsible for house and furniture construction that depend on one species of tree. But women collecting fuelwood for cook stoves and fires depend on two other species.^3
Rural women are mainly responsible for health care and child care and may depend, during dry seasons or periods of food scarcity, on food found in forests or bush, or on fallow land.
THE LIVESTOCK AND WILDLIFE
Key questions here are: What livestock are kept and for what are they used? Are they large or small animals? And why are they kept: for milk, eggs, dung, religious reasons, status, bride wealth? Are wild animals used?
Taboos surrounding the use of animals and animal products are frequent. In many areas, very little meat is eaten, especially by women, and parts of the animal, even a chicken or fish, is relegated by gender, age and status. Among the Shona in Zimbabwe, for example, cattle are used for manure, for ploughing, to enhance male status and as payment to a bride's father. Seldom are cattle used for beef.^4
In parts of Sudan, meat comes chiefly from wild game, antelope, elephant, buffalo, lizards, rabbit and warthogs. Traps, spears, arrows and nets all are made of tree products m one way or another.^5
Who in the household has responsibility for livestock?
In parts of West Africa, farmers report earning more family income from hunting wild rodents and small game that depend on the forests than from crops. In Sierra Leone, women who fish remark that there are fewer fish as tree cover is removed and streams and ponds become silted.
It is important to discover who in the household has responsibility for the livestock. Do women and men have control over different animals? Who milks them and collects fodder and dung? Who builds pens and what type of material do they use? Who benefits from the livestock and in what way? If women are in charge, does the fodder need to be available close to the household compound? Who hunts, processes and benefits from large game, small animals, insects and fish?
Women frequently care for small livestock - calves, chickens, rabbits - while men care for large animals. One reason is that women may manage animals that stay close to home while men may be more mobile, going greater distances with the herds for fodder and water.
A papaya tree in Indonesia
When projects suggest stall feeding instead of free ranging animals in order to protect the environment, someone must add fodder and water collecting as well as stall cleaning to their daily tasks. In many cases, cattle herding is the work of men or boys but these new chores are in the woman's domain and must be added other daily chores.
Often in fishing communities men do marine fishing although women may fish in streams and women smoke fish for sale.
THE CROPS
Observe: What crops, both annual and perennial, are raised and how are they used? Which are for sale and which are for home use? How are trees used to manage soil, water, or wind in support of annual crop production? When trees are introduced as crops whose land will be used? Will it change food or income patterns?
In many rural areas of the world, households have fruit trees - banana, mango, coconut, jackfruit, breadfruit, papaya, guava, cashew, apples, berries - near the homestead and accessible to the woman.
Who in the household works with the crops? Who plants, who cooks and who markets? Do men and women work with different crops?
Specific crops are often closely related to gender. In many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, women are responsible for certain crops and have their own fields. Often these are subsistence crops, such as cassava, millet, vegetables. Men are more involved with cash crops, rice, coffee and tea.
However, at times both grow subsistence crops: in parts of Nigeria, for example, women grow cassava and men concentrate on yams. If tree growing is introduced, how will land and labour distribution be affected?
Even when crops are grown by women and men together, the tasks associated with agriculture may be gender-specific. In Sri Lanka, both men and women are active in agriculture. Men, however, are primarily responsible for land preparation and chemical application, whereas women dominate in other tasks - seeding, transplanting, weeding, harvesting and processing.
When a tree plantation is introduced, therefore, women may have responsibility for carrying water. When agroforestry is introduced, women may need to spend extra time weeding around the trees.^6
In one region of Colombia, women have few tasks in the field. However, decisions on what to grow are often shared by men and women. This is because the type of bean grown for export does not have the flavour or cooking characteristics demanded by the farm woman, who is responsible for feeding hired agricultural labour: if the food is not good, the labour does not come and the crops are not harvested.^7
Many decisions on harvesting or selling family or communal trees are discussed at home although the men may present the decision in public meetings. In a case study in Peru women complained that a meeting about selling community owned trees was held with the men without prior information and warning. Women felt it unfair that they were unable to take part in the decision making process by discussing the issues with their husbands. This type of women's informal participation in decision making is apt to be overlooked by outsiders.^8
NATURAL VEGETATION AND TREES
Natural vegetation and trees
Questions here are: What areas of natural vegetation are available and how are they used? Is there communal land and what are the rules on its use? Is there any forest reserve land and who has access to which products from this land? Are there products that could benefit rural families if made available?
Could these areas be managed to provide more benefits, especially to the poor, without disadvantaging others? Who in the household collects and uses these products?
Landless and land poor families everywhere take advantage of forest and tree resources when they are available. A study shows that farm families in Northeast Thailand obtain 60% of their food from nearby forests.^9 In India, landless women often depend on government forests for food, fuel and fodder for family use and for forest products they sell.
For example, many women in Madhya Pradesh generate income only through forest harvesting of tendu leaves, which are used in the production of low cost cigarettes called bidi. Previously, middlemen bought permits to harvest these leaves, and harvesting was done largely by women, who earned very little.
A typical home garden in Southeast Asia
In 1988 the Forestry Department of Madhya Pradesh took control of tendu harvesting and doubled the price paid for harvesting the leaves. The Department also introduced quality controls that rejected broken leaves. The experiment paid off: thanks to the increase in leaf quality, bidi manufacturers are willing to pay a prime price, which has doubled the income of the women harvesters and made the Department an unexpected profit.
Further questions: What trees are found on the farm and in household areas, who has the rights to them and who actually uses them?
Are they used for fodder, medicines, fuelwood, food or soil, water or wind management.? Are they for household use or income-generation? Are they used to provide shelter for animals, as building materials or to make household utensils?
A study in a rural area of Java - where families have no access to forests showed 60% of the family food comes from home gardens (illustrated above) in which trees play an integral role.10
Seeing women through other disciplines
Those who design forestry projects are accustomed to working within technical disciplines: for example, forestry, agronomy and animal science. Many times these disciplines focus on a product, such as timber or a specific crop, while the interaction of the product and the rural people - particularly women - who use it is given only secondary importance.
By involving other disciplines that focus on this interaction, women can be made more visible in the process of project design.
Women must be consulted about forestry projects
ANTHROPOLOGY/SOCIOLOGY
In Bangladesh, the economic and technical subtleties of a community forestry project were designed by an economist and a forester. The sociological issues were dealt with in a cursory fashion, through a household survey done by male interviewers with male heads of households. In their report. the project designers noted that "the involvement of women in forestry is very limited".
In fact, unknown to the project designers, women's involvement in forestry was substantial. So many problems resulted from this misunderstanding that the project's mid-term evaluation team included an anthropologist to discover why women's participation in forestry activities had not been forthcoming. The evaluation team's report concluded that women should have been consulted during the project design phase and recommended a series of immediate practical steps to correct this "oversight".^11
NUTRITION
Designers of forestry projects should confer with women in particular so that their perception of the food, fuel and fodder trees they depend upon can be used in selecting species for tree nurseries.
The project should also identify the time of year when local food supplies are most in deficit, and conduct a survey of local people's preference for food-bearing trees that produce during that season. This approach could help women improve the resource base from which they feed their families.^12
EDUCATION
In Nepal, staff of a large reforestation project realized that women needed to be trained as foresters and extension agents in order to provide information to other rural women who were the primary users of the forests. Women had never been trained in forestry before and only 5% of the women in Nepal are literate.
Nevertheless, through careful planning by educators and social scientists, training facilities were revamped to accommodate women, taking into consideration both the physical facilities and the cultural implications of including female trainees.^13
LAW
Legal studies can make visible gender differences in rights to use land and trees, and can highlight the potential impact of proposed legal changes on different groups. For instance, the Luo women in Kenya lost many of their traditional rights to land when statutory law gave title only to male heads of households. Nevertheless, they retained exclusive rights to the nuts and fruits of trees which they traditionally used, although not to the land on which the trees grew.^14
<section>5</section>
[Asking women the right questions]
What do women already know about trees, their products and management?
What problems are women experiencing in relation to tree resources?
What constraints do women face in addressing tree and forestry problems?
How can we find out what women know?
How can women organize themselves?
[Once women and their roles, and uses of trees, are made visible, there remain some specific questions to which only local women can give the answers:]
[- What do women already know about trees, their products and management?
- What problems are women experiencing in relation to trees resources?
- What constraints do women have in addressing these problems and how can the project help women overcome these constraints?
- How can we find out what women know?
- How can women organize themselves?]
[What do women already know about trees, their products and management?]
[Women can explain the uses of trees and the rationale behind traditional tree management. This local knowledge is essential for designing new activities.]
[In Sierra Leone, women knew 31 uses of trees on fallow land and in forests and knew what forest products would be produced in a particular fallow year men identified only eight different uses.]15 [In Zambia, it was noted that women made oil from a local tree that foresters had never considered putting in a nursery. In Thailand, women select different species of wood for cooking different items, according to their different heating qualities. One type of wood with specific burning qualities is considered essential by these women for processing good quality silk.]16[ In Cameroon, women use branches from trees that regenerate to build animal corrals and fences. When these poles grow they form semi-permanent "living fences" that are regularly pollarded, the branches being used for building other fences, house construction or repair, basketry and fuelwood.]
[Where women are heads of households - as here in the Andes - they must take on men's jobs as well as their own]
[What problems are women experiencing in relation to tree resources?]
[When scarcity is felt, women can often describe their problems, make proposals to address these problems and act upon them, once constraints are removed.]
[In Burkina Faso, women spoke out against monoculture forestry plantation projects. Although such plantations provided a source of wood for urban markets, the women said, they also removed access to "useless bush" for neighbouring families and thus removed important sources of fuelwood, food and plant material. The women asked for more multi-purpose trees as well as guaranteed access for local residents.]
[In many rural areas, older women complain that they can no longer prepare medicines because medicinal trees that were formerly available have been removed. They can help identify and reintroduce these trees.]
[In India, halewood used by the lacquer industry is becoming increasingly scarce, mainly because it is being indiscriminately cut for fuelwood. The forest service has suggested the use of another species, but female artisans have found it does not produce as fine a product. They have suggested an alternative solution: protect the valued species when permits to cut fuelwood are given out.]17
[Finally, in Sierra Leone, women speak of problems caused by heavy cutting of trees: the loss of predators' high forest habitat has led to an increase in the number of grain eating rodents, while fishing yields are down due to increased silting of waterways. The women have called for the introduction of agroforestry and rat control, rather than the woodlots proposed by project designers.]18
[What constraints do women face in addressing tree and forestry problems?]
[A number of constraints are location specific but women can describe them if asked. Some common constraints are: time, mobility, customs, lack of access to land and lack of organization.]
[Men clear the land, turn the soil - women do most of the rest]
[TIME]
[Being responsible for various tasks both within and outside the home, women are forced to work a "double day".]
[Projects must be careful that they do not add unduly to women's workload. Some forestry projects add to women's work simply because watering and weeding are traditionally women's tasks. Where women are busy, men may be able to plant and tend trees that women have helped select, and will use and help manage.]
[In Guinea, women said they wanted projects to be joint efforts, involving both men and women. They felt that men had more time to contribute and that men would appreciate women's input more if it was an all-community effort.]
[Better organization can also reduce women's workloads. In Senegal, women found that by organizing they were able to share tasks and find time to plant a woodlot. Unesco has assisted by introducing donkey carts and grain mills.]
[MOBILITY]
[Women in many societies have limited mobility. Most activities must be located near the household so that women can carry out their household activities. Customs also limit women's mobility: it is important to understand these customs fully so that modifications can be made if necessary.]
[Women who go for training or work away from home must often travel in pairs or in a group in order to gain family or community approval. In Nepal, the election of women to serve on regional resource committees provided the legitimacy needed for them to travel.]
[In Sudan, a project overcame customs that secluded women by using women extensionists and concentrating initially on activities that could be done inside the family compound. In this way, women were able to produce seedlings in backyard nurseries and eventually joined in planting woodlots.]19
[CUSTOMS]
[Customs regarding the use of trees are very location-specific. In an area of Kenya where trees denote land ownership, women were forbidden to plant or cut trees because land belonged only to men. A fuelwood project overcame this obstacle by introducing shrubs and exotic trees not traditionally identified as denoting land ownership. Thus, women were free to plant and cut these species. A second approach was to present the issue through amusing plays that provoked village discussions between men and women on how to solve the fuelwood problem.]
[LAND]
[Land use and tenure reflect status, inheritance patterns, family and community structure, and national policy. Women may prize land close to home, but it may be difficult for them to obtain. They may have only customary rights to land, or they may be given land use only for dry season gardens. Where men have migrated, women may be left with land to manage but no rights over changing land use. If they have no assured land tenure they may not be interested in planting.]
[Projects must be careful to guard against land distribution schemes which offer no assurance of land use to women or take away their traditional access to land. Some projects help women organize groups in order to negotiate for land over which the group will have long-term use rights.]
[INFORMATION, TRAINING, EDUCATION]
[Figure]
[Information, training and education must be made available to women at convenient times.]
[Women may not be able to attend meetings during the day. Extension agents must therefore hold sessions when women are free, perhaps after the evening meal. It is also essential that the information given is appropriate to the real conditions they face. Women can often identify what they want to learn and how.]
[In southern Burkina Faso, for instance, women were asked at a formal meeting how they wished to be involved in the management of a previously closed forest reserve. When they did not answer, they were chided and told if they did not speak up they would lose access to all potential forest products. At this point one woman rose and said, "We are not familiar with what the forest currently contains. We do not know what your project has to offer. We do not know the costs or the benefits of participation. Once we know these things, we tell you what we wish to do."]
[Extension advice for Zambian women]
[In the informal discussions that followed. the women asked to go into the reserve accompanied by the project staff to identify forest products available for collecting or harvesting. They asked if the project could provide them with market information on medical plants, fruits and nuts, and if they could learn about machines for extracting honey.]
[In India, a project recommended that women adopt a particular silkworm that produces a large quantity of silk. However, the women objected, saying 