<title>Appropriate Food Packaging</title>
by Peter Fellows and Barrie Axtell
Published by Transfer of Technology for Development-Amsterdam
for International Labour Office - Geneva
This publication is published by:
Tool Publications
Sarphatistraat 650
1018 AV Amsterdam
The Netherlands
for
International Labour Office
Entrepreneurship and Management Development Branch
FIT Project
CH-1211 Geneva22
Switzerland
Copyright (C)1993 International Labour
Organization
ISBN 90 70857 28 6
First impression 1993
The designations employed in ILO publications, which are in conformity with United Nations practice, and the presentation of material therein do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the International Labour Office concerning the legal status of any country, area or territory or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers. The responsibility for opinions expressed in signed articles, studies and other contributions rests solely with their authors, and publication does not constitute an endorsement by the International Labour Office of the opinions expressed in them. Reference to names of firms and commercial products and processes does not imply their endorsement by the International Labour Office, and any failure to mention a particular firm, commercial product or process is not a sign of disapproval.
This publication was made possible with the financial contribution of the Ministry for Development Co-operation of the Netherlands. Responsibility for the contents and for the opinions expressed rests solely with the author(s); publication does not constitute an endorsement by the Ministry for Development Co-operation of the Netherlands.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form, by punt, photography, microfilm, or any other means without written permission from the publisher.
While every care has been taken to ensure the accuracy of the information given in this publication, neither the publisher nor the author(s) can be held responsible for any damage resulting from the application of the described methods. Any liability in this respect is excluded.
<section>Preface</section>
Over the years both the ILO and TOOL Question/Answer Service received signals indicating that there is a considerable demand for information on food packaging materials and the application of packaging methods in developing countries. Plans to produce a publication on this subject were made within the joint ILO and TOOL project Farm Implements and Tools.
An inventory of available documentation showed that information on packaging materials and methods can be found in several publications on processing one particular kind of food (fish, fruit, etc.) or in publications on a particular packaging method (canning). A disadvantage of these publications is that they do not offer an overview of alternatives in packaging and packaging methods. Often economic aspects are omitted, although the costs of packaging materials are a major point of concern in developing countries.
This publication on packaging materials for food products should offer an inventory of packaging materials and cost effective methods which can be applied on a small scale in developing countries. The information is primarily aimed at entrepreneurs in small-scale food processing industries in developing countries and employees of development organizations supporting these entrepreneurs.
Maurice Allal, ILO
Albert Jan van Weij, TOOL
About the authors
Dr Peter Fellows is a food technologist with 15 years' experience in small-scale food processing in Africa and Asia. He is currently a Senior Technical Manager with the development agency Intermediate Technology in the United Kingdom. Previously, he was a Senior Lecturer at Oxford Polytechnic and he has worked in the United Kingdom's food industry. He obtained his Doctorate from Reading University after conducting research into the symbiotic growth of edible yeasts on fruit processing wastes. His specialisms include fruit and vegetable processing, small food enterprise development and food packaging.
Barrie Axtell worked in the United Kingdom's food industry for over ten years and then joined the British Overseas Development Programme. He then spent four years in the Eastern Caribbean as an adviser in food processing followed by three years in Guatemala teaching and developing small scale drying systems. In 1981, he joined Intermediate Technology to start its agroprocessing programme and travelled extensively to developing projects in Asia and Latin America His particular areas of interest are drying, packaging and fruit processing. After ten years as Senior Technical Manager with ITDG he became a private consultant providing technical consultancy inputs to agencies such as FAO, IL0, UNIFEM and ITDG.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
The authors greatly acknowledge the help and assistance given by Clare Sheffield for the preparation of the manuscript, Matthew Whitton for the illustrations, Jean Long for the photography, Gordon Keddie for his constructive editorial comment, and PRODEC for their co-operation in allowing us to use their illustrations from their publication: Handbook on the Procurement of Packaging by Tuula Ramsland.
We would also like to thank the following companies for supplying information about their products: MAISA, Mar del Plata, Argentina; Botswana Technology Centre, Gaborone, Botswana; FEFCO, Paris, France; PRODEC, Helsinki, Finland; and (all from the United Kingdom) AID &Packaging Services (UK) Ltd., Worcester, Atwell Self-Adhesive Labellers, South Godstone; C.R. Clarke & Company (UK) Ltd., Ammanford; CMB Packaging Technology plc, Wantage; Chadwicks Ltd., Bury; Erapa (UK) Ltd., Luton, ICI Plastics Division, Welwyn Garden City; Limpet Tapes, Huntingdon; MARIA Ltd., Bradford; Metal Closures Ltd., West Bromwich; Perafrap Ltd., High Wycombe; Thames Packaging Ltd., London; and Thomas Hunter Ltd., Rugby.
<section>1 Food and packaging</section>
<section>1.1 The importance of food processing</section>
Food has been processed and packaged since the earliest days of man's history on earth. Meat and fish were salted, smoked and dried. Herbs were dried and stored for use as medicines. Alcoholic beverages were made from fruits and cereals. In the early days of traditional food processing the main aim was preservation to maintain a supply of wholesome, nutritious food during the year and in particular to preserve it for hungry periods, for example when hunting was poor. Food was seldom sold but traded and bartered.
While food processing still has the main objective of providing a safe nutritious diet in order to maintain health other aspects, particularly the generation of wealth for the producer and seller, have become increasingly important.
With the change from traditional to industrial food processing there has also been a change in the types of product processed. Traditional processors worked with foods that grew locally and the methods they developed were in harmony with the climate in which they lived. Only simple packaging using leaves, animal skins and pottery was possible and necessary to protect the food for its planned storage life. Nowadays non-traditional crops are grown all over the world. For example, the potato which originated in Peru, rice which came from Asia, and numerous fruits and vegetables are now grown away from their area of origin This together with consumer demand influenced by radio, advertising and television has lead to a demand for non-traditional foods that are not appropriate to the local environment. They need special processing and packaging to protect them for their required storage life.
While most people in the world still rely on traditional foods for their basic diet those in industrialized centres tend more and more to purchase processed and packaged foodstuffs for convenience. The increasing number of women who now work away from home adds additional
pressure for such changes. Even people with a heavily traditional diet are demanding external products either as occasional treats, such as gassy drinks or basic commodities such as white sugar and flour.
To meet these demands the industrial food processing sector has emerged. Food and crop processing is generally considered to be the largest industry in most countries. Studies in several developing countries for example have shown that up to 25% of the urban population can be involved in making or selling ready-to-eat meals. While in developed countries food processing is almost totally carried out in large, automated factories small-scale food processing still remains a vitally important economic activity in the developing world. The small-scale food processing sector:
- is a major source of employment,
- adds value to crops by processing,
- is a major source of food in the diet,
- in some cases, by export, earns valuable foreign exchange,
- provides opportunities for import substitution,
- benefits a large number of poor people, such as farmers, packaging suppliers and vendors.
The small-scale food processing sector is however under increasing threat and competition from large manufacturers who, through economies of scale and better presentation and marketing, can put them out of business. The powerful large-scale food sector is also often able to influence government and international policies and laws and so prevent the small manufacturer from entering production or selling in a particular market.
Much of the customer appeal of foods produced in large factories in reality lies less with the food itself than with the appearance, presentation and advertising used to sell it. Good packaging lies at the very heart of presentation and thus customer appeal. It is an area of vital importance for small and medium food manufacturers if they are going to continue to compete and expand.
<section>1.2 What is good packaging?</section>
Good packaging serves two purposes are essentially technical and presentational.
Technical changes in packaging aim to extend the shelf-life of the product by better protecting the food from all the hazards it will meet in storage, distribution and use. Changing from one type of plastic bag to another for example may mean that less moisture from the atmosphere is absorbed into the food so extending the shelf-life. Making the bag re-closable in addition would mean that the customer could keep the food in good condition for forger in the home. If shelf-life is extended then it may be possible to market the product over a bigger area so increasing sales
Presentational aspects of packaging do not actually do anything to make the food keep longer or in better condition. Such packaging increases sales by creating a brand image that the buyer instantly recognises. It also aims to appeal to the customer in terms of shape, size, colour, convenience, etc.
The ultimate aim of good packaging is increased sales against any competition and thus improved income for the producer. This cannot be achieved without a cost. It is not only the direct cost of the packaging material that needs to be considered but other changes such as different processing systems, purchase of fillers, staff training, etc.
The small and medium-scale food manufacturer considering improvements to their existing packaging system face difficult decisions that will need careful thought and investigation. One of the central problems is the impossibility of really knowing if the proposed changes will indeed result in increased sales that will have to be made to meet the costs involved. In addition, for most small producers, the choice is really not theirs but dictated by what kinds of packaging are locally available. In most cases it will not be possible to select the best type of package but only select the best of available alternatives.
Some of the positive and negative factors that need to be thought about are included in Table 1-1.
Positive
By how much will the shelf-life be extended?
Will food losses be reduced?
Can this result in a wider distribution, if so at what cost?
If returnable containers are used by how much will transport rise?
Will the new packaging give entry to a new area of the market?
How much more competitive will be product be?
Negative
How much will the new packaging raise the product's selling price?
Will new equipment be needed, at what cost?
Will staff need special training and higher pay?
Will special quality control measures have to be set up?
Will external experts need to be used?
Tabel 1-1: Positive and negative factors of packaging
<section>1.3 Environmental and economic aspects</section>
As well as considering various types of industrial food packaging and their application, this book also briefly examines related areas such as re-cycling and economic aspects of the use of different materials.
With the increasing use of plastic packaging the whole subject of damage to the environment is becoming of increasing concern One main problem is that plastic packaging is invariably cheaper than alternatives such as glass. If glass is given a monetary value of 10, then tins cost 6 to 8 units while plastic costs 3 to 8. The shift to plastic, at the present time, therefore appears unstoppable. However re-cycling and re-use of packaging can not only generate jobs and wealth but save energy and help to protect the environment A study carried out in Thailand, for example states that it would be possible to set up a $40 million a year industry based on recycling paper, cardboard and plastics.
In its final section this book considers some economic aspects of packaging changes. Not only must the direct cost of the pack be thought about but other associated costs such as equipment and training. Economic choices can be difficult and complicated. A glass container for example, is more expensive than a tin can. It can, however, be re-used, which may in the long run make it cheaper. The manufacturer would need to think about how many times the same bottle could be re-used, the costs of collection and costs involved in washing and preparing the returned bottles.
<section>1.4 The aim of this book</section>
It is hoped that this book will assist the small and medium food manufacturer to consider not only which packaging is best for their product but other related aspects. The whole package including its materials, label and shipping container should be considered as part of the overall business plan and not, as often happens, as an afterthought. The book is mainly written for entrepreneurs who wish to increase their sales and competitiveness by improving their business. Some of the technologies described may appear too large and costly for the very small cottage industry sector. In many cases, however, it is companies from this sector which, with advice and good management, have grown into well known brand names.
It is also hoped that this publication will be of interest to food research institutions, non-government organizations, development workers and extension workers who are involved in projects to improve the small-scale food processing industry sector.
It is believed that this book is somewhat unique in the bibliography of packaging, concentrating as it does on the small-scale application of packaging against a background of basic food technology.
<section>2 Types of food and prevention of deterioration</section>
In this chapter, one of the main reasons for packaging foods that was introduced in Chapter 1 - prevention of deterioration during storage - is covered in more detail. First the types of foods that are commonly produced by small to medium-scale processors are briefly described. This is followed by the main ways in which these foods spoil, together with other hazards that foods face during storage and distribution. The role of packaging in protecting foods against a variety of hazards is then described and the typical extension of shelf-life that arises from correct packaging is shown.
<section>2.1 Food products that are suitable for small-scale processing</section>
Some processed foods are not suitable for manufacture on a small scale and others have no local or regional demand. The factors that determine whether a food is suitable for production in a particular location are complex and inter-related. They are also specific to each production site. However broad guidelines on how to select the types of food that can be produced are as follows.
The selection of the type of food to process depends in part on the level of skill and experience of the staff that will do the production. Care should be taken with all low-acid wet foods, including meat products (especially sausages, burgers and pies), vegetable products, milk products (except yoghurt, butter and ghee) due to the risk of food poisoning. These foods require strict hygienic processing and an understanding by the operators of the risks involved. They should not be produced by inexperienced or untrained people.
Other products require the use of expensive high-technology equipment that is not generally affordable or repairable by small-scale producers. Examples include any low-acid canned foods (for example, canned meats, fish, vegetables, milk), hot-extruded snackfoods, carbonated (fizzy) drinks, homogenized or UHT (IJltra-Heat Treated) milk, solvent-extracted cooking oils and irradiated foods (the last is not legal in some countries). Some foods (for example, some baked goods and sugar confectionery) require a degree of flair, skill, imagination and experience to produce interesting and appealing products. Again these would normally only be produced by trained or experienced staff.
It can be seen from the above considerations that packaging is only one of the many factors that should be taken into account when setting up a business to process foods for sale. However because of problems of availability of packaging materials in many developing countries the problem of packaging assumes great importance. The methods used to select a product and the scale of production may need to be modified to take this into account. For example, the authors know of at least one food business in Africa in which the entrepreneur first found an available source of packaging materials and then designed a product that would suit it.
With these considerations in mind it is possible to analyse the factors that influence the likely success of a small food business and plan carefully to overcome any constraints. Typical questions that should be asked during the planning stage are shown in Table 2-1. In all cases, for a small business to be successful there should be:
- a good demand for the food, either locally or as exports to neighbouring areas or countries,
- supply of raw materials, ingredients and packaging materials,
- affordable, easily operated, maintained and repaired equipment,
- suitable infrastructure and facilities for processing and distribution of the selected food under hygienic conditions.
These considerations are shown as a 'decision tree' in Figure 2-1.
Questions to ask
How to find the answer
Who is the product aimed at?
Conduct a market survey
What is the demand for the processed food?
Conduct a market survey
Is there a health hazard associated with the food?
Consult a food technologist
What type of packaging is most suitable for the processor, distributor, retailer and consumer?
Conduct surveys, ask each group
Are all raw materials, ingredients and packaging materials available in sufficient quantities and at a low enough price when they are required?
Consult farmers, and suppliers to obtain prices, order sizes and plan ordering schedule
What is the expected scale of production?
Calculate from market surveys and resource availability
What is the expected profitability at the planned scale of production
Do a feasibility study
How much money is available to Invest in equipment and materials?
Consult suppliers or technical advisors
How will the food be sold
Have detailed discussions with potential distributors and retailers
What are the relevant regulations
Consult government authorities to find details of business registration, taxes(Ministry of Small Industries or equivalent) and food regulations, Ministry of Health, Food Standards
Table 2-1: Typical questions that should be asked during the planning stage
Taking these and other factors into account, Table 2-2 shows the foods that are commonly seen as suitable for production at the small scale. Short shelf-life products are those that are expected to be eaten within a few days of production. In general the following short shelf-life products are suitable for small-scale production because there is a good opportunity to add value to low-cost raw materials. There is often a good demand for such products and there are fewer packaging and distribution problems than occur with some other foods.
<section>2.2 Types of deterioration</section>
2.2.1 Micro-organisms
2.2.2 Enzymes
2.2.3 Water
2.2.4 Heat
2.2.5 Light
2.2.6 Air
2.2.7 Contamination
2.2.8 Mechanical damage
The section above indicated the types of food that can tee processed on a small scale. The reasons for their selection are mostly concerned with the demand from customers (the popularity of a food) and the feasibility of small-scale production. If it is decided that there is a good demand for a food and that production is feasible, it is then necessary to make sure that processing adequately preserves the food for its expected shelf-life. An understanding of the various factors that cause food to deteriorate is helpful to ensure that the correct processing and packaging is selected. In this section the causes of deterioration of foods are first described and then the different roles of processing and packaging in preservation of the food are described.
The main causes of deterioration of foods are as follows:
- micro-organisms,
- enzymes,
- chemical changes due to water, heat, metals, air or light,
- contamination by soils, stones, insects etc.
- physical (or mechanical) damage.
2.2.1 Micro-organisms
All fresh foods have micro-organisms on their surfaces, often in enormous numbers, and these can grow rapidly to spoil foods. A main purpose of processing foods is to destroy unwanted micro-organisms. Packaging prevents recontamination and together processing and packaging prevent micro-organisms from spoiling the product during distribution and storage (that is to give the food the shelf-life that is expected).
Micro-organisms may be divided into general groups such as bacteria, yeasts or moulds, each of which may be further divided into sub-groups. Of the many microorganisms, the main types of interest are those that cause food spoilage and those that cause food poisoning.
When food is processed correctly, the number of spoilage micro-organisms and their activity is reduced and controlled at known levels. It is when there is a failure in processing conditions or packaging materials that spoilage micro-organisms can have an effect on the food. They can result in the food going mouldy, developing an off-smell or fermenting. The different types of spoilage depend to a large extent on the nature of the food and in particular its acidity and its moisture content.
Food poisoning is mostly caused by bacteria. These are also controlled by the acidity and moisture content of a food as shown in Table 2-3.
Food poisoning micro-organisms may grow in low-acid foods. Heat processing to 121øC for 15-50 minutes in jars or cans is required to destroy these micro-organisms.
Such heating requires the use of pressure cooking and detailed technical knowledge. For these reasons it is strongly advised that these foods are not produced by small-scale processors, especially as a first venture.
Acidic or dry products
Low-acid products
Will support the
Moulds and yeasts
Many types of
growth of:
bacteria (including
food poisoning types)
and moulds
Production errors
Surface mould
Food poisoning
can cause:
growth or
especially from
fermentation. Low
canned
risk of health
vegetables or fish,
hazard
meat products
Examples of the
Fruit juices,
product:
yoghurt, jam dried
fruit
Table 2-3: Microbial growth on different foods
2.2.2 Enzymes
Enzymes are naturally occurring proteins that act on foods to cause changes in flavour, colour or texture. There are many hundreds of different enzymes but some of the more important spoilage changes include softening of fruits, rancidity of oils, browning of cut fruit or root crops and loss of green colour in vegetables. In general enzymes are either destroyed by heating or prevented from acting by changing the acidity or water content of the food.
2.2.3 Water
Enzymes and micro-organisms can only spoil foods if water is present. If the water is removed or made unavailable they cannot act. Different foods have different water contents (Table 2.4). Some, for example grains, are relatively dry when harvested and these can be easily preserved by removing the remaining water by drying. Other fresh foods such as fruits, vegetables and meat have a much higher water content and this should be made unavailable by either drying or concentration (water removed) or by freezing (water held as ice, which together with the low temperature, prevents micro-organisms and enzymes from acting).
However, removing water only prevents the action of enzymes and micro-organisms, it does not destroy them They can act again when water returns, for example during re-hydration of dried food, thawing of frozen food. Foods are therefore often heated (blanched) to destroy some of the enzymes and micro-organisms before drying or freezing.
Fresh food
Water content (%)
Shelf-life at room
temperature (days)
Fruits
Meat/Fish
Vegetables
Grains
more than 175
Table 2-4: Water content of some foods
The normal moisture content of a processed food should be maintained during storage. This is a main function of packaging for some foods. If the moisture content falls below an acceptable level in moist foods, the food dries out, shrivels and is seen as spoiled by consumers. Similarly if the moisture content of a dry food is allowed to rise above an acceptable level it will first lose its crispness and become unacceptable to consumers, but it may also gain sufficient moisture to allow micro-organisms to grow and cause further spoilage. The acceptable range of moisture contents is different for each processed food and for some it is a critical factor. Table 2.5 shows some foods that require careful control of the moisture content by processing and packaging to maintain their quality.
2.2.4 Heat
Food
Moisture contents (%)
Cooking oil
trace
Sugar
trace
Snack foods
Biscuits
Sweets
trace -10
Dried fish
Flours
Dried fruit
Honey
Jam
Tomato paste
Table 2-5: Foods that require careful control of the moisture content
Higher temperatures increase the rate of spoilage by micro-organisms and enzymes, up to a maximum above which they are destroyed (Figure 2-2).
When foods are heated above 60øC most enzymes and micro-organisms are destroyed - the higher the temperature the faster they are destroyed. This is one of the easiest methods of preservation and includes boiling, frying, baking and pasteurization. However, cooked food can be easily re-contaminated if it is not properly packaged.
Heat can also spoil packaged food. It can melt fats, cause a loss of texture or flavour and cause more rapid changes such as development of rancidity in oils and movement of moisture within a food which in turn leads to spoilage.
2.2.5 Light
Sunlight contains ultra-violet (UV) rays which cause rapid deterioration of some foods (especially oils and fatty foods) or specific components of a food such as certain vitamins. UV can also cause packaging materials to fade or to become brittle and lose their properties (for example polythene in Section 3.2.2). In general all foods should be stored in the shade away from direct sunlight. Electric lights do not have the same effects on foods because they do not contain the UV component.
2.2.6 Air
Some foods, especially those that have a high fat content or those with delicate flavours and aromas, are susceptible to oxidation (attack by air which causes off flavours to develop, known as rancidity). Biscuits, cooking oils, dried fish and other fatly foods are liable to spoilage by rancidity. These foods should therefore be protected from contact with air by storing them in airtight containers.
2.2. 7 Contamination
Foods are often contaminated when harvested or slaughtered and most processing involves a cleaning stage to remove these contaminants. However foods may also be contaminated after processing and this is more serious because the contamination will not be removed before the customer buys the food. The main types of post-processing contamination and possible sources are shown in Table 2-6.
Contaminant
Possible source
Hair
Operators, animals
Dust, soil, stones
Workplace, equipment,
transport
Bacteria, moulds
Air, operators, animals,
insects, birds, dust
Excreta
Animals, insects, birds
Oil, grease
Equipment, transport
Wood, glass, paper, cloth,
Workplace, transport
leaves etc
Metal
Equipment, workplace,
transport
Insects
Air, workplace,
transport
Table 2-6: Types of post-processing contamination and possible sources
One of the main functions of packaging is to protect foods against contamination from the time it has been processed until it is consumed. It should be noted that the contamination described before is accidential contamination. Contamination that is done deliberately to increase profitability or from malice is named adulteration. Packaging that is intended to prevent or reveal adulteration is described briefly in Chapter 3.
2.2.8 Mechanical damage
Foods are frequently fragile and easily crushed, scratched, split or otherwise damaged during storage and distribution. Damage is caused in four ways:
- by pressure such as that caused by stacking or piling foods too high,
- by impact from hitting or dropping the food,
- by vibration from transport,
- by foods rubbing against each other or against container sides.
Another main function of packaging is to minimise these types of physical damage to foods during transport and storage. This type of packaging is often known as a shipping container and these are described in more detail in Chapter 4. A summary of the different roles of processing and packaging to prevent deterioration described above is shown in Table 2-7. The factors that affect the shelf-life of foods and the protection offered by different packaging materials are shown in Table 2-8.
<section>2.3 Extension of shelf-life</section>
2.3.1 Short shelf-life products
2.3.2 Medium/long shelf life products
The section above describes the processing and packaging that is needed to preserve foods for their expected shelf-life. It also indicated that for different foods the importance of packaging can vary from simply keeping foods clean to being the main factor that controls the shelf-life. It was noted that for many foods the humidity of the climate in which the food is stored is one of the most important considerations.
In the following section the actual extension of shelf-life for different foods is shown for two types of climate. Readers should note that the data given is indicative only and that shelf-life will vary according to the local storage conditions used. Table 2-9 indicates the likely extension of shelf-life of the foods to be achieved by proper packaging.
2.3.1 Short shelf-life products
Baked goods
Breads and cakes are normally sold by small-scale bakers within a day of baking to retain the fresh baked flavour and odour and the correct texture. Staling takes place rapidly at tropical temperatures and leads to a toughening of the crumb and, in some breads a softening of the crust. The changes happen in both humid and dry climates but additionally there may be drying out of some products in dry climates. Because of the short shelf-life packaging is mainly used to keep these products clean and it is not used as a barrier to moisture or air.
Clean paper (for example tissue paper) is an adequate packaging material, but old newspapers should not be used because the ink is poisonous. Plain or coated cellulose is likely to be too expensive for most small bakers and is not needed if the products are to be consumed on the day of production or the following day. Polythene bags are used by some bakers to give a 'more attractive' or 'professional' image. If polythene is used to wrap baked goods, care should be taken to allow them to cool to room temperature after baking. This will prevent moisture condensing on the inside of the bag and wetting the su