<title>Guidelines for strengthening animal health services in developing countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The purpose of this publication is to assemble information from various sources to assist developing countries that, with the objectives of providing more effective animal disease control for improved food production and livestock development and protecting food safety for the consumer, are planning to upgrade their official health services in accordance with internationally accepted principles.
A large volume and variety of technical publications on the many different aspects of animal health services under various social, economic and ecological conditions with many different animal disease situations are available. Following requests from many developing countries, a compilation of major experiences of animal health services has been prepared in the form of this publication. The document is based on previous Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) publications such as Standard of Veterinary Services (1974), World Health Organization (WHO) and International Office of Epizootics (OIE) publications, literature sources and technical reports dealing with this subject. Personal experiences of FAO experts and of the participants of the FAO Expert Consultation on Animal Health Services in Developing Countries, Rome, 15-19 October 1990, represent a very important contribution to this document. The Expert Consultation was attended by selected chief
veterinary officers from all regions of developing countries. The final editing of the document was carried out by Drs A.K. Chatterjee, W.H.G. Rees and J. Thomson, former chief veterinary officers of India, the United Kingdom and Zimbabwe respectively.
It is hoped that it will prove useful to the official animal health services in developing countries in their important role of improving animal production and food safety, which is vital for the well-being of all humankind.
V. Kouba
Chief, Animal Health Service - Animal Production and Health Division
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction
The control of animal diseases and the promotion and protection of animal health are essential components of any effective animal breeding and production programme. Despite remarkable technical advances in the diagnosis, prevention and control of animal diseases, the condition of animal health throughout the developing world remains generally poor, causing substantial economic losses and hindering any improvement in livestock productivity.
In developing countries, animal health services were established with the main objective of controlling major contagious and infectious diseases, such as foot-and-mouth disease, rinderpest and contagious pleuropneumonia, as well as parasitic diseases, such as trypanosomiasis and tick-borne diseases. This was obviously the first priority, since the control of these diseases is a prerequisite to any successful livestock development programme.
With the present concern for sustainable economic development, more attention is now being given to other diseases that affect livestock productivity, such as helminthiasis, nutritional diseases, reproductive disorders, etc.
The successful control of disease depends initially on its timely and accurate recognition and on the presence of sound diagnostic capabilities based on effective working links between laboratories and field services. Emergencies created by outbreaks of major infectious diseases demonstrate the need for establishing, strengthening and improving such diagnostic services. As well, particular attention should be given to the development of an efficient animal disease information system.
Beyond the national level, a general increase in the movement of animals and animal products underlines the importance of international cooperation in the prevention and control of animal diseases.
Most animal health services in developing countries do not have at present adequate technical and administrative infrastructures to carry out the tasks and duties necessary for the efficient control of animal diseases and for consumer protection.
In many developing countries, there is either a shortage of skilled veterinary personnel or their services are not correctly utilized. The problem is exacerbated by deficient veterinary infrastructures and inadequate disease control programmes, veterinary legislation and information services, as well as a lack of transport, communications, veterinary products and equipment. The most common problem is the shortage of funds to sustain the activities of veterinary staff. In some developing countries, the animal health services are not given the appropriate legal power in the administrative system.
These shortages significantly reduce the effectiveness of animal health services control measures against major animal diseases. By exploiting existing conditions, local resources and international help, possibilities for improving of animal health service programmes are increased.
Veterinary education and training should receive the highest priority; however, more emphasis must be placed on the qualitative and practical aspects. Effective personnel development requires adequate planning of staff requirements, improved curriculums for undergraduate and postgraduate studies, training of auxiliary personnel and greater interregional cooperation to exploit existing training facilities fully, among other things.
Animal health services should be further developed by improving their efficiency. While the control and prevention of major infectious diseases clearly remains a government responsibility, some veterinary tasks such as the treatment of individual animals could be undertaken in other ways. Privatization is one way of improving some sectors of animal health and of responding suitably to the needs of animal owners. Other ways include contracting out certain services, creating farmer cooperatives and producer associations, recovering government costs more efficiently and using the revenue thus generated for selective subsidies. Several countries have already taken steps to reorganize their veterinary services in this way.
Developing countries must address this problem. This publication aims to assist them in improving livestock production through better control of major animal diseases. It is not intended to be a comprehensive text describing in-depth all aspects of a complex subject with worldwide variations. Instead, it is meant to serve as a guideline, providing general background information on basic topics. Its main objective is to assist animal health authorities in their organization, planning and management activities.
The contents cover major problems facing official animal health services in developing countries in contributing to the production of food of animal origin and livestock development as integral components of general social, economic and agricultural development. Other priorities of animal health services include the protection of humans against diseases that may be transmitted by animals and the production of safe food.
Biological and pharmaceutical production may be the responsibility of some services, however, only aspects of the control and management of veterinary biologicals and drugs are included in this publication.
The major issues dealt with in this publication are the objectives, functions, organization and management of animal health services. Without going into detail, relevant information, statements and recommendations make up the basic text. This general approach does not permit specific disease control or specific social, economic and ecological conditions to be dealt with. However, information is provided in the annexes on specific topics and in the selected bibliographies of general interest publications.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2: General principles of animal health services
Policy, strategies and priorities
Organization
Standards and norms
Bibliography
Policy, strategies and priorities
The animal health services policy in developing countries represents an integral component of overall government, social and economic policies in the fields of agriculture and rural development, public health, food processing and import/export of animals and animal products. In order to obtain the necessary political, economic and public support, animal health services policy should attempt to contribute effectively to the overall development of a country, aiming at improving the standard of living of its inhabitants.
An effective and desirable animal health services policy should first contribute in a practical way to reducing food losses due to animal morbidity and mortality, increasing productivity in animal population/herd yields and draught power, protecting human health against diseases transmissible from animals and ensuring humane treatment of animals.
This policy usually reflects specific social, economic and political systems and philosophies, which are different in each country. The variety of animal health policy includes different animal health services organization and programmes. The spectrum varies from country to country. In some, all activities of the animal health services are carried out by government veterinary staff (completely or partly free of charge). In others, animal health services are private, with the exception of a few veterinary officers in government institutions. However, in the majority of developing countries today, a mixed system between the extremes prevails: preventive and control/inspection programmes are covered by government services while private veterinarians have direct contact with animal owners for the treatment of sick animals.
The animal health services strategy should effectively contribute to the creation of conditions necessary for an uninterrupted animal breeding, production and reproduction process and for other effective utilization of domestic animals for human needs. One of the most important tasks of government services is to protect the national territory against the introduction of exotic diseases.
Animal health services strategy in developing countries reflects the application of general policy. It identifies the concept, priorities and principal objectives of animal health programmes. The strategy should also determine the systems required to achieve these objectives and to solve animal problems in the most effective way. It should respect the country's needs and conditions and stage of development, as well as economic and organizational possibilities.
The strategy should be the realistic outcome of analysis and prognosis of the animal health situation and its development and of the factors that can influence the disease situation and animal health programmes, such as economic, sanitary (public health), social, political, ecological, environmental and organizational conditions.
Decision-making on national animal health strategy is an important responsibility. On one hand it deals with the protection of the health of the human population, and on the other hand with the protection and utilization of the whole animal population and its products in the country. The aim of the strategy is to achieve the best possible results with available resources, or, to achieve its goals with the minimum possible inputs.
There are several different types of animal health strategy, all relating to the specific problems of individual countries. The strategy should first provide general coverage for all animal health service activities and then complement this coverage with specific solutions for selected problems.
Priority should be given both to local strategy, which should be linked with the national strategy, and to long-term strategy, which should be reflected in middle- and short-term programmes.
Animal health services priorities must be determined in each country, as there is no country in the world where conditions exist for solving all problems. Prioritizing problems helps to define effective strategy and programmes.
Identification of priorities also facilitates the concentration of limited resources on the most important animal health problems. The order of priority should be the result of cross-evaluation of biological, economical, sanitary, social and environmental priorities, corrected by feasibility studies and the availability of resources. The availability of effective tools with which specific goals may be achieved under local conditions, as well as the availability of funds, labour and material resources, must be taken into consideration.
It has proved useful first to list the problems according to their rank of importance. Those problems for which no practical or effective solutions or no diagnostic, control, treatment or eradication methods have been found should be moved to a lower rank of priority or postponed for the future. The same procedure should be applied if the necessary resources and other basic conditions are lacking. The priorities should be limited to a realistic number.
Benefit/cost analysis
As an aid to the decision-making process on priorities, a benefit/cost analysis may provide valuable information. A simple comparison of benefits and costs could be made with available data to obtain some idea of priorities in disease control. However, the results may be unreliable. More complex methods using comprehensive economic and social analyses that take into account depressed animal productivity caused by subclinical disease, as well as specific infectious diseases, require additional expertise. (Further details are provided in Chapter 6, under the heading "Economic evaluation".)
If government or donor organization financial support for animal health programmes or projects is to be forthcoming, it is important that their planning be based on sound, comprehensive data and information that can be fully justified and is well-presented.
Organization
Organizational principles
Good organization of animal health services is the first precondition for any successful application of animal health strategy, programmes and measures. Organization should accommodate the objectives, programmes and activities in a given country (territory or sector) at any given period of development. It is a fundamental instrument for creating the necessary conditions for the realization of effective animal health service functions.
The organization should be flexible, so that it can adapt, if required, to changes in animal disease situations and conditions. It should create necessary conditions for providing animal health services and applying disease control measures within the limit of the whole country (territory), and it should be ready for action at all times.
Animal health services can be based on the activities of government, enterprises or private veterinary surgeons. All have their advantages and disadvantages. In most developing countries these forms of animal health services exist in different sizes, structures and combinations.
From experience it has been found that centralized organization with vertical operation offers better conditions for national prevention, control and eradication programmes and for protection of the livestock population. It also creates conditions for more uniformity and better coordination of diagnostic methods and control measures for mobilization activities in emergency cases.
A decentralized organization with horizontal operation offers better management conditions for identifying and solving local problems and the treatment of diseased animals and for increasing animal productivity. Decentralized organization creates conditions for closer cooperation with farmers, the meat industry, suppliers and consumers.
In practice, the strengths of both systems are combined to form a mixed organization of animal health services, which is more likely to deliver effective services at both the local and national levels.
Animal health services structure
The structure of animal health services usually corresponds to the general administrative, political/financial structure in the country concerned. Therefore it varies from country to country.
The central animal health service administration, under the direction of the national Chief Veterinary Officer (CVO), is responsible for technical activities in the country carried out by government officers. It is usually responsible for technical supervision of private and cooperative enterprise, in the areas of animal disease control, human health protection and/or animal production. As well, it generally has overall responsibility for national veterinary institutes, such as central diagnostic laboratories, vaccine production and control laboratories, national research and training institutes and central storage, and for local-level institutions.
At the local level, provincial CVOs supervise provincial diagnostic laboratories, veterinary clinics, storage and other institutions of provincial importance. Similar structures may also be at a lower organizational level, i.e. at the district level, if such institutions exist.
The most important tier of the animal health service structure is the field animal health service, which is in direct contact with producers, animals and their products. The work done at the village, farm, herd/flock and individual animal levels is decisive for any animal health programme.
Administration is generally facilitated by having staff perform functions for which they have been trained. It is illogical to have trained veterinarians in charge of accounting, transport or secretarial services. Even at higher organizational levels, such as planning or public relations, it is often advantageous for the animal health service to engage competent, trained staff for these posts. In all cases, their work should be directed toward animal health activities and be supervised by the CVO.
General experience suggests that animal health and production extension personnel should operate separately from agronomy extension personnel at the field level. The background and training of personnel in each service are different; combining the two extension functions dilutes their effectiveness for each function.
Standards and norms
Animal health legislation should be supported with standard definitions and structured by national precedent. However, biological and technical standards and definitions should comply with international norms in order to facilitate comparisons and communication between countries.
In preparing national animal health standards, international documents and recommendations should be applied. National standards should complement international ones while respecting local needs and conditions. As examples of international standards, the following documents are pertinent: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/World Health Organization (WHO) Codex Alimentarius, International Office of Epizootics (OIE) International Animal Health Code (rules recommended for international trade in animals and animal products), OIE Manual of Recommended Diagnostic Methods and Requirements for Biological Products and FAO/WHO/OIE Animal Health Yearbook, which includes definitions of animal morbidity, etc.
Bibliography
FAO. 1990. Report of the Expert Consultation on Cost/benefit for Animal Health Programmes in Developing Countries. Rome, FAO.
ILCA. 1984. Financing animal health services in some African countries. Pastoral development network. A. Anteneh. Addis Ababa, ILCA (Livestock policy unit).
PAHO. 1986. Administración de programas de salud animal.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3: Objectives and functions
Objectives
Functions
Development of animal health and production
Protection of human health
Protection of animals
Objectives
o Development of animal health and production
o Protection of human health
o Protection of animals and welfare
The achievement of these objectives involves the effective and coordinated performance of many diverse activities, which together are the functions of the service.
Functions
Development of animal health and production
o Surveillance
o Disease investigation
o Disease prevention, control and eradication
o Quarantine
o Emergency response
o Clinical services
o Control of animal drugs and biological products
o Veterinary inspection
o Research
o Training
o Wildlife disease monitoring
o Veterinary aspects of aquaculture
Protection of human health
o Control of zoonoses
o Food hygiene
o Meat inspection
o Residue testing
o Training
Protection of animals and welfare
o Ensuring humane treatment of animals in general
o Welfare standards in markets, during transport and slaughter
o Control of laboratory animals
Enforcement of legislation, extension services and transfer of technology are common to all of the above activities. Although the main functions will be considered separately, many of them overlap. The service should be well-coordinated and closely integrated to achieve its goals effectively. Senior officers in charge of the different components should ensure that the structure and staff numbers and qualifications are appropriate for the tasks to be performed and that management integrates their activities.
<section>5</section>
Development of animal health and production
Surveillance
National animal health services should have a properly organized system of disease surveillance. Surveillance involves the close observation of the disease profile in a population. On the national scale, the population comprises the entire animal population of the country, as well as the human population, where zoonotic conditions are concerned. To be useful, surveillance should include the systematic recording and analysis of observations so that current disease status may be defined and any changes may be documented.
Routine surveillance requires that all regular field and laboratory disease control activities are documented in a systematic fashion and reported to a central unit responsible for collating and analysing the data. This activity should be a continuous function and an integral part of the daily work of all staff.
Active surveillance is also required to provide specific information about individual disease conditions at a particular time. This type of surveillance generally takes the form of purpose-designed surveys and provides information on which decisions may be based. One common example is the serological survey undertaken to provide an estimate of the prevalence of an infectious disease before deciding to implement an eradication campaign, or as part of the campaign's design process. More complex surveys are done to estimate the impact of a disease or parasite on animal production so that economically effective control measures can be developed or recommended.
The design and management of surveillance activities of a national animal health service is usually the responsibility of the epidemiology section. The section utilizes the results of its data analysis for:
o assessing the need for, or progress of, disease control in control eradication programmes at farm, area, regional and national levels;
o national and international reporting of disease statistics;
o developing and monitoring national animal health programmes;
o developing and managing quarantine policy;
o facilitating export trade in animals and animal products.
This last activity is assuming greater significance as efforts to reduce non-tariff barriers in international trade progress. The evidence needed by a country to support and justify the imposition of quarantine barriers is its ability to document freedom from a disease - evidence that can only be convincingly provided by efficient surveillance. Similarly, evidence of the economic impact of a condition, required to persuade politicians to finance a control campaign, may come from the data of a surveillance programme.
Disease investigation
Investigation of animal health problems in the field is the responsibility of the field staff under the direction of the provincial or district veterinary officer, who may be based in a field office or in a diagnostic laboratory. In either case, it is imperative that the veterinary officers have the widest possible contact with the livestock producers in their areas because the producers provide information that is essential for an epidemiologically valid disease investigation.
Field investigations are generally conducted in response to reports of health problems from breeders/producers. Regular reporting of such problems requires that producers have confidence in the veterinary field staff and that they have regular contact with them. Local animal health staff should be based in a centre from which they can readily move to all parts of the area with available transport. They should also have ready access to simple laboratory support at the local or provincial level. However, local disease investigations are also performed as part of larger regional/provincial or national programmes. In particular, the origins of an outbreak of disease in one area should be traced so that distant foci of infection can be detected. This in turn may identify failures in local disease control measures, such as vaccination breakdowns or unauthorized movement of animals.
Field investigations should always be fully documented. It is important to submit diagnostic material for laboratory examination in order to confirm the field diagnosis. Valuable information and experience are often lost because no report was written after the investigation took place.
In countries where there are nomadic livestock owners it is particularly difficult to investigate disease outbreaks adequately. Nevertheless, investigation is very important because the diseases may spread rapidly via the movement of animals during the incubation period. If a diagnosis can be established quickly it may be possible to treat or vaccinate the moving herds, thus preventing a rolling epizootic. It is clear that animal health field staff must have the legal authority to compel owners to apply the prescribed sanitary measures and to prevent further movement of animals. A communication system should be established so that the national animal health authority can be quickly informed when the potential exists for serious extension of an outbreak. This would enable the service to apply coordinated control measures at regional/provincial and/or national levels.
All investigations of disease outbreaks should begin with clinical and epidemiological examinations of diseased and suspect animals. A detailed history should be recorded in writing immediately after the first examination is completed. The information recorded should include:
o numbers and characteristics of the animals in each herd or group;
o management factors such as type and quality of feed and water available;
o all animals that were introduced into or left the herd;
o other factors that may have influenced the origin and development of the disease.
If a dangerous transmissible disease is suspected, immediate provisional quarantine measures should be applied and details of all contacts, both human and animal, should be recorded. When more than one owner is concerned, every effort should be made to corroborate the most important points in the history with everyone involved. This collaboration can yield information of great diagnostic value, as well as indications of the source of the disease. Once all the available epidemiological information has been collected, the diagnostic process should continue with the physical examination of the other animals involved. This should include a large sample of the group and, in sedentary herds, should extend to neighbouring herds. The examination will involve:
o a complete clinical examination of sick and apparently healthy animals. Where blood tests are necessary, samples should be taken from animals in all available stages of the disease;
o full pathological examination of dead animals;
o collection and submission of necropsy samples where laboratory examination is required. (This should not prevent the making of a tentative diagnosis and the corresponding advice for control of the suspected disease.) The differential diagnosis, together with requests for specific tests and a copy of the epidemiological and clinical histories, should be forwarded with appropriately preserved specimens;
o when laboratory results become available, the case should be reviewed to confirm or revise the diagnosis. In many cases it will be desirable to revisit the animals to change or reinforce the previous advice on control measures. In cases involving "notifiable diseases" the provincial and chief veterinary officers should be informed immediately so that measures such as movement control or vaccination may be imposed over the widest possible area, as soon as possible.
An epidemiological assessment of the outbreak should be conducted at several levels, local, provincial and central, according to its severity and scale. Methods of tracing the origins of the outbreak should be instituted and coordinated control measures applied. This basic investigative procedure should be standard in all transmissible disease situations.
It is extremely important that all the information obtained, the procedures adopted and the outcome should be officially recorded.
Animal health services should always seek to prevent disease, and a part of the epidemiological follow-up of any disease investigation should be an attempt to identify appropriate methods of prevention. Transmission of these preventive methods to farmers/producers thus requires an effective extension effort. While this teaching process should naturally become an integral part of the activities of all field officers, deliberate, organized extension methods should also be employed.
However, this does not require the development of a large "extension service". Extension activities should be a normal part of the everyday duties of all animal health service officers. Nevertheless they should receive continuous training in extension methods and full support for these activities.
Disease prevention, control and eradication
Major epizootic diseases. One of the main functions of an animal health service is to control and, if possible, eradicate the major epizootic diseases, e.g. foot-and-mouth disease, rinderpest, African swine fever, contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, tick-borne diseases, animal trypanosomiasis, etc. All of these major epizootic diseases have very serious effects on animal production. It is only after they have been brought under control that improved breeding, production and control of other enzootic and more readily suppressed diseases can be achieved.
Major epizootic diseases generally can only be controlled by well-planned programmes, coordinated and implemented by a strong central veterinary authority. In large countries much of the day-to-day running of programmes can be decentralized to the provinces or regions. It is essential that there is a strong control point responsible for setting up, coordinating and implementing policy.
When planning disease control policies the following must be considered:
o the distribution of the disease, i.e. how widespread it is in the country and how far it is expected to spread;
o the economic impact of the disease on the country and the benefits to be gained by its eradication. This should include any direct effects, such as loss of production, milk supply, draught power, etc., as well as the effect on trade in animal products and exports;
o methods of preventing a resurgence of the disease after it has been eradicated. These methods may involve border control and surveillance;
o methods of controlling and eradicating the disease. These must be practical and sustainable;
o availability of sufficient financial support;
o the presence of necessary legal powers.
When it has been decided that it is essential and economically justifiable to eradicate a major epizootic disease, detailed plans should be drawn up to carry this out.
Before launching the eradication or control programme, there should be sufficient staff/transport infrastructure and finances to sustain and carry out the programme. In some cases it may be better not to launch a disease control programme if it cannot be sustained.
The programme should be flexible enough to accommodate changing circumstances and to cope with unforeseen problems.
Control of zoonotic diseases. The Animal Health Service should play a major role in the control of the more important zoonotic diseases. As with the epidemic diseases, these can only be controlled and eradicated with strong central plann