<title>Guidelines for integrating nutrition concerns into forestry projects</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Since 1984 the Community Forestry Unit of FAO has been working on materials to illustrate the extremely important links between forestry and nutrition. During the past five years the Unit has published a range of different materials on the subject. Additionally, it has supported Asian and African Nutrition Division workshops for forest policy makers, forestry project managers and nutritionists. FAO has found that the integration of nutritional or food security objectives is perceived to be more tangible than other poverty indicators and greatly interests forestry policy makers and programme implementors. This field manual is an attempt to make the link between nutrition and forestry projects more explicit and to give ideas about how forestry projects should proceed.
This approach is new both to forestry and nutrition. Convential measures of nutritional well-being are often neither feasible nor desirable when focusing on nutrition as it relates to forestry. Most forestry activities cannot independently eliminate the basic and complex causes of malnutrition in such a way as to show a measurable difference in the growth of babies at the end of a project. However, there are things that can be done if nutritional problems and their causes are to be identified and nutritionally vulnerable groups are to benefit. Often it is a matter of expanding, in a nutritionally informed way, the selection of species in the nurseries and focusing distribution so that vulnerable groups gain access. Other times it is establishing a forest management plan that takes into consideration the foods and other nutritionally valuable products communities use. This field manual identifies some less direct activities as well and describes the necessary steps for
planning, implementing monitoring and evaluating a forestry project that includes measurable nutritional objectives.
Cynthia Ogden, a nutrition planner, has been helping develop and focus the Community Forestry Unit's study of the links between forestry and nutrition almost since the Unit began its investigations. She has helped analyse the relevant literature and design workshops, and has given presentations on the subject. She developed these guidelines and incorporated many of the concerns of forestry policy makers, project implementers and national nutritionists who have reviewed them. Britta Ogle, Jacqueline Landman, Julia Falconer, Elizabeth Campbell and William Sunderlan provided significant input. Several people from the Food Policy and Nutrition Division of FAO also provided ideas. The effort was directed by the Community Forestry Unit and partially funded by the Forests, Trees and People Programme a multi-donor trust fund dedicated to increasing the sustainability of the livelihoods of men and women throughout the developing world, especially the rural poor, through self-help
management of tree and forest resources.
This is the first field manual of its type. It is being produced and circulated with the hope that it will be read, tested and then revised based upon comments from the field. People are encouraged to send their comments to the Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, Food and Agriculture Organization, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Marilyn W. Hoskins
Senior Community Forestry Officer
Planning and Institutions Service
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
<section>2</section>
Introduction
All development projects attempt to improve the well-being of people living in project areas. Development goals often involve narrowing the disparity between the rich and the poor by focusing especially on improving the situation of those in the poorer strata. Increasingly, criteria other than economic improvement are being used to further these goals.
Nutritional well-being is one of the non-economic criteria that is being used to assess quality of life. Isolated development projects cannot by themselves eliminate the underlying causes of malnutrition that are deeply rooted in political, social and economic inequalities. Yet development projects, and specifically forestry projects can use nutritional well-being as a measure of project success and can use nutritional vulnerability to identify potential project beneficiary groups. Incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry activities is possible once the relationship between forestry and nutrition is understood. With the help of the community, nutritionists, social scientists and foresters can determine the nutrition situation in the project area in order to focus activities on enhancing the nutritional well-being of individuals. With surprisingly little effort most forestry projects can incorporate measures aimed at improving nutritional well-being.
<section>3</section>
About the field manual
This manual has three purposes. First, it describes some of the linkages between forestry and nutrition to help foresters, together with nutritionists, orient their activities toward improving the nutrition situation in their project area. Second, it suggests an approach by which forestry activities can incorporate local peoples' nutrition and food security concerns. Third, it identifies some possible indicators for use in monitoring and evaluating the effects of forestry activities on nutritionally vulnerable groups and individuals.
The manual is written for planners and managers. It suggests ways of addressing nutrition issues. It makes reference to practical examples, emphasizing the process of community participation in identifying problems and activities. Although different types of forestry projects might be classified with respect to their potential in relation to nutrition, this guide presupposes that all types of forestry projects can incorporate nutrition concerns by choosing the relevant steps and examples.
The guide has two sections. The first introduces the linkages between forestry and nutrition, including a short discussion of the causes of malnutrition. The next contains a methodology for incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry projects. It includes examples of how forestry can positively and adversely affect nutrition. The section offers worksheets that correspond to the methodology.
The worksheets summarize the methodology discussed in the manual. They are each comprised of an objective, suggested responsible parties, and a series of questions that may make it easier to reach the objective(s). The appendices identify some of the possible indicators that can be used to plan, monitor and evaluate the impact of forestry activities on nutrition.
<section>4</section>
I. Forestry and nutrition
Linkages between forestry and nutrition
Contributions to nutritional well-being
Assessing nutritional well-being
Linkages between forestry and nutrition
The relationship between forestry and nutrition may go unnoticed by development professionals. Yet the connection is important. Forests and trees contribute to the nutritional well-being of many people and are especially important for the poor, who may depend on natural resources for many purposes.
Some nutritional implications of forests and trees
Coconuts produce a good, almost sterile oral rehydration fluid; a high energy food; oil for cooking or soap-making; foliage for roofing; husks and wood for fuel; shade under which other foods grow and animals live.
Plantains, bananas and ensete (false bananas in Ethiopia) may be the staple high carbohydrate food of 30-50 million people in the world; an important supplementary food for millions of others.
Mulberries may form the basis for a silkworm industry, providing income and food for many people.
Fruit orchards may produce most of the carotene (vitamin A) and vitamin C in diets.
Trees may provide a place away from the field and footpath as a designated place for defecating and urinating, as in India. In this way they may lessen transmission of diseases linked to malnutrition (Latham 1988).
Not surprisingly, forests and trees provide many edible products. Although these foods usually are not dietary staples, they play a supplementary role in the diet. Wild leaves and fruits contain necessary vitamins. Seeds, nuts, roots and tubers supply fats and carbohydrates. Mushrooms, gums and saps provide protein and minerals. Wild animals often supply the majority of meat consumed by people living near forest areas. Forest foods also contribute to diet diversity and consequently may improve the quantity and quality of food intake. Forest foods are often seasonally important. Those foods available for longer periods or during the "hungry season" ensure that rural people eat when agricultural products are not yet available and/or when storage facilities have emptied. Finally, tree products such as roots, nuts, honey and stems furnish needed energy during famines or natural disasters.
Forestry also contributes to food production through environmental protection. Various trees with deep rooting systems extract nutrients from deep in the soil and deposit them in the form of leaf litter. This leaf cover enriches the soil and helps retain moisture. Nitrogen fixing trees also contribute to soil fertility as does the shade which lowers surface temperatures. Trees and shrubs planted and managed as wind breaks can help control erosion, thereby stabilizing soil quality and helping agricultural production. Moreover, fodder for animals collected from forests and trees enhances meat and dairy production.
Another linkage between forestry and nutrition is fuelwood. Fuelwood scarcity can influence household nutrition in a number of ways: cooking foods, boiling water and allocation of women's time. If fuelwood is scarce, women may be forced to ration cooking times. This can lead to decreases in food consumption or meal frequency. In turn, the nutritional well-being of household members may suffer. Additionally, fuelwood scarcity may increase the incidence of illness resulting from contaminated water or improperly prepared food. Finally, the amount of fuelwood available for household use influences the time women spend collecting fuelwood and thus the time they have for food production and preparation, income generation, child care and leisure.
Income and medicines also link forestry and nutrition together. Selling fuelwood, wild foods, medicines and forest raw materials or employment in forestry bring essential monetary income to many households. In addition, medicines, which originate from tree products, help keep humans and livestock healthy.
Forestry products and benefits, overall household welfare and household nutritional well-being all affect one another. Their relationship is characterized by a complex web. The diagram in Figure 1 outlines some of the factors that influence one another. The graphic is not all-inclusive and is complicated. It only attempts to indicate the range of factors that interact to form links between forestry and nutrition. It identifies forest products and benefits that can influence nutritional well-being and can often be targeted by forestry projects.
Figure 1 Forestry products and benefits related to nutrition
Contributions to nutritional well-being
In much of the world, individuals and households suffer from problems of undernutrition. The causes of these problems are complex and the consequences often lead to a "vicious circle of malnutrition." On the individual level, food consumption and infection determine nutritional status. However, food consumption and infection are, in turn, affected by many other social, political and economic factors. The most pressing of these is poverty.
Crop variation
While commercialization in small-scale farming households is a necessary development, changes in crop variation policies such as monocropping can lead to a decrease in diet diversity and to malnutrition. Hassan et al. carried out research on the extent of malnutrition in two villages in Bangladesh between 1981 and 1982. The first village employs traditional farming practices, is double-cropped and flooded. The second village, on the other hand, is triple-cropped and non-flooded but has irrigation facilities, high yielding variety seeds, and chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Researchers found that in this second, agriculturally modern village which specializes in cereal crops, there is a greater incidence of vitamin A and vitamin C deficiency. The researchers concluded that one of the factors affecting the higher incidence of nutrient deficiencies in this village was decreased food diversity caused by less crop variation (Hassan et al. 1985).
The quality and quantity of an individual's food consumption is predominantly determined by the level and variety of the household's food supply. The food supply consists of foods produced, foods stored, foods gathered, foods given as aid and foods purchased. Many different factors affect the amount and quality of food produced and purchased including agricultural and marketing policies,^1 land holding patterns and laws,^2 labour availability, women's time^3 and cash income. The importance of stored foods should not be underestimated given the seasonal nature of food production and gathering. Food storage facilities and food preservation techniques have a large impact on the household food supply.
^1 For example, cash cropping and crop variation.
^2 For example, landlessness, land poor families and access to commons.
^3 For example, for food production, food preparation and child care.
Infectious diseases also contribute to malnutrition through the synergistic relationship between malnutrition and infection. Malnutrition lowers resistance to infection, and infection increases the likelihood of nutritional deficiencies. Infections often result from poor environmental conditions due to lack of sanitation or clean water. These infections may persist unchecked due to an absence of health facilities. Moreover, activities that modify environments may influence the spread of infection. Water, for such purposes as irrigation, hydro-power or transportation and natural environments of forests or bushlands may constitute habitats for disease-spawning animals and insects. Mosquitos, which thrive in bushland environments, and snails and flies, which thrive in water environments, carry parasites responsible for malaria, schistosomiasis, and onchocerciasis. These infections in turn contribute to malnutrition by affecting the body's ability to consume and absorb foods.
Figure 2 diagrams the factors that, alone or in combination, contribute to malnutrition. The figure indicates that forestry can influence the factors that contribute to household welfare and affect nutritional well-being. Once again the diagram is only illustrative and not all-inclusive.
Vulnerability
The concept of vulnerability is often used interchangeably with poverty. However, as Chambers (1989) points out, the concepts are not identical. Poor people lack, but vulnerable people are defenseless, insecure and exposed to risks and shocks. Community members often define security as a priority and projects must begin to consider vulnerability and not just economic poverty.
Nutritional vulnerability is a particular instance of vulnerability. Certain individuals tend to be nutritionally "at risk" especially if their household is at risk. For example, due to rapid growth, children require frequent feedings of foods with high energy and nutrient content. In addition, because children explore and play in many areas and in large groups, they are more prone to infection than adults. Pregnant and lactating women are also vulnerable to nutritional problems as they require additional food for the growth of the fetus and for milk production. Moreover, households that consume monotonous diets of maize or highly milled rice or that are living in particular areas such as those with insufficient iodine in the soil, may be vulnerable to nutritional disorders. Further, communities may be nutritionally at risk because of seasonal variations in the food supply.
Nutritional deficiencies
Vitamin deficiencies are not the major nutritional problems. The overall major nutritional problem is inadequate caloric intake. The four most serious nutritional deficiencies in the world today are those involving a lack of calories (protein-energy), vitamin A, iron and iodine. Protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) may result from inadequate consumption of food or from disease and usually manifests itself in children through inadequate growth, severe loss of weight, and lack of energy. In extreme cases, swelling or changes in skin, hair, face and mental capacity indicate the presence of PEM. Severe cases of PEM can be fatal. Vitamin A deficiency seriously affects the eyes (causing blindness in extreme cases), is often related to PEM, and is frequently precipitated by infectious diseases. Iron deficiency can lead to nutritional anemia, causing tiredness, shortness of breath, heart palpitations and, in extreme cases, death. Finally, iodine deficiency can lead to goitre (swelling
of the thyroid gland) and cretinism in children born to mothers with iodine deficiency. Niacin, thiamine, vitamin C, vitamin D and riboflavin deficiencies may be problems in certain communities. A deficiency of a single nutrient alone is rare. For example, although riboflavin deficiency alone is not serious, it usually indicates a deficiency in all the B vitamins.
Figure 2 Contributions to individual nutritional well-being
Assessing nutritional well-being
Nutritionists use many types of information to evaluate nutritional well-being. For example, health statistics, vital statistics, anthropometric data, food science information, diet surveys, agricultural data, economic data, socio-cultural data, clinical examinations and laboratory tests can be helpful.^4 In most forestry projects, examination of these types of existing data will improve the project planning process. Ministries, nutrition institutes, local universities, health centres or dispensaries are possible sources of information. Another essential information source is the community itself. Local officials, members of women's groups, traditional midwives and others know what is happening in their community and can offer their own perceptions and state their needs.
^4 Often, nutritionists compare anthropometric measurements (such as height and weight) to reference standards to determine nutritional status. In a forestry project with a nutritionist this is an important method for obtaining background nutrition information and for monitoring and evaluating the project. However, it may not be a feasible or adviseable to measure project success by having foresters weigh and measure babies. Thus, because the term nutritional status often reflects anthropometric measurements, the term nutritional well-being is used throughout this guide.
Table 1 describes the different types of information listed above. The table contains possible sources of information and explanations about how forestry project planners might be able to use the information.
Women's role in nutrition
Women are crucial in maintaining the nutritional well-being of family members for several reasons. Most notably, women play a central role in household food security. Their role in food production is well known but often minimized. In Africa it is estimated that women make up 60-80% of the labour force involved in food production. Additionally, some studies indicate that income received by women is more often used for food purchases than is men's income.
Within the household, women have responsibility for food storage, processing, preservation, and preparation in addition to their duties as child rearer, water and fuel carrier, etc. The labour demands on rural women are tremendous. The many demands placed on a woman's time mean that she cannot devote much time to any one activity, thus even her food production function has had to be altered in order for her to meet other demands. For example, in Zimbabwe, rural women have changed their crop production from the nutritious crops of sorghum, millet, and groundnuts to maize because the processing of the former crops is so demanding (Tagwireyi 1987).
Table 1 Assessing nutritional well-being
TYPE OF INFORMATION
POSSIBLE SOURCES
VALUE OF INFORMATION PROVIDED
UTILITY TO FORESTRY ACTIVITIES
Health and nutrition information
Health centres, nutritionists and health professionals
Existing information to determine the nutrition and health situation in the area.
Vital statistics
Ministries
Existing information to determine the nutrition and health situation in the area.
To set project objectives
Food science information nutrient content, biological availability, toxicity, food processing
Universities
Existing information to select species based on the community's nutritional needs
Anthropometric data
Nutrition institutions, nutritionists
Existing information to determine the nutritional situation in the area.
To determine the nutritionally vulnerable
Clinical examinations
Health professionals
Requires highly trained medical personnel and thus may be difficult for some forestry projects.
Laboratory tests
Health professionals
Requires highly trained personnel and large hospital facilities and thus may be difficult for forestry use.
To create a pool of baseline data for use in monitoring and evaluation
Dietary surveys
Nutrition institutions, nutritionists
Determines overall food consumption patterns including forest and tree foods eaten.
Agricultural data food production, food balance sheets
Nutritionists, agronomists, ministries, community members
Determines scarcity periods and food storage capacity. Determine food uses of trees and forests including snack foods. Determines the vulnerable.
To develop an idea of the level and types of existent indigenous knowledge
Economic data purchasing power, food prices and distribution
Economists, ministries, community members
Determines income distribution and the nutritionally vulnerable.
Sociocultural data food consumption patterns, food practices and beliefs
Community members, sociologists, universities, anthropologists
Determines child feeding practices, key food consumption, fuelwood use, women's workload.
To select indicators^5
^5 Only the last four types of information can reliably be used in the selection of indicators
<section>5</section>
II. Incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry projects
Define individual roles
Obtain background information
Define nutritional objectives
Decide on forestry and nutrition activities
Use nutrition indicators to monitor and evaluate projects
The first section of this manual described the theoretical links between forestry and nutrition. It will now address a series of questions such as: how can foresters incorporate nutrition into forestry projects; how do foresters link their knowledge of trees with the nutritional well-being of villagers?
The following guidelines provide an approach to incorporating nutrition into forestry projects when nutritional well-being is an overall project goal. They correspond to five steps: define roles; obtain background information; define specific objectives; decide on activities; and monitor and evaluate the project. The steps are not arranged in a sequence, they need to be adjusted to suit individual circumstances. For example, often the goals and objectives of the project will need to be determined prior to defining roles as they relate to nutrition objectives. Several steps, information collection for example, may have to be repeated as the project evolves. Finally it must be noted that the steps cannot be followed individually. That is, they must be completed keeping in mind the other elements of the process. Objectives may need to be reexamined given time and personnel limitations. The worksheets should be used to help tailor the approach.
An essential element of this methodology is the active participation of community members in all aspects of the project. By increasing the attention that is paid to local needs and uses of trees and forests in all forestry projects (not just community forestry projects), forestry can have a positive influence on nutritional well-being.
Define individual roles
If there are no nutritionists involved, who will be responsible for the nutrition part of the project? If a nutritionist is involved, at what stage and level will she/he be included? Worksheet A contains a list of some of the questions that may help clarify individual roles in the project.
Worksheet A
DEFINING ROLES
Objective: to determine the people that will be involved in the nutrition dimensions of the project and what role, if any, nutritionists will play.
Responsibility: project designer, staff and the community
Questions
1. What role do nutrition considerations play in the project?
2. How much time and how many people are needed to complete the tasks associated with the nutrition-related aspects of the forestry project?
3. Who is on the team?
4. If a nutritionist is part of the team, what is her/his responsibility?
5. Will a nutritionist be hired as a consultant? If so, what will she/he be contracted to do?
6. Is there a nutritionist that can act as a resource person? If so, what information can she/he provide?
7. To what extent can community members work to set nutrition goals and objectives, implement the plan and/or monitor progress?
8. If no nutritionist is involved, who will be responsible for the nutrition dimension of the project?
Obtain background information
Identify resources and collect data
Review basic information
Obtaining background information is an ongoing process. Team members must identify resources, including local people, sources of existing information, and methods for obtaining additional information. Then, together with the community, the team reviews basic information and/or collects additional information about the physical and socioeconomic characteristics, nutrition/food security concerns, and the use of forests and trees in the project area. Appendices 2 and 3 contain a list of sources and detailed background questions.
Identify resources and collect data
Rapid rural appraisal in northeast Thailand
Using rapid appraisal techniques, Somnasang et al. examined the use of natural food resources in northeast Thailand. Specifically, the researchers were interested in the sources of foods; kinds of foods; quantities and availability; factors influencing quantity and source; methods of acquisition; preparation and cooking methods; roles of taste, attitudes and beliefs; and methods of preparation. The information was used to evaluate effects of changes in farming patterns on nutrition. The primary techniques for gathering information were semi-structured interviewing, direct observation, and photography. The methods were fast, comprehensive and ideal for planning a more detailed study. Using a set of guidelines for the interviews, researchers visited eight villages in three provinces once during each of the different seasons in 1984-1985. In total 15 days were devoted to the field portion of the study (Somnasang et al. 1988).
Many individuals are potential sources of information. Interviews provide valuable insights into who has access to resources and how local people define poor diet. Possible key informants are health officials, project staff, extension workers, NGO workers (including religious organizations), teachers, leaders, and local nutritionists. In regard to nutrition, it is especially important to interview women's groups as women are generally in charge of feeding and caring for the family. Often, these groups can supply information about food, medicine and health in the community. Moreover, they will be able to suggest nutrition objectives and indicators that are of local concern. Project managers and planners may also want to visit a limited number of carefully selected men and women farmers of different strata and the landless to discuss issues of crops, income, and uses of trees and their products. Once the nutritionally vulnerable have been defined, they, themselves, may be able
to provide critical information about their situation, its causes, and how they would like to see the problems addressed.
In addition to interviews, visual inspection can be extremely helpful. Direct observation and photographs of routine activities in the forests (or involving trees) will provide some information about who uses the land and for what purposes. Photographs of children may provide an indication of acute nutrition problems.
Other possible resources are printed materials. A literature search of the area describing class/caste distinctions, and resource uses in terms of tenure and access, can contain information about nutrition and forest use. The search should be done across different fields of thought, among them history, political science, economics, anthropology, and ethnobotany. The search will help to determine those groups that may be nutritionally vulnerable, those who benefit from activities aimed at particular resources, and possibly, the uses of trees and forests. Health studies (including those on traditional health practices) and records of malnutrition and infection will give a picture of the nutrition problems in the area. Nutritional surveys and studies of the causes of malnutrition in an area provide additional information about the nutrition situation in the project area. Appendix 2 lists some sources of information and Table 1 in Section I lists different types of information
used in determining nutritional well-being.
When defining the resources that will be tapped for useful information, the planners always need to consider the personnel, time and resource availability. For example, photographic or video equipment may not be reasonable options because they are too expensive or unavailable. Additionally, the level of expertise of collectors and the amount of time and energy the project may want to spend training on techniques of collection need to be considered and determined.
Consideration must also be given to the kinds of information that will really be needed. It is tempting to try to access every available, potential information source, but this often isn't helpful. The only information that needs to be collected is that which can and will be used. Some information may be extremely important. For example, the information that is gathered before a project begins can provide baseline information for monitoring, evaluation and indicating project efficacy.
Finally, the data analysis resources that are available must also be a factor when deciding what information to collect. While it is nice to plan for collection of all relevant data, it is not always feasible or desireable.
Worksheet B
IDENTIFY SOURCES AND COLLECT DATA
Objectives: to identify information sources, including local people, printed material and others.
Responsibility: team members and the community
Questions
1. What are the information needs of the project at this stage?
2. What are the existing sources of information about the community and the women and men that live there (see also Appendix 2)?
e.g. local people:
teachers (school or college)
health staff (nurses, paramedics, doctors)
development staff
religious leaders
community groups and their leaders
agricultural extension officer
community nutritionist
books
journals
government serials and other government reports
3. Which of these sources are accessible?
4. Is additional information needed beyond these existing sources? If so, is rapid rural appraisal appropriate? Interviewing? Photography?
5. How much labour is available to gather and analyse information (either within the staff or the community)? What is the skill level of the collectors? Are they capable of doing the necessary research and collection? Does the project want to train either collectors or analysts?
After the information needs and the optimal data sources have both been determined, collection can begin. What are the particular problems in the community and who are the vulnerable groups? What criteria are used for determining nutritional vulnerability? For example, are the nutritionally vulnerable those households that face seasonal food insecurity, or are they children under five? Community input is especially important, as the community's assessment of the project, based on their own needs, should be the basis for the foresters' assessment of the sustainability of the project's initiatives. Local people's information needs can be included as part of project information needs. Info