<title>Reduction of wood waste by small-scale log production and conversion in tropical high</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
FAO would like to acknowledge the valuable assistance provided during the undertaking of this study by the Forestry Department of the Government of Papua New Guinea and by the Forest Research Institute in Lae. Without this cooperation the successful completion of the study would not have been possible.
<section>2</section>
Foreword
An important objective of programmes undertaken by the FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch during the past several years has been to improve utilization of tropical wood, especially through the reduction of forest residues. Studies by FAO have shown that nearly half of the timber volume felled during commercial harvesting operations in tropical forests remains in the forest as unutilized residues after the loggers have departed. Utilizing even a fraction of these residues would help extend the tropical forest resource and would reduce the area of forest that must be harvested in order to produce the approximately 235 million m^3 of industrial roundwood which is removed each year from tropical forests.
The case study reported in this document is part of a multi-year undertaking by FAO to assist the Government of Papua New Guinea to improve harvesting and primary processing of tropical timber. The field work, analysis of data, and preparation of the case study report were carried out by Risto Kilkki, who served as an Associate Professional Officer in the FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch during 1989-1991. Tixon Tiki of the Papua New Guinea Forest Research Institute at Lae actively participated in the study, providing very valuable assistance in making all the local arrangements, which permitted the successful conclusion of the project. Technical reviews of the analysis and report were provided by Knut Foss of the FAO Wood Industries Branch and Dennis Dykstra of the Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch.
This study forms part of a series which has been initiated by the Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch to assist developing countries in promoting harvesting systems, techniques and methods which could help to enhance productivity, reduce wood waste and make forest operations more environment ally acceptable. Emphasis has been placed on systems which will favour local people's participation, increasing employment and income and thus contributing to self reliance and development of local communities in rural areas. A list of publications in the series is provided on the back cover page of this report.
Rudolf Heinrich
Chief
Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch
FAO, Rome
<section>3</section>
Summary
A portable sawmill, called Wokabout Somil in Melanesian Pidgin, was studied in Papua New Guinea during May and June 1990. The purpose of the case study was to measure and analyze the productivity, recovery rate and sawn timber quality of the sawmill in order to increase possibilities for reducing waste and improving round timber usage in commercial logging operations in PNG.
Technical data concerning the sawmill were collected during a field test at the Kui logging operation, about 120 km south of Lae. Ten sample logs were sawn and the time consumed and recovery data were recorded. It was found that the roundwood consumption of the sawmill per hour varies between 0.5 and 2.5 m^3/h on working time. If the transport and moving times of each log are included, the size of the log is a critical factor in determining productivity. On effective time basis it can be assumed that the length of the log has a significant effect on the productivity of the sawmill. The recovery rate was found to vary between 45 % and 56 %. The recovery rate of a Wokabout Somil depends considerably on the sawing pattern used. The sawn timber production per day was found to vary between 1.0 m^3/day and 2.0 m^3/day depending on the skills of the sawmilling crew.
The quality of the sawn timber from the sawmill in this study was found to be rather good. In general the quality of the products depends a lot on the level of skills of the sawmilling crew in sawdoctoring and sawmilling itself. With a well trained sawmilling crew and good skills on sawdoctoring the Wokabout Somil is able to produce construction timber fulfilling the grading rules for construction timber in PNG.
The cost of the sawmill was found to be 181.5 K/m^3 (about US$ 191/m^3) during the first year of operation. As an average the yearly expenses of the sawmilling operation are about 19 000 K based on a yearly production of 104 m^3/year.
The roundwood sources that exist within the commercial logging operations were studied from earlier logging studies and by interviewing personnel of the Forestry Department. It was determined from the logging studies made in PNG that there exist after commercial logging operations about 60 m^3/ha merchantable sized standing mature trees on the logging site. According to the Forestry Department there are also left as an average 30 m^3/ha of uncommercial mature trees on the logging site.
Volume of the trees damaged during logging operations and left in the forest was found to be about 15 m^3/ha in size classes from 20 to 50 cm BHD.
The amount of waste logs extracted from the forest but left in the export harbour for not fulfilling the export grading rules was found to be from 10 to 35 % of the exported amount depending on the species selection of the logging operations.
As a result of the study it was concluded that mobile sawmilling in PNG could be enhanced by combining it with commercial logging operations. The logging companies have a significant amount of reject logs that are not accepted to be exported and thus need to be processed in the forest or at the export harbour. These reject logs can be used as raw material for local mobile sawmillers. The stand in logged over areas also gives sawmillers a possibility to do salvage logging in them. When doing these salvage loggings the sawmillers have a big advantage of the roads that were built in the forest during the previous logging operations. Combining mobile sawmilling in PNG with controlled logging would have a positive impact on forest management of the country.
The combination of logging operations and mobile sawmilling benefits the involvement of local people in the use of their own forest resourses.
<section>4</section>
Symbols, abbreviations and exchange rate
Symbols
cm = centimetre
g = gram
h = hour
ha = hectare
kg = kilogram
min = minute
mm = millimetre
s = second
Abbreviations
PNG = Papua New Guinea
BHD = breast height diameter
W.s. = Wokabout Somil
Exchange rate used (September 1990)
US$ 1 = K 0.95 (Papua New Guinean Kina)
<section>5</section>
REDUCTION OF WOOD WASTE BY SMALL-SCALE LOG PRODUCTION AND CONVERSION IN TROPICAL HIGH FOREST
1. Introduction
A portable sawmill, called the Wokabout Somil in Melanesian pidgin and the mobile sawmill or the Wokabout Sawmill in this report was developed and manufactured in Papua New Guinea. The introduction of the sawmill in 1983 was a result of a joint-venture project of the South Pacific Appropriate Technology Foundation and a Papua New Guinean national engineering company.
To date about 400 mobile sawmills have been produced and put into operation in PNG, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Cook Islands and Niue.
The basic idea behind increasing sawmill capacity was to give rural communities the possibility of producing their own lumber for housing purposes. The mobile sawmill converts logs into lumber at sites where there are no hauling or yarding machines available or where the site is inaccessible because of the lack of roads. To meet requirements the sawmill is made light and portable, with simple technology and maintenance needs.
The sawmills are bought by rural clans which seldom have previous experience in sawmilling or logging. Although the delivery of the sawmill includes a compulsory three week training for the users of the sawmill, the level of skills to take care of logging and sawing is very low. This, added to the great number of sawmills, has raised questions about the effects that sawmilling might have on forests in PNG, and whether there exist needs and possibilities for directing the activities toward more rational use of raw material.
The common way in which the sawmill is used is to take it to a site in a forest near a road and clearcut an area surrounding the sawmill. The radius of the clearcut area is normally about 50 metres, depending on the ability of the crew to roll logs at the sawing site. This way of doing clearcuts can cause problems if reforestation of the clearcut is neglected. Clearcut areas are normally situated in places where there are good quality logs available. Anyhow, the Wokabout Sawmill does not have technical properties to produce sawn timber of highest quality and therefore the raw material for the sawmill should be of rather low quality; high quality logs should be channelled to sawmills that have a higher quality of end product.
Little information has been collected about the use of the mobile sawmill in PNG. The information on productivity, need for manpower and the quality of lumber, as well as the level of skills among sawmillers are based mainly on opinions instead of proper studies. The Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch of FAO therefore carried out this study to evaluate the role of the mobile sawmill in forestry and to outline the needs and ways to improve usage of them. The main objective was to determine ways to reduce waste from logging and to increase the utilisation of reject logs from commercial logging operations by using mobile sawmills. The increased participation of rural communities in harvesting and wood processing was also examined.
2. Location of the case study
The study took place in May 1990 in Papua New Guinea. Field studies were carried out in the Kui logging area in Morobe province, about 120 km southeast of Lae.
The arrangements for the study were made together with the UNDP/FAO project PNG/86/009 and the Forest Research Institute in Lae. The Provincial Forestry Department in Morobe provided the Wokabout Sawmill and the work crew for the study. The Philippine logging company Timber Producers and Marketing Corporation (TPMC) provided the timber for sawing, as well as accommodation and living facilities during the field study.
3. Study methodology and data collected
The sawing at the Kui logging operation was studied as a case example and complementary information was obtained by interviewing people and collecting inventory data concerning other logging operations.
The time study consisted of sawing 11 reject logs chosen at random from a log pile in the export harbour of the logging area. The measurements and defects of the logs were registered and are shown in Appendix 1. The preparation and sawing time of every log were recorded to an accuracy of 0.1 second. The sawing process was divided into four work phases: adjusting the vertical and horizontal positions of the sawing carrier, sawing the length of a log, returning the carrier, and adjusting the vertical position.
The number and length of timber pieces sawn were recorded and are shown in Appendix II. The dimensions of the timber were measured from sample timber.
The level of skill and productivity among sawmillers varies considerably. Therefore to obtain a reliable overall picture of an operation one has to collect a large amount of data. In this case that was not possible because of the limited manpower and time. The results of this case study thus give just one example of a sawmill operation; other sawmills operating in PNG might deviate significantly from the figures given in this study. The sawmilling team studied was a very skilled one. Therefore the productivity and working habits of the group is supposed to be among the best with this equipment. The team had been trained by the Provincial Forestry Department, where a Philippine sawmilling specialist, Mr. Art Padua, did the training.
For the above reasons the figures given about production represent the maximum estimated capacity of the Wokabout Sawmill rather than the average production by sawmillers.
4. Description of the sawmill studied
The portable sawmill was developed and is being manufactured in Papua New Guinea. It is made under the Wokabout Somil Programme of the South Pacific Appropriate Technology Foundation (SPATF) in cooperation with a PNG National Engineering Company, the Wokabout Workshop.
The portable sawmill is a small scale sawmill designed for village use. It is used at the logging site to manufacture sawn timber straight from the felled logs. The machine itself consists of separate parts that can be hand carried to the site without any transportation equipment.
The sawmill produces dimensioned timber. The maximum dimensions of the timber are 250 x 100 mm in section. The maximum length of the logs to be sawn is 6.5 m.
The sawmill consists of an 8 m long track, an engine and circular saw unit mounted on a carrier, a hand winch to operate the saw and an 8 m x 4 m frame made out of steel tube. The frame provides a stand for the track on which the carrier is driven with the winch. The layout of the sawmill is seen in Photo 1.
Photo 1. The layout of the Wokabout Sawmill in operation.
Photo 2. The engine unit and track of the Wokabout Somil
Photo 3. The blades are mounted at an angle of 90 degrees to one another.
Photo 4. The sawing unit is driven by a hand winch.
Photo 5. The height of the sawing unit is adjusted manually with the help of wooden measure ticks.
The engine of the sawmill is an 18 horsepower Briggs & Stratton four stroke petrol engine. Its fuel consumption is about 20 litres in an 8 hour shift and oil consumption is about 4 litres per week. The engine uses regular gasoline. In normal sawmilling use the engine runs at 1800 revolutions/min.
The sawmill has two circular saws mounted at 90 degrees to one another. The diameter of the vertical saw is 32 inches and that of the horizontal saw is 12 inches. The circular saws have 6 removable teeth each. A tooth is tightened in the blade with a shank. The blades are belt driven with a normal working speed of about 600 r/min.
The frame supporting the track is made of steel tube with diameter of 10 cm. The frame is used also for gauging the saw.
For transportation the sawmill can be dismantled into smaller parts. The total weight of the sawmill is 500 kg consisting of 100 kg for the frame, 200 kg for the track and 200 kg for the engine and circular saws mounted on the carrier.
Photo 6. The engine unit being transported by four workers.
5. Logging in PNG
5.1. Logging operations in PNG
The total land area of PNG is 46 million ha. The area of closed forest is 36 million ha, of which 15 million ha are regarded as operable forest.
The Papua New Guinea forest resource is evenly distributed throughout the country. Approximately half the forest cover is formed by lowland rainforest less than 1000 m in altitude.
Commercial logging operations started in PNG in the 1950s. The annual cuttings have been growing year by year so that by the late 1980s the yearly production was about 5 million m^3 from an area of 80 000 ha.
The forest are owned by rural clans. Each clan is allowed to use its own forests and sell wood locally. Sales outside the local market and for export are controlled by Timber Licences that are controlled by the Government Forest Department. In some cases the government has purchased Timber Rights from landowners and for these areas it can grant Timber Licences to timber companies. Timber Rights are valid for up to 40 years, while Timber Licences are normally valid for 10 years.
Every timber company having a Timber Licence has to prepare a working plan for each 5 year cycle. This plan has to contain an overall schedule of activities concerning the working area. Companies are also asked to prepare a one year plan for details of logging operations such as movements of machines and felling of trees. However, most of companies are not preparing these plans properly. They are mostly based on map data without an on-site survey and therefore they often do not match the reality.
The government has acquired 6 million ha under Timber Rights. So far, about 2 million ha of this area has been logged and about 4 million ha are still to be logged. The remaining sawlog volume on this unlogged area is about 125 million m^3.
In 1990 a total area of 4.4 million ha containing a total volume of about 32 million m^3 of wood was under Timber Permits. The annual maximum cut was 3.7 million m^3 and the maximum annual export volume was 3.5 million m^3.
5.2. Selective logging method
The selective logging method has been introduced in the tropical rainforests partly because of the sensitivity of such forests to clearcutting and partly because of the need to harvest only the logs that are big enough in size to make processing them profitable.
This means that a logger is allowed to take out from the forest only permitted species and stems having a breast height diameter (BHD) greater than a specified limit.
In PNG the minimum BHD is 50 cm. Companies exporting logs normally use a minimum BHD of 60 cm.
The selective logging method is meant to give a sustainable yield of wood out from the forest. By taking out only mature trees, leaving behind younger generations, the future growth of the forest will be assured. In well planned and managed operations this goal can be achieved.
Depending on the logging operation, selective logging leaves behind various amounts of secondary class logs and defective trees which are under the minimum BHD size. These trees might have some value if taken out of the forest at the same time when they are found to be defective. If they are left in the forest to wait for a next logging operation their value will most likely be lost.
5.3. Raw material content of logging site after logging
Logging operations are very seldom done so that the maximum number of trees fulfilling the minimum BHD demand are logged. Therefore there are mature trees in the forest that can still be used as raw material without contravening forest management or threatening sustainability of the forest.
The evaluation of the raw material content of the logging site after an operation needs a detailed inventory on the site. The limited time for this case study did not allow that kind of examination.
In the Forest Working Plans of PNG there is a requirement to make a post-harvesting inventory on 5 % of the harvested area. This information can be used to determine the average raw material content in PNG forests. For the Kui logging project these inventories have not yet been done.
Buenaflor has made detailed inventories in his study on the Vanimo logging operations in PNG. He studied two logging sites in West Sepik in northwestern PNG. The following results were given in Working Document No. 15 FAO:DP/PNG/84/003.
Area A, containing 15.5 ha of forest, was logged in the normal manner used in PNG. That means logging without proper planning before the operation. Area B, containing 16 ha of forest, was logged with careful planning and supervision.
The distribution of trees in areas A and B before and after logging were as summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. The commercial and residual stands in areas A and B before and after logging operations at West Sepik, Papua New Guinea. Source: Working Document No. 15, FAO:DP/PNG/84/003.
Diameter class, cm
Total
Before logging: number of trees > 20 cm BHD
Area A
Area B
Total
Percent
Before logging: number of trees/ha > 20 cm BHD
Area A
Area B
Before logging: number of trees > 50 cm BHD
Location of trees
50-59 cm
60+ cm
Total
Area A
Area B
Area A
Area B
Area A
Area B
Forest road
Skid roads
Log landings
Forest
Total
Logs removed
After logging: trees remaining > 50 cm BHD
Total trees
Trees/ha
The differences between logging operations in areas A and B were mainly in the number of defective trees in size classes less than 50 cm BHD.
In the Buenaflor study about 22 mature trees per hectare having BHD above 50 cm were left on site after logging. Of these about 16 were in the size classes between 50 and 60 cm BHD.
The volume table for standing trees in PNG gives the volumes shown in Table 2 for different merchantable height classes.
Table 2. Standard volume table for commercial timber species in Papua New Guinea. Source: PNG Government Forest Department.
BHD, cm
Height classes, m
Volume, m^3
From the above information it can be calculated that after logging operations more than 60 m^3/ha merchantable sized mature trees are left in the forest. Of these about 45 m^3/ha are in BHD classes between 50 and 59 cm.
The value of the trees damaged during a logging operation will be lost if they are not used before they become affected by tree diseases. So the damaged trees, although not fulfilling the minimum BHD, should also be used as raw material in order to obtain the maximum advantage from the operation.
Buenaflor also studied the damage to the residual trees which resulted from the felling and extraction operations. The damage study was conducted on a 10.8 hectare sample plot that was situated in logging area B. The results of the study are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. Logging damage in a commercial operation in area A at West Sepik, Papua New Guinea. Source: Working Document No. 15, FAO:DP/PNG/84/003.
Description
Diameter class, cm
Total
Before logging: number of trees > 20 cm BHD
Total trees
Trees/ha
Removed for roads and landings
Remaining
After logging: number of damaged trees > 20 cm BHD
Crown broken
Stem injuries
Lost and/or destroyed
Total trees damaged
Trees/ha damaged
The total number of damaged trees in the forest after the operation was about 21 trees/ha in BHD classes from 20 cm to 50 cm. Most of the trees are in the smaller classes in that there are about 8 trees/ha in both 20 cm and 30 cm BHD classes. In the larger classes the number of damaged trees was smaller. In BHD classes above 50 cm there are not normally many damaged trees, because they are mostly logged and extracted from the forest to landings.
Based on the data in Table 3 and the estimated volumes from Table 2 it can be calculated that about 15 m^3/ha in BHD classes between 20 cm and 50 cm were damaged and left in the forest at the conclusion of the logging operation.
6. Portable sawmilling operation
6.1. Productivity in relation to time
The productivity of the sawmill was examined by conducting a detailed time study. Ten sample logs were sawn and detailed times were recorded during the operation. The measurements and descriptions of the sample logs are presented in Appendix 1.
This type of time study gives information about production in relation to effective working time. However, the results cannot be used to estimate the daily or weekly production of the sawmill.
The raw material consumption of the sawmill in effective working time was studied in the time study. The dimensions of the raw material were measured crosswise at both ends of the sample logs. The volume of the log, V, was calculated from the formula V = (D1 + D2 + D3 + D4)/(8piL), where D1, D2, D3 and D4 are the crosswise diameters at the ends of the log in metres, L is the length of the log in metres, and pi is 3.14159, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter.
The time required to process a log includes the setting of the log for sawing, sawing time, horizontal and vertical adjusting of the sawing unit during the sawing operation and minor servicing and repairs not exceeding 15 minutes. Data recorded during the time study give the following consumption per working hour according to log size.
Figure 1. The roundwood consumption of the sawmill in effective working time. Descriptions of the 10 sample logs for which data were recorded can be found in Appendix 1.
The rate of roundwood consumption by the sawmill varied between 0.5 and 2.5 m^3/hour of effective time. The roundwood consumption per unit of effective time does not seem to have a straight dependence on the volume of the log. In total operating time including all the setting up and moving of the logs, the volume of the log has a straight effect on the productivity. The length of the log is an important criterion on effective time as longer logs necessitate less adjustment of the sawing unit compared to the volume of timber sawn.
Figure 2. The effective time consumption per m^3 of roundwood processed in relation to the volume of the log.
In Figures 3 and 4 the time required for sawing each log is related to the amount of timber recovered from the log. For this calculation, recovery rate information from Section 6.3 has been used.
Figure 3. Production of sawn timber per hour of effective working time.
Figure 4. Processing time required per cubic metre of sawn timber recovered from the logs.
6.2. Overall productivity
The term "overall productivity" in this report means the average productivity of the sawmill over a longer period of time, for example the average production, measured in m^3/day, during the months of March and April 1990. This productivity includes all the side works, repairs and moving etc. of the sawmill in the working time; it is not merely the productive time in the sense of producing sawn timber.
The basic idea of using a mobile sawmill is to take it to the logging site and do the sawmilling there. The sawmill must therefore be installed on each sawing area before operation. The set-up time for the sawmill on a new area is normally about two hours covering the time taken to clear an area for the sawmill, to adjust the basement for the logs to be sawn and to install the sawmilling equipment.
The dismantling time is about 0.5 hours. The re-installation of the sawmill on the same site without transporting the sawmill over a longer distance takes normally about one hour.
On average two trees are sawn at a site. The average size tree used in a Wokabout operation in PNG gives three logs.
The sawmilling crew spends about two hours arranging the logs for sawing.
The overall production of the sawmill depends very much on the skills of the sawmilling group as well as on the maintenance of the equipment. The manufacturer of the Wokabout Sawmill estimates that a new group will achieve a production level of 0.8 m^3/day of sawn timber in the first year of operation. In the second year production will be 1.0 m^3/day and in the third year 1.25 m^3/day.
The Morobe Province Forestry Department has found from their studies that the average production of the sawn timber with Wokabout sawmills varies between 1.0 and 2.0 m^3/day. The maximum overall production for one crew over a longer period has been 4. 0 m^3/day.
6.3. Recovery rate of the Wokabout Somil
The volume of timber recovered from each sample log was measured. The dimensions of each log were measured crosswise at both ends of the log and log volumes were calculated from the formula given on page 12 of this report.
The volume of sawn timber produced from each log was determined by measuring the length, width, and thickness of each piece sawn from the logs, multiplying these dimensions (in metres) to calculate the cubic volume, and summing for all pieces cut from the log.
On average the recovery rate of the sawmill during the study was slightly more than 50 %. The recovery rate for a specific log depends primarily on the sawing pattern used. Figure 5 should be studied together with the information in Appendix 2 describing the sawing patterns of the sample log in the study.
The kerf of the sawmill is 7 mm.
Figure 5. Recovery rate for the sawn sample logs, with the volume of timber recovered expressed as a percentage of the volume of logs consumed during the operation.
The recovery rate for the ten logs varied between 44 % and 56 %. The most important factor affecting the recovery rate was the sawing pattern. The volume of the log does not seem to have an important effect on the recovery rate.
The sawmill cannot process the whole log and after normal sawing a 10 cm thick slice is left. This slice can be utilised in order to raise the recovery rate by edging and thinning it on top of another log, thus producing a wide plate of timber. The plate is normally 25 mm thick and from 300 to 500 mm wide. The time consumed in utilizing the slice is rather high because it requires additional adjustments of the sawmill.
Photo 7. The bottom slice of the log is sawn on top of another log into a wide timber plate.
6.4. Quality of products
The accuracy of sawing by the sawmill was estimated by measuring the width and thickness of sample pieces of sawn timber at one-metre intervals along their length. The results are summarized in Figures 6 and 7.
Figure 6. The accuracy of the width dimension as measured along the length of 100 x 50 mm timber sample pieces. Differences between vertical and horizontal sawing are not shown. Note that the greatest accuracy was achieved near the top of each piece.
The sample logs in this study were sawn with blades and teeth in good condition. Variations in the dimensions were mainly caused by the mechanical structure of the sawmill.
As a mobile unit, the Wokabout Somil has been designed to minimize the weight of the components. This results in reduced rigidity of the main beam and supporting frames, which affects the accuracy of sawing due to vibrations.
The quality of sawing with the Wokabout Sawmill varies considerably, depending on the skills of the crew and the maintenance of the saw blades and other equipment. With good maintenance the Wokabout Somil is able to produce timber the quality of which is reasonable for building purposes. However, on average the saw blades are poorly maintained which causes big variations in dimensions and very uneven surface of the timber.
Figure 7. The accuracy of the thickness dimension as measured along the length of the 100 x 50 mm timber sample pieces. Differences between vertical and horizontal sawing are not shown. Note that the greatest accuracy was achieved at both the top and the bottom of the pieces.
In PNG the sawn timber should be treated with dip diffusion preservatives before use or sale. To be successful the treatment should be done 8 hours after sawing because the surface of the timber cannot absorb preservative when it is too dry. The Wokabout sawmilling crews do not normally have a proper tank for dip diffusion and therefore the treatment is not done. Untreated timber is not allowed to be exported although it might technically be high quality timber. As a result of the treatment problem there is no export of timber from mobile sawmills.
At the moment the demand for sawn timber in PNG exceeds the production, so quality is not rated as a very important factor among the sawmillers because even the poorest quality of timber can be sold.
6.5. Costs
Costing of the sawmill is highly dependent on the overall costs in the area where the operation is done. A very high proportion of the cost consists of the cost of labour, gasoline, lubricants and spare parts etc., the prices of which are related to the overall cost in the country.
For this study, the consumption assumptions of a Wokabout Sawmill are assumed to be as follows:
· Gasoline consumption by the engine is 20 litres in an 8 hour shift and the oil consumption is 4 litres per week, assuming a weekly oil change.
· The circular saws are assumed to last about 6 months if good care is taken of them. The price for the larger blade is about 700 - 1000 K and the smaller one, 200 K. There are 6 teeth and shanks in each plates. The lifetime of a tooth is two weeks and that of a shank is 6 months. The price for a tooth is 5.4 K and for a Shank 11 K.
· The blades are run by 4 belts which need to be changed every 3 months. The cost of the 4 belts is 34 K.
· The air filter costs 4 K and lasts about three months. Spark plugs (2), about 2 K per each, should be changed every third month. The bearings in the plates and rail cost 150 K per year.
· The sawmilling crew consists of five men: 1 operator, 2 siters and 2 utility men. Wages amount to about 40 K per week for the operator, and 35 per week for each siter and each utility man.
· Establishment costs are estimated to be as follows:
Wokabout Somil
K 7000
Chainsaw
K 750
Dip treatment tank
K 300
Dip diffusion salts
K 550
Petrol, oil, tools
K 200
Transport to site
K 150
Total establishment cost
K 8950
The detailed cost estimate summarized in Table 4 has been derived from the information above plus estimates provided by the manufacturer and by experienced users.
Table 4. Estimated cost of operating a Wokabout Sawmill for three years.
Costing assumptions
1. Co