<title>Extension woman to woman - Training peasant women liaisons to reach peasant women</title>
<section>1</section>
Rural women in Honduras
Rural women in Honduras
Rural people in Honduras constitute almost 61 percent of the total population. They have little access to basic development goods -- food, shelter, potable water, sanitation systems, education, communications, roads, and markets. Eighty percent of all rural people live in poverty. Sixty-six percent of farmers who produce basic grains, the country's staple food, have access to only eight percent of all cultivable land. This 66 percent has, on average, slightly more than one hectare of land to secure a year's supply of basic grains to feed a family with approximately six children, and to produce a surplus for the nation. Peasants cultivate indigenous seed varieties using rudimentary hand tools and some animal traction to prepare, sow, and harvest the land. In need of cash, peasant farmers often sell part of their food crop in order to purchase goods necessary for their family's livelihood or to settle debts, only to buy food at high prices in periods of scarcity.
Paid work opportunities for both rural men and women are minimal, but the situation is even more difficult for rural women. In some regions, women's handicraft production increases their official economic activity rate, but the 1988 census shows an economic activity rate for rural women of 11 percent. This is not to say that women do not work. The traditional gender division of labour hides the actual economic participation rate of rural women. Women's work is even further under-estimated in the agricultural sector because women typically do not consider themselves primarily as agricultural workers. A 1990 comparison of four studies on women's economic participation in the 1980s revealed that 75-79 percent of rural women participate in agricultural production, although this is often seasonal or part-time. This "adjusted" figure includes women's participation in subsistence production in areas that traditionally are under the woman's control -- poultry, pig and goat
production, and vegetable gardening. These activities normally take place close to the home, allowing women to attend to domestic and productive responsibilities at the same time.
The census shows that, of all women who claim to be heads of households in rural areas, 22 percent are involved in economic activity, which is more than twice the rate registered for women who are spouses of a head of household (nine percent). The most recent statistics on rural households headed by single women -- 17.8 percent according to the census under-estimate the actual number of women with dependents who lack a companion. Abandoned women's emigration to urban areas, single mothers who identify their oldest son as the household head, and separated women reincorporated in their parents' households, hide the actual "count" of single mothers.
Trends in rural emigration indicate that women respond differently to rural poverty compared to rural men. They are less likely than men to remain in rural areas. Women make up 49 percent of the rural population and 53 percent of the urban population. Of all rural emigrants, 54 percent are women, of which 64 percent migrate to urban areas. Higher women's emigration is often linked with either temporary or permanent dissolution of households, and the need to earn an income.
Rural women's educational level is equivalent to men's, but both are deficient. Illiteracy is concentrated in rural areas where, according to 1988 statistics, 51 percent of the population is illiterate. The historical trend that discriminated against young girls' education has been rectified in Honduras, according to recent census data. Comparing women to men, slightly more women are literate than men.
The poverty of the rural population is manifested by chronic malnutrition. Multiple births without adequate spacing, and nearly continuous breast feeding have even greater negative consequences for women's health. Depending on the region, illiterate women in rural Honduras have an average of between 6.7 and 8.2 children in their lifetimes, averages which are among the highest in Latin America. Seventy percent of all breast feeding mothers suffer from Vitamin A deficiency, and iron intake is estimated at 40 percent of the recommended level. The rural population suffers from both caloric and protein deficiencies that limit mental and physical growth as well as the capacity for continuous physical activity.
<section>2</section>
Project background
Project background
The "Promotion and Training Programme Women's Incorporation in Rural Development" is part of a 10-year long process of integrating rural women's concerns into development planning and project execution in Honduras, an effort spearheaded by UN organizations and supported primarily by the Government of the Netherlands.
Promotion of women's participation in production began in the 1970s with financial assistance offered by the United Nations System to the National Agrarian Institute of the Government of Honduras, with the goal of strengthening organized peasant groups who have benefitted from Agrarian Reform (called the "Reformed Sector"). Agricultural producers not benefitting from Agrarian Reform (the "Non-Reformed Sector") have been provided with services through the Ministry of Natural Resources; since the 1950s this has included activities for women, although these were primarily directed toward activities in the domestic sphere. In any case, rural development policy in Honduras has been oriented toward production, which was traditionally considered to be "men's" work.
The FAO project evolved out of a joint project of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the FAO.^2 Directed to female members of families in the Reformed Sector, this women-specific project had a budget of $1,095,000 over three years (1983-1986) to implement technical training and develop a rotating credit fund for small productive projects. However, only five percent of the total budget was allocated to training for women.
^2 Project symbol DP/HON/82/007 (1983-86).
The lack of a training component for rural women had a negative impact on the project. First, it allowed women to develop unrealistic expectations of monetary returns that could not be met because of their low level of skills and organizational capacity. Second, despite the modest success of some women's groups in the implementation of productive and marketing activities, the project's overall objectives were not attained. Forfeited loans amounted to 40-60 percent of all loans made, depending on the region. The absence of a good marketing strategy led to market losses that made it impossible to replenish the project's rotating fund.
The specific problems of women in the Reformed Sector were determined to be:
1) a high rate of illiteracy,
2) lack of motivation to assume new roles,
3) little awareness of production alternatives,
4) lack of time to participate in groups due to the demands of household activities.
It became clear that the grassroots women's activities in the UNDP/FAO project were not addressing the basic educational and organizational needs of women. National administrators and international development officials proposed a new project, focused solely on training rural women and sensitizing and training extensionists who worked with those women. The fundamental conviction behind the proposed new project was that economic activities could not take place without prior organization, and that training is a necessary tool for group organization. Supported with US$ 698 500 contributed by the Government of the Netherlands, the new project^3 got underway in February 1986 and its first phase was completed in September 1989. FAO coordinated the project in collaboration with the two government agencies responsible for extension in Honduras -- the National Agrarian Institute and, later, the Ministry of Natural Resources.
^3 Project symbol GCP/HON/013/NET (1986-89), also referred to as "Phase I" of the FAO project.
From the beginning, the FAO project aimed to strengthen rural women's organization, enhance awareness both from the bottom up and from the top down, develop appropriate agricultural training techniques, and train rural women to act as liaisons between the extension system and grassroots women's groups. Six regions were targeted by the project: Comayagua, Copán Choluteca, El Paraíso, Francisco Morazán, Olancho and Santa Barbara.
Four different types of liaisons were trained: 1) Literacy Workers, 2) Housing/Environment Liaisons, 3) Women's Group Organizers, and 4) Food Production Liaisons. The training of rural women was complemented by the simultaneous training of extensionists and other professional staff from the Government extension agencies. Grassroots participation and feedback helped the project to fine-tune its goals and methods, meet the needs of the peasant women and their organizations that were its beneficiaries, and assure project acceptance. This participation has been an important ingredient in success throughout the project.
The project's specific objectives were:
1) to train 200 peasant women, and
2) to train 152 extensionists and other extension staff.
Course content for the 200 rural women trainees included literacy, housing improvements, group organization and project implementation, and food production for improved household nutrition. The training for the 152 extension workers aimed to sensitize them to the situation that rural women confront, and to promote appropriate technology and organizational techniques for the development of social and productive projects to benefit rural women. The expected impact of the activities in the project area was improved capacity on the part of rural women to plan and execute productive and social projects based upon their own and their communities' felt needs.
To address the needs of women in the Non-Reformed Sector and to strengthen training in nutrition, the FAO project requested that, in addition to the National Agrarian Institute, the Ministry of Natural Resources also participate. Administrative complications, however, limited the Ministry's participation to the last of the four training modules.
The lessons learned in the process of project execution, and the need to consolidate groups that had benefited from it, convinced the FAO to support once the project ends support a six-month interim project^4 which would offer continuity while a special FAO/Netherlands Government team developed a full second phase for the project. Phase II^5 would span the period from November 1990 to May 1992, with a budget of US$ 410,380. As can be seen in the Chart, Phase I was oriented towards organizing peasant women into groups, training certain group members as extension liaisons, and sensitizing the extension workers who serve rural women. The objectives of the six-month interim project were to organize credit sources, provide follow-up training for some of the women trained in Phase I, more clearly define the training and role of the most successful class of extension liaisons and peasant promoters, and document Phase II of the project.
^4 Project symbol TCP/HON/0051 (1990), with a budget of $75,000.
^5 Project symbol GCP/HON/015/NET (1990-92).
CHART: OBJECTIVES OF THE DIFFERENT PROJECT PHASES
"PHASE I"
CODE: GCP/HON/013/NET (1986-89)
BUDGET: $698,479
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Train a total of 200 persons, mostly women
a) Women's Group Organizers
b) Male and female Literacy Workers
c) Community Food Liaisons
2. Train 152 state extension agents and social promoters
ADDED COMPONENTS:
1. Train women Housing/Environment Liaisons
2. Establish Inputs and Seeds Fund
3. Follow-up training in family poultry production
"INTERIM PROJECT"
CODE: TCP/HON/0051 (1990)
BUDGET: $75,000
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Establish pilot credit programme to test family poultry production
2. Re-activate Rotating Fund for Peasant Women (frozen in 1987)
3. Write up Phase II of project
"PHASE II"
CODE: GCP/HON/015/NET (1990-92)
BUDGET: $410,380
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Train 60 new Community Food Liaisons and follow up on previously trained CFLs
2. Train 60 state extensionists and social promoters
3. Establish poultry credit for all groups with CFLs
4. Continue Inputs and Seeds Fund
5. Provide technical assistance for service and productive projects for both subsistence and income generation
6. Establish and document training methodology
7. Support efforts to research and produce intermediate technology for grain mills and water supply
8. Establish network of resources that peasant women can exploit for technical and financial
Phase II, now in progress, is working to consolidate the peasant women's groups, train another 60 women as extension liaisons, provide training for another 60 extensionists, provide further practical training for peasant women, promote the production of intermediate technology for grain mills and water supply, and build a network of technical and financial support to continue beyond the project's end. (See Chart for details.)
<section>3</section>
Training in gender for extensionists
Training in gender for extensionists
Training was conceived as a tool to reshape the attitudes of extension staff towards working with women. The great majority of extensionists held the view that women were suited to household and maternal functions only, and expressed the general attitude that a woman "only knows how to care for children, wash clothes and cook." Thus, for them, women's participation in production and in all activities related to rural development was insignificant. This bias limited women's access to agricultural extension.
The essence of the training was to promote broader acceptance among extension workers of the idea of working with women in rural development programmes and, at a macro level, to strengthen institutional capacity to work with women after project completion. It was considered vital to project success to bring about a change in attitudes within the National Agrarian Institute -- one of two agencies in the country responsible for extension. The Institute had a male production-oriented concept of rural development, few women employees, and only a nascent women's section. The training in gender was essential to guarantee women a minimum of access to extensionists' time.
The most important element of the extensionists' training was the course on "Methodology for Promotion and Organization of Rural Women". Training emphasized the need to: 1) better motivate field personnel to collaborate with women, 2) identify traditional and non-traditional roles of women, and 3) provide feedback to field personnel on their field work. This women-specific approach addressed the structural problems that extensionists and women confront in group organization -- such as the heavy domestic workloads of rural women, and the low priority extensionists often give to women -using dramatizations to enact real-life situations.
Training of extensionists emphasizes the need to better motivate field personnel to collaborate with women.
The four themes of the training were: 1) peasant economy, 2) the gender division of labour, 3) conditions in which women work, and, 4) compatibility of women's roles as workers and mothers.
Training courses were continually subject to adaptation and improvement, but each took a non-threatening, non-"feminist" approach based on traditional Honduran values. Through discussions, case studies, dramatizations and exchange of experiences, participants dedicated five days to changing their previously held conceptions. Begun in 1986, this training continues today in each of the executing agencies under the auspices of the FAO project and other supporting institutions.
<section>4</section>
Extension liaisons
Literacy workers
Housing/environment liaisons
Women's group organizers
Elements of success
Additional constraints
Lessons learned
Extension liaisons
The formation of "extension liaisons" was meant to improve the ability of the extension system to reach rural women by educating women from rural communities to work with grassroots women's groups, thus expanding the scope and quality of the extension services for rural women. In order to be considered as candidates for training, potential liaisons had to be literate. Initially, the project proposed that women needed a sixth-grade education, but within the first six months of execution, expectations had to be lowered because women with this level of education were not to be found.
Women were trained as one of four types of extension liaisons, in four separate training modules:
* Literacy Workers
* Housing/Environment Liaisons
* Women's Group Organizers
* Food Production Liaisons
The most successful module was the fourth, which prepared Food Production Liaisons. The other three training modules suffered from institutional, financial and social constraints that limited their success. However, the fact that the different modules were executed consecutively rather than simultaneously made it possible to apply the lessons learned from the first modules to the later modules. In this way, the so-called "Interim Project" and Phase II of the project were directed toward replicating and documenting the fourth, most successful module -- that of the Food Production Liaison. A description of the four training modules and the subsequent work of the women and men who received the training is given below.
Literacy workers
Learning how to read and write gives higher skill levels and greater personal confidence that in turn enhance democratic group processes and boost participation at the grassroots level. As well, with 50 percent of their members illiterate, women's groups in the project area had difficulty dealing with technical problems that might otherwise have been tackled on a group basis. The FAO project addressed this concern by training 141 Literacy Workers to teach basic math, reading and writing.
Eighty percent of the trainees chosen by the National Agrarian Institute were women. The methodology used for literacy training was developed by the Ministry of Public Education for their national literacy programme.
Some 97 literacy circles were formed between 1986 and 1990 in the project area, but by 1991 only 30 circles were still functioning. More than half of the Literacy Workers never completed their first course. Despite the critical need for literacy training, cultural, personal and institutional problems limited implementation of the plan. Women's participation as Literacy Workers was limited by socio-cultural obstacles. The women were at times denied permission by their fathers or husbands to travel to the villages where they taught. Literacy classes generally were offered in the evenings, and walking through the woods or crossing rivers at night was considered dangerous for women. They did not have the freedom to travel, or the encouragement and support at home to be accompanied by a family member.
After the Literacy Workers were trained and had initiated their teaching activities, lack of follow-up on the part of extensionists in each region also weakened the expected results. Most extensionists did not stay in the villages after dark, since transport was difficult and they were not paid for overtime.
Literacy Workers expected technical support for the development of literacy circles and were also led to believe that they would receive financial support for their activity, including improvements in the teaching site and a token amount of pay for their work. They were disappointed in both expectations. As a result, Literacy Workers did not continue teaching.
Housing/environment liaisons
The Housing/Environment Liaison module was not one of the three modules originally proposed in the project document. Rather, it was proposed in 1988 by the director of the National Agrarian Institute. The director at that time was interested in supporting traditional projects for women as mothers and housewives.
Although the concept was somewhat at odds with the project's objective of changing attitudes about women's multiple roles, the project team agreed to implement the module, recognizing that the overall lack of infrastructure adversely affects women's time availability and family hygiene. Housing in rural areas is typically cramped and unsanitary. Difficult living conditions impede women's participation in group activities.
After their training, the enthusiasm with which the Housing/ Environment Liaisons carried out their work led to demands from grassroots groups that the project could not fulfil. The Liaisons were active within their groups, especially in the construction of improved wood-burning stoves. For stove construction and many other housing improvements, a certain amount of materials had to be purchased -- nails, hammers and tiles, for instance. Without credit, most women could not make even simple improvements.
The improvements that the women considered most important -- building concrete floors, constructing water receptacles and latrines, and improving roofs required construction materials whose costs were prohibitive. The transfer of appropriate technology generated a demand for larger, more comprehensive changes in infrastructure that required credit and construction materials. When the project team recognized that the Housing Liaisons were creating a demand that could not be satisfied, training and follow-up activities were halted. The Housing/Environment Liaisons and their groups lost the motivation to continue home improvement activities, although some have since been able to take advantage of outside support from non-governmental development organizations to implement major improvements in their communities.
Women's group organizers
The Women's Group Organizers module was proposed in order to develop "peasant women activists" among women who belonged to predominately male peasant organizations. These women typically had above-average levels of organizational consciousness, but their access to decision-making within the organizations was usually minimal. The "activism" proposed was intended to promote change in male-dominated peasant organizations and to stimulate demand for extension services in the groups these women led.
The training of the Women's Group Organizers consisted of six one-week courses on the following themes:
1) National Policies
2) Rural Women's Reality
3) Home Economics and Women's Health
4) Administration of Productive Projects
5) Integrated Family and Collective Gardens
6) Project Planning.
The training methodology included talks, demonstrations, action, group dynamics, role-playing, and discussion and problem-solving in small groups. After completing the courses, each woman, depending on her circumstances, committed herself to promoting the formation of 5-20 groups of rural women. The work of these women was to encourage grassroots organization and train group members in appropriate agricultural techniques. The Women's Group Organizers were supported by the project for four months with a 300 Lempira ($75) per month subsidy; after this time the subsidies were supposed to be provided by their peasant organizations.
A number of problems arose among the Women's Group Organizers and the peasant organizations they belonged to that created obstacles to the continuity and sustainability of their work. One of the problems was a lack of conviction and hence a lack of resources from peasant organizations to support the Women's Group Organizers. (The responsibilities of a Women's Group Organizer were equivalent to those of a full-time male peasant organizer who generally received about $150/month for his work, plus expenses.) Second, the drop-out rate among initial trainees was high. And, finally, the Women's Group Organizers' own workload proved to be incompatible with full-time organizing activities, particularly for women heads of household, and personal confrontations at the household level were common. Despite these difficulties, 55 of the original 92 women trained continue in some organized capacity today, although not in that originally designated by the project.
Their job was to encourage grassroots organization and to teach appropriate agricultural techniques.
Elements of success
The "multiplier effect" of the Women's Group Organizer training was very great. Statistics from the National Peasants' Association of Honduras (ANACH - Asociación Nacional de Campesinos de Honduras), for example, show that within 18 months after 17 Women's Group Organizers were trained, they formed 61 new groups with a total membership of 800 women. The Organizers' increased motivation and initial remuneration gave them the willingness, confidence and ability to transfer the knowledge they received through training to numerous groups within their area of influence. These women were also inspired by their previous involvement in peasant organizations.
By offering technical support in villages where extensionists rarely visited, Women's Group Organizers initiated and continued work that would not have been possible otherwise, helping new groups to form and consolidate and to administer their affairs. The women's groups formed enjoyed stability thanks to continuous supervision by their Organizer, rather than having to wait for an extensionist to arrive.
The political impact of the women's training was felt in the household, the community and the peasant organizations. Women's involvement in organizations increased their responsibilities in the public sphere.
Trained peasant women who belonged to predominantly male organizations began to demand increased decision-making power and fought for recognition of their rights. The women of the National Peasants' Union (UNC -- Unión Nacional de Campesinos), for example, formed a block and in 1988 successfully demanded the right to vote within the organization. Female members of ANACH have pushed for greater representation at the regional level, demanding that at least one woman be included in the leadership of each region.
Increased activity often caused personal problems for the women because they were taking on a non-traditional role. After a period of time, though, the positive results of the Organizers' activities transformed village gossip into community respect. Women working as Organizers universally agreed that they initially experienced rejection at home and in the community, but that their struggle to work with the women was worthwhile. Overall, the women, the peasant organizations, and the project's personnel recognize that women's greater presence at all levels within the peasant organizations is a direct result of the training programme.
Additional constraints
The high drop-out rate among trainees, especially at the beginning of the project, was found to be in part the result of trainees' lack of connection to a grassroots base. Often the women chosen by the peasant organizations to participate in training were involved in their organizations at the regional or national level. They were not able or willing to transfer their knowledge to grassroots groups. In these cases, the desired multiplier effect did not materialize.
Lack of funding was the most persistent constraint to successful continuation of the work of the Women's Group Organizers. Each Organizer was supposed to depend on her own peasant organization for a subsidy, or at least to cover travel expenses, after the end of the first four months of project execution. However, predominantly male peasant organizations denied payment to the women Organizers, or paid them half the men's rate. Women's peasant organizations had limited funds to pay the Organizers, having depended on volunteerism in the past; even payment of travel allowances was interminably delayed, and Organizers had to pay transportation and meal costs out of their own pockets.
Payment for work that many consider to be political activism can be controversial, but not for the Women's Group Organizers themselves. Almost one-third are single mothers. They work out of necessity as seamstresses, farmers, or market vendors. Organizing is itself a full-time activity, and productive work cannot be carried out while organizing and attending to grassroots groups on a full-time basis. Without compensation, the women were unable to expand their organizing activities beyond their villages.
The majority of Women's Group Organizers also had to struggle within their families for the right to participate actively as organizers. The women report that their husbands mistreated them, or tried to control them (one man reportedly even left his wife), once they had completed their training and begun organizing. They received neither support nor approval because, in the words of one woman, "I was a different person after the training. I had more confidence, and my husband didn't know what to do with me." After a period of personal struggle within the family, however, most husbands came to recognize the value of their wives' participation and allowed them to leave the house and travel to other villages.
Lessons learned
The three principle lessons derived from the Women's Group Organizer module are: 1) the need for incentives for full-time participation in organizing activities, 2) the desirability of selecting women who are connected to the grassroots in order to achieve the greatest impact, and 3) the need to integrate spouses in women's efforts in order to soften the impact of women's personal changes and their new time commitments. These lessons and others were applied in the final training module, described in the following chapter.
<section>5</section>
A model for success: the food production liaison
The idea behind the training
Research and action - training methodology
Motivate to produce - tools, training and credit for women
Inputs and seeds fund
Poultry credit fund
Rotating fund for peasant women
A model for success: the food production liaison
The idea behind the training
The fourth module, limited to the Departments of Comayagua, Copán and Choluteca, trained peasant women as Food Production Liaisons. This module aimed to improve nutritional levels in the project area, while redressing the lack of attention given to women's economic responsibilities and to the gender division of labour in the countryside. The component was oriented toward supporting women's traditional roles in subsistence agricultural production.
The productive activities of the forerunner FAO/UNDP project in the early 1980s had not been entirely successful, in part because families had to sacrifice their welfare to obtain a profit, when what they really needed were modest investments to improve family consumption. For example, pigs were treated with medicines while families could not afford medical care for their children, and chickens were given imported feed that cost more than the families' corn. The FAO project now proposed to improve subsistence production rather than supporting production for profit. Cultivating indigenous varieties of grains, vegetables and fruits, and breeding indigenous small livestock is common among peasant families who cannot afford expensive inputs required by high-yield crop varieties imported from outside the region or provide animals with special diets and expensive medicines. But these home-grown varieties are minimally productive because normally no steps are taken to control plant
or animal diseases or to improve production. The training proposed to improve women's knowledge of and control over production for consumption and to enhance family survival strategies.
The project proposed to improve productivity and knowledge to meet subsistence needs, rather than to generate profit.
Increased subsistence production is of paramount importance in the project area. Though impacts on family consumption have not been measured, it appears that the increase in family consumption of poultry products, vegetables and fruits since implementation of this phase has been highly significant. The improved diet also represents a real economic benefit.
This module adapted many of the elements of the Women's Group Organizer module, but changed those that had not worked. For example, greater care was taken in selecting participants for the courses than had been the case in the previous three modules. After staff from both the National Agrarian Institute and the Ministry of Natural Resources had identified potential trainees and beneficiary groups, they asked each women's group to make the final decision on who would represent them 