<title>A guide to marketing costs and how to calculate them</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The intention of this Guide is to explain basic concepts of agricultural marketing costs and marketing margins. It identifies the main types of marketing costs, provides brief advice on how to calculate them and discusses the interpretation of marketing margins.
An understanding of costs and margins is essential for all those involved with agricultural marketing. Farmers seeking to produce new crops need to be aware not only of their likely production costs but also of the costs of marketing these crops. Extension workers need to be able to advise farmers and farmers" groups on such matters. Wholesale and retail traders must, of course, be fully aware of their costs if they are to trade profitably. Finally, government officials concerned with monitoring the efficiency of agricultural markets need to have a full understanding of marketing costs and margins and need to be able to monitor these on a regular basis if they are to propose viable improvements, such as new markets. In part, the aim of this Guide is to correct some of the widely held misunderstandings over marketing costs. Traders' margins are often looked upon as being excessive; frequently this is because the observer lacks a full appreciation of all the costs involved.
This Guide should be particularly useful to marketing officers and extension workers who are called upon during their work to advise farmers on marketing and prices. It is hoped that it will be used by agricultural training colleges for their courses in agricultural marketing. The Guide can be used as a companion to the FAO publication Horticultural Marketing - a resource and training manual for extension workers (AGS Bulletin No. 76) and its accompanying videos.
The Guide has been prepared by Andrew Shepherd of the Marketing and Rural Finance Service of FAO. It has benefitted from comments received from many of the FAO marketing staff, both in Rome and in the field.
H. de Haen
Assistant Director-General
Agriculture Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The sequence of stages involved in transferring produce from the farm to the consumer is generally referred to as a marketing chain. Examples of marketing chains are shown on the opposite page.
The consumer could be as close to the producer as the same village or could be a consumer of cash crops living on the other side of the world. All transfers involve marketing activities in some form or other. All activities involve costs. At the simplest level the cost involved may just be the time taken by a farmer to walk to a nearby market and stay there until all his or her vegetables are sold. At the most complex level a product may be stored for lengthy periods, transported long distances and processed several times before reaching the form in which it is finally sold.
Why is the price of a product in a shop or retail market often so much higher than the price paid to the farmer? The costs involved with marketing are not always fully understood. We can understand that traders or processors spend money on transport or packaging or on fuel for a rice or maize mill but there are many other, less obvious, costs. Because these costs are not always visible, those doing the marketing are often accused of making unreasonable profits. People look at prices paid to farmers by traders and compare them with the prices consumers pay for the same product and assume that the farmers and consumers are being exploited. Sometimes, of course, traders do make very high profits but on other occasions they make small profits or even losses. Clearly, unless they make an overall profit traders will not be keen to continue in business, to the disadvantage of both consumers and farmers.
Generally, the more complex and lengthy the marketing chain the higher are the marketing costs. Thus simple comparison of farmer prices with retail prices is a poor indicator of marketing efficiency as it does not take into account the costs involved in moving produce along the marketing chain from farmer to consumer. If a farmer lives 20 km from a market he will normally receive a higher share of the final price than one who lives 200 km away, because of lower transport costs. A producer of a perishable crop, such as tomatoes, is likely to receive a lower share of the final price than the producer of a non-perishable crop such as coconuts because some of his crop may be unsaleable by the time it reaches the market. A farmer who grows apples may receive a lower share of the retail price than one who produces pineapples, because apples can be stored for several months to take advantage of higher prices later in the year, while pineapples cannot, but storage costs money.
Similarly, an onion farmer may get less of the final retail price than a cauliflower farmer because onions can be stored for several months. Thus, in comparing farmer and consumer prices, we need to be fully aware of all the costs involved. Only then can we see if excessive profits are being made, if the marketing system is inefficient or if the high costs are justified.
This Guide briefly explains the concept of marketing costs and their calculation. Marketing margins are also discussed. The Guide will be particularly useful to marketing officers and extension workers who are called upon to advise farmers on marketing during the course of their work. Sometimes, for example, it may be in the interests of farmers to work together as a group to jointly market their produce. However, before this is done, someone, such as the extension officer, needs to be able to calculate the costs involved so that farmers can be sure they would be better off using a different marketing procedure.
Marketing practices vary so much around the world and according to the type of produce that this Guide can only identify possible costs and indicate ways of calculating them. In one country farmers may them selves take their produce to the wholesale market; in another, produce may be handled by two or three traders before it reaches the market. Differences in marketing methods even occur within countries. It is therefore impossible to provide a simple methodology for evaluating costs. For the same reason, it is clear that there is no such thing as a "reasonable" marketing cost for a crop which extension workers could use to compare with costs in their area. The costs of marketing any one product depend on the circumstances in the country and in the area concerned.
Senior government officials who wish to go into more depth about cost calculation methods may like to refer to Costs, Margins and Returns in Agricultural Marketing, a publication which is available from the Marketing and Rural Finance Service of FAO in Rome.
The first chapter of this Guide briefly summarises the main costs associated with agricultural marketing and explains why they can vary so much. Subsequent chapters consider each individual type of cost (for example, packaging, handling, transport) in more detail. The Guide then discusses how to put together all of the individual costs in order to determine the total marketing costs involved in moving produce from the farmer to the consumer. A final chapter looks at marketing margins, how they are calculated and how to interpret them.
<section>3</section>
What are marketing costs and why do they vary?
Produce preparation and packaging costs
We assume that harvesting of produce and the movement of that produce to the farm gate or packing shed is part of the production cost. Thus the first marketing cost incurred is produce preparation. This includes cleaning, sorting and grading. The second cost that is usually faced by farmers and/or traders is packaging. Types of packaging used may range from a simple jute bag which may account for less than one percent of the marketing cost to sophisticated plastic packaging for direct shipment of fruits to consumers in supermarkets, which would account for much more.
Handling costs
At all stages in the marketing chain produce will have to be packed and unpacked, loaded and unloaded, put into store and taken out again. Each individual handling cost will not amount to much but the sum total of all such handling costs can be significant.
Transport costs
Once packed, produce is then transported. In many countries the initial transportation may be done by the farmer or his labourer, carrying the produce themselves or using animal-drawn carts. Alternatively, traders may send agents around to farmers to collect produce for assembly in one central area. As noted in the Introduction, costs will vary according to the distance between farmer and market. But they will also depend on the quality of the roads. A farmer living close to a main highway will probably face much lower transport costs than one living at the end of a rough road which causes much damage to trucks and is often impassable. Transport costs will be lower in countries where trucks and fuel are cheap than in countries where import duties are high. Truck owners have to buy their trucks; costs will be lower where bank interest charges are low than where they are high.
Sometimes transport costs are a simple matter to calculate because the farmer or trader pays a set price per kilogram to the transporter. But what do we do when produce is carried on a "per container" basis or when farmers or traders hire a complete truck and transport a variety of crops? How do we calculate a trader's transport costs if he owns his own vehicle?
Product losses
Losses are common with agricultural produce marketing. Even if nothing is actually thrown away products may lose weight in storage and transit. Thus one kilogram of a product sold at retail level cannot be compared with one kilogram sold by the farmer. Sometimes very high losses can be recorded, particularly for perishable fruits and vegetables. Losses will probably be highest in the main season when "gluts" of produce mean that much has to be thrown away unsold. In general, the longer the distance between farmer and consumer the higher the likely loss.
The treatment of losses in marketing cost calculations can be fairly complex. In particular, produce which is bought but not sold can still incur costs such as packaging, transport and storage. If there are no quantity losses there can still be quality losses and this is reflected in the price at which produce is sold.
Storage costs
Storage is an important cost for many products. The main purpose of storage is to extend the availability of produce over a longer period than if it were sold immediately after harvest. The assumption behind all commercial storage is that the price will rise sufficiently while the product is in store to cover the costs of storage. Such costs will vary, depending on the costs of building and operating the store but also on the cost of capital used to purchase the produce which is stored. If a store is used to its maximum capacity throughout the year costs will obviously be much less than if it is only used for a few months and is, even then, kept half empty.
Processing costs
Processing is often an important marketing cost. Grains such as rice and maize have to be milled. In working out total marketing costs we need to consider the conversion factor from unmilled to milled grain, as well as the value of any by-products. The price paid to the farmer for one kilogram of paddy cannot be directly compared with the price paid by the consumer for one kilogram of milled rice because they are not the same product. It is surprising how often something as simple as this is overlooked. Similarly, a coffee farmer can't compare directly the export price for a kilogram of green beans with the price he receives for cherries or even parchment coffee.
Processing costs can vary according to the efficiency of the organization doing the processing, the processing facility's throughput and the frequency of its operation. It will also vary according to the organization's costs which can depend on factors such as fuel costs, depreciation costs, import duties, taxes and wages.
Capital costs
Capital costs may not be very visible but are extremely important. To operate, a trader may have to borrow money from the bank. The interest he pays on that money is a cost. If a trader uses his own money we cannot then say that he has no costs since he could have left the money in the bank to earn interest instead of using it for trading. The cost of using his own funds is thus the interest he is not receiving. Economists call this an opportunity cost.
There are other opportunity costs. For example, a trader could perhaps be using his time to do other work. For him to want to be involved with marketing the profit he makes from marketing must be more than his alternative income opportunities. Often it must be significantly more, particularly when he runs the risk of losing money.
Fees, commissions and unofficial payments
The costs considered above are the major costs which are faced in marketing agricultural produce. But there are many others and people involved with measuring costs need to keep all of them in mind. While they may be low in one country they may make up a sizeable proportion of costs in another. People using markets have to pay market fees. Often they will have to pay to have their produce weighed. Traders normally have to be licensed and pay licence fees. In some markets wholesalers charge commissions. Taxes have to be paid and, sometimes, bribes are needed whether at road blocks when transporting produce or to get permission to operate a business. All these costs have to be built into the calculations.
Prices and margins
Finally, costs have to be related to prices received. In a retail market in the morning tomatoes may be selling at a high price which appears to give the trader an excellent profit. By the evening, however, the trader may be selling them at a far lower price as he knows that the next day a supply of fresh tomatoes will be arriving. This must be kept in mind when comparing the selling price with the amount paid to the farmer. The price paid by the eventual consumer is thus made up of the amount of money paid to the farmer for his produce plus all of the costs involved in getting it to the consumer in the form in which he or she purchases it and a reasonable return to those doing the marketing and processing for carrying out these functions. The percentage share of the final price which is taken up by the marketing function is known as the marketing margin.
Sometimes the marketing margin can be quite a high percentage and this may be used to argue that farmers or consumers are being exploited. However, high margins can often be fully justified by the costs involved. Without an understanding of those costs and how they are made up it is impossible to know whether margins are reasonable or not.
<section>4</section>
Produce preparation and packaging costs
Produce preparation costs
Preparation of produce for the market can often be time consuming. However, money spent at an early stage on preparation and packaging should be more than repaid by higher prices and lower losses. Higher costs can be expected to result in higher returns. Preparation activities, sometimes undertaken by farmers but more frequently by traders, include:
* cleaning, such as removing soil and foreign matter;
* trimming, to remove unwanted leaves, stems or roots;
* sorting, to remove rejects and non-marketable produce (see Chapter 5);
* curing, for example as with onions, garlic or potatoes;
* grading, to separate produce into similar sizes and qualities before packaging, thus increasing the market value of the produce;
* waxing and wrapping, for example as with oranges in some countries, to preserve the produce and make it more attractive to the consumer.
Packaging costs
Most produce needs packaging. Exceptions are generally larger fruits and vegetables such as pumpkins and water melons which may be transported in bulk. Leafy vegetables, such as cabbages, are also often transported in bulk. Here the outer leaves themselves act as a form of packaging by protecting the inner leaves. There is no packaging cost but it should be remembered that the outer leaves are often thrown away before sale and thus there is a cost in terms of product loss.
Packaging serves three basic purposes. Firstly, it provides a convenient way of handling and transporting produce. Costs would certainly be much higher if everything had to be carried and moved without any form of packaging. Secondly, it provides protection for the produce. The efforts which are continually being made to improve bulk packaging are designed mainly to improve the protection offered rather than to increase the convenience of the packaging from a handling point of view. Finally, packaging can be used to divide the produce into convenient units for retail sale and to make the produce more attractive to the consumer, thus increasing the price at which it can be sold. The more sophisticated the packaging, the greater the cost.
Quite often the farmer will provide the packaging, such as jute or gunny sacks for maize and paddy, which is used right through the marketing chain. More complex and expensive packaging, such as plastic crates, will, on the other hand, normally be the trader's responsibility.
A fruit or vegetable may be packed and repacked several times on its way between producer and consumer, depending on the length of the marketing chain. The farmer may use one type of packaging (for example a sack) to take his produce to market. At the market a trader may transfer the produce to a wooden box or plastic crate for transport to the wholesale market. A retailer buying at the wholesale market may then transfer the produce to his own packaging and then repack it (for example in plastic bags) for convenient sale at his shop. All of these various types of packaging involve costs, and need to be taken into account when working out total marketing costs.
The simplest packaging cost to calculate is when the bag, box, crate or basket is used only once. All you then need to know is how much produce the package contains in order to work out the packaging cost per kilogram. Often, however, things are not that simple.
With the use of more sophisticated bulk packaging, every effort is made to use the packages over and over again. In these circumstances you need to make an estimate of how many times the container is used to arrive at a cost per journey. Allowance must also be made for repairs and for the cost of transporting the empty package back to the beginning of the marketing chain. If a trader owns his own vehicle and all his business is in one direction (that is from farms to town) then his cost of returning the containers is negligible. If, however, he has to pay transport costs for the empty containers this can increase his packaging costs significantly. An example of this calculation is shown in Figure 1.
The type of packaging used in a particular country and for a particular marketing chain will depend on the costs and benefits of using it. Thus, plastic crates are likely to be used more for produce marketing in a country where they are manufactured than in a country where a 100 percent import duty is charged on such crates. Sophisticated packaging will be used more when it significantly reduce losses; non-perishable produce will not require expensive packaging because the benefits of using it will be marginal. The possibility of using improved packaging made with local materials should always be studied carefully.
Figure 1
Calculating packaging costs
Assume that oranges are packed 20 kg at a time in wooden boxes which, with occasional repairs, can be used for 10 trips. A box costs $10, repairs and cleaning during its life costs $2 and each time the box is transported back empty to the producing area costs $1.
Then the packaging cost per trip is ...
[(original cost + repairs) ÷ no. of trips] + transport when empty
or
($10 + $2) ÷ 10 trips + $1 = $2.20 per 20 kg
and
$2.20 ÷ 20 kg = $0.11 per kg
<section>5</section>
Handling costs
It is very easy to overlook handling costs. Each individual time a product is handled the cost per kilogram will be negligible. But a product can be handled many times before it reaches the consumer. The total of ail these small handling costs can end up being quite considerable, particularly in countries with relatively high labour costs.
In some cases it is possible to get an accurate idea of handling costs. For example, porters at wholesale markets usually charge a fixed rate per box or per cart. In other cases, however, there will not be a fixed charge. Costs per container will then need to be worked out approximately by dividing the wage of the employee by the number of packages handled. Where casual employees are recruited on an hourly basis (for example at a market) this might be fairly easy. Where the person is a full-time employee of the trader the calculation is more difficult. The employee may spend many hours sitting on a truck travelling between the farmer and the market. He will be doing nothing during this time but the trader will still have to pay him if he wants his assistance to load and unload.
Referring to a Farmer-Wholesaler-Retailer-Consumer marketing chain we could have the following individual handlings:
* farmer or labourer loads produce on to ox- cart;
* Iabourer unloads produce at assembly market and it is weighed;
* wholesaler or his employee repackages the produce in wholesaler's containers;
* produce is carried to and loaded on wholesaler's truck;
* produce is unloaded at wholesale market and taken to premises occupied by wholesaler or his agent and weighed;
* produce is unpacked and sorted or graded;
* produce is repacked in retailer's containers;
* produce is carried to retailer's transport;
* produce is unloaded at retailer's store;
* produce is repackaged into plastic bags.
<section>6</section>
Transport costs
Transport costs are incurred by farmers when they take their produce to the market and by traders as they move the produce down the marketing chain to the consumer. Sometimes transport costs are very obvious because they involve the direct payment by a farmer or trader to a truck owner or, in some cases, boat owner on a per piece basis. In other cases such costs are less direct, for example when the trader, or even the farmer, owns and operates his own vehicle.
In other situations there is no financial outlay but there is still an opportunity cost. For example, when a farmer uses animal transport, a bicycle or even carries the produce himself to get to an assembly market he could be doing other things with his time. This is a relevant marketing cost if the farmer has the possibility of selling his produce at the farm gate but feels his income will be higher if he takes it to the market. However, if the farmer has no alternative to going to the market then the time spent can be more properly regarded as part of his costs of production. If he doesn't go to the market he will not be able to sell his produce.
Payment to truck drivers to carry produce to market on a "per piece" basis makes for easy marketing cost calculations but is usually a more expensive way of transporting produce. Truckers have no idea whether they will fill their trucks or not and so calculate their charges "per piece" by assuming an average load over the season or year which is less than the capacity of the vehicle. Thus traders or farmers working in groups can, if they are sure they can fill a vehicle, save on transport costs by joining together to hire one. Generally, the larger the truck they can hire and fill, the cheaper the per unit transport costs. Extension officers involved with marketing can play an important role by helping farmers or traders to organise to do this.
When produce is carried on a "per piece" basis it is a simple matter to divide the cost per container by the number of kilograms in the container. When a truck is hired or the trader uses his own, the calculation is more difficult because the vehicle may be used for several different commodities, each packed in a different sized container. For most trucks the factor limiting quantities carried is space available, not weight. Thus products which have a low weight-for-volume ratio (for example green peppers) should be costed at a higher per kilogram cost than produce which is heavier in relation to its volume. This requires making a rough estimate of the volume of the containers used for each commodity. The space available in the truck(minus an allowance for space that cannot be filled because of the shape of the containers, etc) can then be divided by the volume of the container, so allowing the cost per kilogram to be worked out. An example of this calculation is shown in
Figure 2.
The calculation becomes more complicated when a trader owns his or her own vehicle and we have to assess his or her transport costs. There are so many factors to consider in working out the costs per kilogram for one journey that this is best avoided unless there is no alternative information available to allow the cost to be estimated. 11, for example, some traders use their own transport while others hire trucks on a "per journey" or "per piece" basis then you can use the costs of the latter as a "best guess" of the costs to a truck-owning trader.)
Because traders and truck owners are often accused of overcharging it is important to be aware of the transport costs they face. These include:
* wages paid to the driver and, where relevant, his assistant;
* cost of fuel, maintenance, repairs and the like;
* cost of licences, road tax, insurance and other necessary payments;
* costs incurred en route such as tolls or bribes paid at official or unofficial road blocks and charges for entering a market;
* the capital cost of the vehicle. When working out the yearly cost of operation of a truck you need to include not only the cost of bank interest paid on a loan but also the annual depreciation (or loss of value) of the truck. When roads are bad trucks may last only a few years and thus depreciation will be a major cost.
Having identified annual transport costs it is then necessary to consider the amount of work the truck will do in one year in order to work out a cost per tonne per km. This will depend on:
* the periods in which produce is available to be marketed;
* the other uses (if any) to which the truck can be put-on return journeys or when not being used for agricultural marketing;
* the days the truck is unavailable due to breakdowns, repairs, services and the like;
* when both produce and the truck are available, the number of journeys and kilometres the truck will be able to do.
Figure 2
Calculating transport costs
Assume that there are 40 m^3 of space available in the truck to be used and that it costs $500 to hire the truck. A container of 0.2 m^3 holds 8 kg of tomatoes and a container of 0.4 m^3 holds 10 kg of green peppers.
Then the transport cost for tomatoes per container and per kilogram is ...
$500 ÷ (40 m^3 ÷ 0.2 m^3) = $2.50 per container
and
$2.50 ÷ 8 kg = $0.3125 per kilogram
While the transport cost for green peppers per container and per kilogram is ...
$500 ÷ (40 m^3 ÷ 0.4 m^3) = $5.00 per container
and
$5.00 ÷ 10 kg = $0.50 per kilogram
As can be seen, there are numerous individual costs which can combine to make produce transport extremely expensive. In many cases transport will be the most important marketing cost. It is therefore vital that the cost is calculated correctly. Expensive mistakes can be made if, for example, a village, cooperative decides to buy a truck to compete with traders. If it underestimates the costs of operating the truck or overestimates the amount of produce it will handle it could end up with a large loss.
<section>7</section>
Product losses
If a trader buys one kilogram of produce from a farmer, how much of that one kilogram will he actually end up selling? And what will be the average price of what he sells? Post-harvest losses of produce, particularly fresh produce, can be quite considerable, both in terms of quantity and quality (which will affect the selling price).
The causes of losses are many and varied and will not be considered in detail here.2 One of the biggest causes is often the fact that the farmer produces more than the traders want to buy or the traders buy more than they can sell to the consumers. When there is a surplus, physical losses will be high and/or farmers and traders will have to sell at a loss.
Poor harvesting techniques and bad handling on the farm (bruising, exposure to the sun) can mean that much damage has been done even before the produce is sold to the trader.
Poor handling by the trader and his employees can make the situation worse. When truckers are paid on a "per piece" basis, farmers and traders try to squeeze as much as possible into the package. This can be a false economy as the loss resulting from the damage caused can exceed the savings in transport costs. Produce can be damaged in transit, by the constant shaking on bumpy roads, by exposure to sun on top of a bus, by high temperatures inside a truck or other vehicle (if a truck breaks down and has to sit at the side of the road for two or three days the entire consignment could be lost). Delays and bad handling at the wholesale market can make things worse. Sometimes, for example, produce which has been well packed by the farmer or the trader is simply thrown onto a heap on the floor of the wholesaler's premises, causing further bruising and damage.
At all stages of the marketing chain some produce will be thrown away. This may be planned, as in the case of cabbage leaves discussed earlier, but in most cases it will be the result of losses caused by bad handling. Sorting should occur at all stages of the marketing chain to separate damaged from good produce.
Losses in weight can occur even if produce is not thrown away. Most crops lose weight during transit and storage as the result of moisture loss. This is not necessarily a bad thing. For example, grain stores better when dry. But it does mean that a kilogram of produce purchased from a farmer is not equal to a kilogram sold to a consumer by the trader.
Therefore, try to estimate the losses. This will not be easy unless you are able to follow consignments all the way through the marketing chain. Also, losses will vary according to the season; poor quality fruits which are unsaleable during a glut when prices are low may well be saleable when there is a shortage. Most Ministries of Agriculture have assessments of losses and these can be used as a starting point for estimates. However, there is often a tendency to exaggerate losses, so official figures should be treated with caution.
The best way to treat losses is one that enables you to compare the quantity eventually sold with the quantity bought from the farmer. It gives the most accurate calculation and also means that the costs involved in packing, transporting, handling and storing produce which is eventually lost are included. An example of this calculation is shown in Figure 3 together with the more usual, and wrong, method of calculation.
Figure 3
Calculating the cost of product losses
Assume that, at 10 percent loss levels, 1 kg of tomatoes purchased by the trader from the farmer results in 900 grams (0.9 kg.) available for sale to consumers. The trader buys tomatoes from the farmer at $5 per kilogram and marketing costs are $2 per kilogram for the tomatoes originally purchased. The selling price of tomatoes is $8 per kilogram.
Then the costs are ...
1 kg purchased at $5 per kg = $5.00
1 kg packed and transported at $2 per kg = 2.00
Total Costs = $7.00
Sales Revenue or $8 x 0.9 kg = 7.20
Thus the margin to the trader = $0.20
Below is an example of the more usual, and wrong, method of calculation.
1 kg purchased at $5 per kg = $5.00
1 kg packed and transported at $2 per kg = 2.00
10 percent losses or $5 x 0.1 = 0.50
Total Costs = $7.50
Sales Revenue or $8 x 1 kg = 8.00
Thus the margin to the trader = $0.50
The second calculation is clearly wrong because here the trader is seen to be obtaining revenue from produce which has already been "lost".
Note: We will return to the correct methodology in Chapter 9 where a worked example of a marketing cost calculation is given.
There are quality as well as quantity losses. Quality losses reveal themselves when the trader has to sell part of a consignment at a lower price than the rest. This could be because some produce is damaged in transit, because p