<title>Social and economic incentives for smallholder tree growing</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Even as millions of hectares of tropical forest are lost each year and large numbers of reforestation efforts have failed, there are smallholder farmers in the world who, for years, have grown and managed their own trees on a sustainable basis. For those involved in community forestry, why farmers plant trees is every bit as important as why they do not.
This study by natural resource economist Peter A. Dewees of the Food Studies Group of Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford University, is the result of research which was undertaken to explore the rationale for smallholder tree growing in its historical and socio-cultural context in Kenya. Although much of the study focuses on tree-growing activities in Murang'a District in the Central Province in that country, many of the observations and conclusions are relevant to other parts of Kenya, and there are certainly parallels to other parts of Africa as well.
Both casual observation and land use inventories provide strong evidence that trees continue to have an important role as one smallholder land use option in many high potential agricultural zones in Kenya. In some cases, farmers grow trees to meet the demand for construction poles, charcoal and fuelwood, and in response to other market forces. Trees are also cultivated to demarcate boundaries or to shade crops such as tea or coffee. Tree cultivation, it would seem, which requires less labour and less capital investment than other types of crops, has emerged as an important income-producing land use option for the smallholder.
Still, there remains the question of why farmers maintain trees on land that could be used for the cultivation of other crops which could potentially generate a substantially higher income. Central to this discussion of tree planting in Kenya is the interlinkage of issues such as land tenure, capital accumulation and labour use. Several of the most common tree cultivation and management practices are the long-term outcome of these three closely related issues. Other practices have been adopted either as a result of relatively recent interventions, such as the introduction of black wattle during the first half of this century, or are due to the evolution of traditional tree management practices.
Dr. Dewees concludes his study by examining some of the issues of relevance to planners and developers in their efforts to encourage farmers to grow more trees. First, he suggests that tree planting innovations must be placed in a context which takes into account local farmer ability and traditional knowledge. Second, it is important to recognize that tree growing is a viable option especially when labour and capital constraints limit agricultural development. And third, existing controls on tree cultivation and management must involve the local population and be more consistent. If farm production of trees is to be encouraged, farmers must be assured that they - rather than the Government or local administration - will reap the benefits.
The research for this study was supported with funds provided primarily by the Rockefeller Foundation through the Oxford Forestry Institute's Smallholder Incentives for Tree Growing Research Project. Additional funding was provided by the Research Committee of the World Bank, the Overseas Development Administration and by Oxford University. The publication of this Case Study was funded by the multi-donor Forests, Trees and People Trust Fund, which is devoted to increasing the sustainability of women and men's livelihoods through self-help management of tree and forest resources. Within the FAO Forestry Department, the activities and publications of the Programme are coordinated by Marilyn W. Hoskins, Senior Community Forestry Officer, in the Forestry Policy and Planning Division.
<section>2</section>
Executive Summary
This report seeks to provide a better understanding of the economic framework of smallholder agriculture in Kenya, particularly in relation to tree growing management and practices. Although much of the report focuses on tree-growing activities in the Murang'a District, a high potential agricultural zone in the Central Province of Kenya, many of the observations and conclusions are relevant to other parts of the country.
Both casual observation and land use inventories provide strong evidence that trees have an important role as one of many smallholder land use options in many high potential agricultural zones in Kenya. In some cases, farmers grow trees to meet the demand for construction poles, charcoal and fuelwood and in response to other market forces. Trees are also cultivated to demarcate boundaries or to shade other crops such as tea or coffee.
Still, there remains the question of why farmers maintain trees on land that could be used for the cultivation of other crops which could potentially generate a substantially higher income. Central to this discussion of tree planting in Kenya is the interlinkage of issues such as land tenure, capital accumulation and labour use. Several of the most common tree cultivation and management practices are the long-term outcome of these closely related issues. Others have been adopted either as a result of relatively recent interventions or are due to the evolution of traditional tree management practices.
Chapter 1 explores the current state of knowledge about the extent of tree growing in high potential areas of Kenya. Chapter 2 examines how rural capital and labour constraints may account for the widespread adoption of different tree growing practices.
In the pre-colonial economy, farm labour was a controlled by kinship ties and was a responsibility of the sub-clan. Many labour tasks and cropping patterns were also gender related. Major changes in farm labour use were brought about during the colonial area as the Colonial Administration fixed forest boundaries and as European settlement limited the land available for expansion.
During the same period, many Africans - mostly male - were forced to seek wage employment on large agricultural plantations or in urban areas in order to pay their taxes. With the emergence of this migrant and wage labour force, less labour was available to work on small rural holdings. Trees, such as black wattle, filled the niche created by rural labour shortages and provided an income during times of need.
Constraints on capital also provided an impetus for tree growing. Formal credit mechanisms for smallholders are a recent phenomenon dating from the 1960s. Even today, commercial lending to farmers remains at an all time low and there are few credit sources to support labour activities. Thus tree cultivation, which requires less labour and less capital investment than other types of crops, has emerged as an important income-producing land use option for the smallholder.
Chapters 3 and 4 explore the evolution of the traditional land tenure system in the Murang'a District and the resulting changes in the relationship between land tenure and tree tenure.
There are strong traditions of tree cultivation and management in Kikuyu tribal areas of Kenya (such as Murang'a District). Trees were used to demarcate boundaries, were cultivated in protected forests for use as fuelwood and were preserved as sacred groves for the site of ritual ceremonies
Traditional law in many parts of Kenya, distinguished between rights of control of land and rights of use and access. As a result in pre-colonial times, rights of tree ownership and exploitation could be held separately.
In the earliest Kikuyu settlements, land acquisition was based on the rights of first use, by the exercise of hunting and trapping rights. These rights were strengthened by forest clearance and cultivation and belonged to families with lineage rights. However land could be lent to people outside the sub-clan for cultivation or tenancy. Land lending and tenancy arrangements were also inherited.
European settlement brought increasing pressures on the traditional land tenure system. Under the villagization programme mounted during the 1952 State of Emergency, over 100,000 people who had lived on small homesteads were forcibly moved to large villages. This removal from smallholdings on which they held traditional rights, permitted the Colonial Administration to consolidate holdings which over generations had been fragmented into separate plots.
Consolidation provided the basis for major land reform legislation that became the foundation for the 1963 Registered Land Act. Under its terms, customary land rights were no longer valid. With respect to tree tenure, trees as well as all things growing on the land, became the property of the registered landowner. The effects of the legislation were most profoundly felt by the landless who lost many of the rights of access to land they once had under traditional law.
Chapter 5 describes the importance of black wattle production during the first half of this century. Africans were excluded from producing cash crops and the returns from food crops were low. Wattle, valued for the high tannin content of its bark, became a major export crop for Kenya and an important source of income and political power in many Kikuyu areas. Although wattle continues to be grown in parts of Murang'a District, its role in the smallholder economy declined during the State of Emergency. With the removal of controls on smallholder coffee and tea production, wattle lost its value as a cash crop.
The concluding chapter examines some of the challenges facing planners and developers in their efforts to encourage farmers to grow more trees. First of all, tree planting innovations must be placed in a context which takes into account local farmer ability and knowledge. It is also evident that tree growing is one result of labour and capital constraints limiting agricultural development. If these constraints are effectively addressed, there will be less of an incentive for farmers to grow trees. Finally, existing controls on tree cultivation and management must be more consistent. If farm production of trees is to be encouraged, farmers must be assured that they - not the Government nor the local administration -will reap the benefits.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Trees on farms in Kenya
1.2 Scope of this study
1.1 Trees on farms in Kenya
Simple observation in many high potential agricultural areas of Kenya would inform the casual observer that trees - protected, cultivated and managed - have assumed an important place as one of many smallholder land use options. The observation poses some interesting problems for our conventional view of peasant agriculture. It is not as if farmers have nothing else to do with their land. Population pressures in many areas of Kenya have become extreme. It is in precisely these areas - where pressures on agricultural land are greatest - that the proportionate area of land used for growing trees increases so substantially. In the face of these types of pressures, and because cash returns for trees are relatively low, there must be strong reasons why farmers grow trees rather than other potentially more profitable crops.
The rural afforestation efforts of the government, aid agencies and local organizations in Kenya have seldom taken account of the extent of existing tree growing activities. Even when they have, project design and implementation have been hampered by a lack of information about why farmers have undertaken these types of activities on their own. In particular, the relationships between land use, capital, labour, and land ownership with respect to tree growing are not well-understood.
The Extent of Tree Growing Activities
Important gains in improving our understanding about the role of trees on farms in Kenya have been made with the recent collection of inventory information about trees in smallholder agriculture. These land use studies, typically of areas with high population densities and heavy intensities of agricultural land use, have suggested that planted and managed trees and shrubs usually cover between 5 and 10 percent of the area of agricultural land. While arid and semi-arid lands are increasingly important as areas of new settlement, they pose special problems for tree growing which are beyond the scope of this case study. On average, over 20 percent of the total high potential agricultural land area has been used for growing trees, or has otherwise been left under natural woody cover.
Although planted tree species are predominantly introduced varieties, such as Grevillea robusta, Eucalyptus sp. or Acacia mearnsii, a number of indigenous species such as Markhamia sp. Croton sp., and Sesbania sesban also feature in farmers' range of choices. The dominant species vary from district to district in Kenya. For example, in Kakamega District, in Western Kenya bordering Lake Victoria (see Fig 1), woodlots are almost always dominated by Eucalvptus saligna while in Murang'a District in Central Kenya, they are dominated by Acacia mearnsii. These contiguous, non-linear, and usually monospecific tree management units may be extremely small, with 10 trees or so, but are more commonly around 200 m² in area. Hedges -contiguous, linear, and also usually monospecific tree management units - are frequently composed of Cupressus lusitanica. They are usually planted in the first instance, but as they grow to maturity, may come to include other species established as a result
of natural regeneration. In some areas, although there is little completely untouched woodland remaining, there are large areas of natural vegetation which have been highly modified, for instance in bush/fallow systems (Bradley and Kuyper 1985).
Figure 1.1 Administrative divisions and the location of the study area in Kenya
The importance of tree cultivation and management as part of the farming system becomes somewhat clearer when other agricultural land uses are considered. Table 1.1 and Figure 1.2 summarize the results of a land use inventory for Murang'a District which shows the extent of tree protection, cultivation, and management compared land uses. Although the predominance of particular crops in this district is mostly limited by the agroclimate, the predominance of trees does not seem to be so constrained. While smallholder coffee, for instance, accounts for anywhere between 0.1 and 13 percent of the land area depending on the agro-ecological zone, woody cover (planted trees, woodlands, bushland and so on) accounts for at least 15 percent and as much as 35 percent of the total agricultural land area across all zones.
TABLE 1: LAND USES IN MURANG'A DISTRICT IN 1988
AGROECOLOGICAL ZONE
Forest/ Upper Tea Zone
Lower Tea/Upper Coffee Zone
Lower Coffee/ Maize Zone
Middle Maize/ Estate Zone
Lower Maize Zone
New Settlement Zone
District Averages & Totals
Average population density per grouping (persons per m²)
Average elevation (metres)
TYPE OF LAND USE
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LAND AREA SUPPORTING EACH LAND USE
SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE
Maize and maize intercrops
Smallholder coffee
Smallholder tea
Subtotal, Smallholder Agriculture
PLANTATION AGRICULTURE
Sisal
Pineapple
Estate coffee
Subtotal Plantation Agriculture
Total Smallholder/
Plantation Agriculture
HEDGES & WINDROWS
Natural tree hedges
Clipped hedges
Other hedges
Planted windrows
Subtotal, Hedges & Windrows
SCATTERED & ISOLATED TREE COVER
Fruit trees
Trees in crops
Trees around buildings
Trees in bush
Trees in open grassland
Trees in hedgerows
Subtotal, Scattered & Isolated Trees
ORCHARDS & WOODLOTS
Orchards
Woodlots
Subtotal, Orchards & Woodlots
Total, Planted or Cultivated Trees
FORESTS, BUSH & WOODLOTS
Indigenous forest
Bush or woodland
Riparian strips
Subtotal, Forest, Bush or Woodlands
Total, All Tree Cover
GRAND TOTAL:
Agriculture & Tree Cover
Some features of land use described in Table 1.1 challenge accepted ideas. While it is often argued that population growth and agricultural intensification are incompatible with the conservation and management of tree cover, the Kenya experience suggests that this is not always the case. Even in the most heavily populated areas, trees continue to be an important feature of land use. Also interesting is the gradual transition in the type of woody biomass which predominates as population pressures increase. Natural forest and bushland is cleared as agricultural development is intensified, but replanting follows, apparently using trees that are much more productive than the forests and bush they replaced.
Figure 1.2 Land use in Murang'a District in 1988
There have been a few efforts which have attempted to assess the impact of tree growing on the smallholder economy or why trees have assumed such an important role. A number of these attempts have focused on cultural attitudes toward trees, such as gender restrictions on tree planting in Kakamaga (Chavangi 1987). In Murang'a, district, household characteristics (farm size, household composition, cropping patterns and so on) have been closely related to patterns of tree cultivation and management (Bradley and Ngugi 1986). Cowen's fascinating history of wattle production in Central Province (Cowen 1978) provides important perspectives on the growth and spread of this tree planting practice, but does not address the question of why wattle continues to be maintained as a land use practice in the face of more lucrative land use alternatives in the Post-Independence economy.
A few studies have sought to explore the economic rationale for farmer tree growing in Kenya. Ongugo's study in South Nyanza, (Western Kenya) for example, focussed on economic resource allocation in the cultivation of tobacco, maize, and fuelwood (Ongugo 1985). Lubega's study of agroforestry systems in dryland areas of Machakos District (Central Kenya) explored the potential economic impacts of alley cropping on maize production (Lubega 1987).
The rationale for tree planting
A number of relatively straightforward conclusions can be drawn about different tree growing strategies. It can be assumed, for instance, that farmers have planted eucalyptus woodlots in response to growing demands for construction poles. Black wattle woodlots in turn, probably indicate that there are markets for wattle bark, and that there may be charcoal and fuelwood markets in addition to household, subsistence demand.
Other tree cultivation practices have little to do with these types of market opportunities. The predominance of hedges and windrows, for instance, is largely accounted for by considerations other than economics (although quite often trees are planted that can eventually be harvested and sold). Tree planting practices such as the intercropping of Sesbania sesban with maize are undertaken as part of soil improvement and management strategies. Shade trees are also highly valued.
If the extent of income-generating tree planting practices is considered, however, the argument that they evolved as a result of "market forces" tells us little. There remains the question of why resource-constrained farmers use their land for the cultivation and management of trees instead of other crops. Although an intensively managed 1 ha woodlot of eucalyptus or black wattle can provide a net income of around KSh 1,000 to 2,000 per year, a hectare of maize can generate an income of KSh 4,000 to 5,000 per year. Coffee can generate around twice this, and tea. twice as much again (World Bank 1986). Maintaining land under tree cover in the face of these alternative ways of generating income seems something of a contradiction.
Preliminary interviews with farmers in Western Kenya suggest that some of our perceptions of the smallholder economy were entirely wrong. It is generally believed that there are serious problems of unemployment in Kenya, (Republic of Kenya 1986) and that with a population growing at an astonishing rate of nearly 4 percent in some areas, (one of the highest in the world) these problems will become much worse. Farmers in Western Kenya however indicated that labour supplies were severely limited and that tree growing was seen as a labour-extensive means of alleviating these constraints. It can be argued that trees may be emerging as the cash crop of the rural poor.
<section>4</section>
1.2 Scope of this study
Objectives and Methods
This study, as well as other studies that were undertaken to provide household-level information about the relationship between tree growing and the rural economy, is intended to address two sets of questions. First, how does tree growing, as a labour-extensive cash cropping activity, complement urban wage employment as a strategy for overcoming problems with capital, land and labour markets? Do trees ease or intensify land use constraints imposed by labour migration? Secondly, does tree growing, an activity that requires low levels of capital input, have any particular advantage as a use for land in situations where limited credit sources have made it difficult for farmers to plant other more capital-intensive cash crops?
Several approaches have been used to address these questions. This study summarizes some of the descriptive information, as well as information from the historical record, in an attempt to describe the evolution of labour markets and land tenure systems and their impact on tree growing. It reviews, as well, traditional tree cultivation and management practices and the pricing and policies which brought about changes in land use that affected particular types of tree growing practices.
Most of this work has been carried out in the high potential agricultural zone of Murang'a District in Central Province of Kenya. Figure 1.1 above shows the location of Murang'a District. The district is in the middle of Kikuyu country and much of the discussion in this study is specific to the economic setting, land use practices, and historical and cultural processes that dominate in these areas, and that are in some ways unique to the Kikuyu. Many of the observations are however also of relevance to other parts of the country.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: The changing rural capital and labour markets
2.1 Labour use in smallholder agriculture
2.2 Capital transactions in smallholder agriculture
2.3 Smallholder responses to constrained labour and capital supplies
2.4 Conclusion: Tree growing and factor markets
End notes
2.1 Labour use in smallholder agriculture
Labour transactions in the traditional economy
A number of features of the rural economy are of particular relevance to farmer tree growing. They are mainly concerned with the ways in which land and labour are used within the Kikuyu agricultural economy. Some of the more common tree planting practices - particularly boundary planting and woodlots - are outcomes of historical processes.
Labour in the pre-colonial Kikuyu economy was largely controlled by kinship ties and responsibilities within the mbari (sub-clan), the most important unit of social organization.
One of the chief obligations of a man to his wife (or wives) was to provide her with fields for cultivation, which meant he had the task of clearing the bush and of hoeing it with the digging stick to make it ready for the harrow (Leakey 1977). Subsequent cultivation and harvesting responsibilities rested with the man's wife, but if it was needed, particularly during times of illness or incapacitation, additional labour could be drawn from the man's other wives. Communal labour (ngwatio) was organized if a household had insufficient labour to carry out an agricultural task. Groups of three to ten women, not necessarily related, would work from day to day on each others plots. (Cowen and Murage undated). Contemporary derivatives of this type of communal labour continue to exist today.
The only system which bore any resemblance to wage labour per se was the work party (wira). When labour was needed to complete a large task, such as digging or weeding, as many as 80 people would be enlisted for assistance by the individual concerned. He or she was obligated to provide beer, at least, and often provided food as well.
Significant changes in labour use were brought about in Kikuyu areas between 1900 and 1910 as the boundaries of the forest were fixed by the Colonial Administration and as the pace of the take-over of lands for European settlement accelerated. It wasn't so much that the Kikuyu lost land (although they clearly had), but that the process of European settlement limited further expansion. In many areas, the man's labour tasks of land clearance and hoeing were no longer as vital because expansion had stopped. The limits clearly disrupted traditional agricultural practices. The chief forest offences registered by the Forest Department in 1909 were for "making new gardens and enlarging old ones" in the newly reserved forests (FD 1909).
The emergence of the migrant and wage labour economy
Subsequent to these events the migrant labour economy developed. The first "hut taxes" (East Africa Hut Tax Ordinance 1903) and the later Poll Tax (Native Hut and Poll Tax Ordinance 1910) were partly intended to coerce Africans, who would not otherwise have sought wage employment, into finding jobs in plantation agriculture or in urban areas in order to be able to pay their taxes (Kitching 1980, van Zawanenberg 1975, Stichter 1982). Opportunities for wage employment in smallholder agriculture were nearly non-existent whereas the rapidly-expanding white settler economy was dependent on these labour supplies for agricultural expansion and development.
The development of wage labour markets in smallholder agriculture dates from around 1915 (in Nyeri District). Existing forms of labour organization - household labour, communal labour, and work parties - were not sufficient given the emerging class of traders, teachers, and artisans. This class of peasant elite introduced crops such as English potatoes and wheat which were far more labour-intensive than traditional maize, millet, and bean crops. Men were employed for heavy digging and women were employed for planting, weeding and harvesting. Labour supplies expanded greatly in the early 1930s; but plantation agriculture still competed with smallholder agriculture for labour and both became more or less dependent on migrant labour (Cowen and Murage undated).
Labour migration and landlessness
By the mid-1930s, nearly 30,000 ha of high potential agricultural land in Kikuyu areas had been taken for European cultivation. Advocates for European settlement argued that this land did not actually belong to the Kikuyu in the first place; that they had replaced the Ndorobo, and that the rights of individual Kikuyu had never amounted to ownership. Over a relatively short period of time, a large number of Africans found themselves without land use or tenancy rights. A system of "squatting" (reported as early as 1904) allowed Africans to farm plots on European farms in exchange for a fixed amount of labour (Government of the United Kingdom 1955).
Squatting was not dissimilar from the traditional practice amongst the Kikuyu of land borrowing - the ahoi system - which allowed individuals to cultivate underutilized land in return for gifts to the person with hereditary cultivation rights. Under the ahoi system, tenancy was not assured, as land could be redeemed by the original rightholder if it was needed. The process of European seizure, closure of the forests to agricultural expansion and consequent increasing land scarcity, led to cancellation of many of these land lending agreements and created a new landless class amongst the Kikuyu. Many -former ahoi tenants settled on European farms as squatters.
In 1918, the Administration legislated that squatters had to be contracted as labourers for 180 days per year for a small wage and the right to live and cultivate plots on European farms. Later changes prohibited squatters from keeping stock, limited cultivation to two acres per family, and increased the labour requirement to 270 days per year (Kanogo 1987). In the mid-1940s, as their numbers burgeoned, a move to evict squatters from European farms and force them to the Reserves, gathered momentum. By then, most squatters had lost any cultivation rights they may have had as ahoi tenants or as rightholders in the Reserves. Their eviction from settler farms created a huge class of landless unemployed, and their absorption into the Reserves created enormous problems.
In 1952, African protest against the Colonial Administration came to a head with widespread destruction of settlers property and murder, especially of Africans perceived to be loyal to the government. The government response to this was to declare a state of emergency. Leading Kenyan nationalists were arrested and a "villagization programme" begun in which the widespread rural communities were forced to live in fortified compounds with a strict night curfew.
During this villagization programme and subsequently during the land consolidation process in the early 1960s it was assumed that the landless, or near landless, could provide wage employment for smallholder agriculture. The relationship between agricultural employee and employer had little traditional precedent in Kikuyu areas, although reciprocal labour arrangements were (and remain) relatively common. The very small formal labour markets in smallholder areas were clearly not able to absorb the increasing mass of unemployed and consequently the migrant labour economy grew.
At the present time, rural agriculture can support only a small wage labour market. Fewer than 10 percent of smallholder labour inputs are provided by hired labour. Of these hired labourers, between 50 and 75 percent are landless or near-landless (Collier and Lal 1986). In a survey of labour requirements for the tea industry in Embu District, over 90 percent of tea pluckers did not have land of their own, but plucked tea primarily on holdings of relatives (Technoserve 1987).
Labour, crops and gender
Labour use and cropping patterns were closely linked to cultural norms of social responsibility. As mentioned above, land clearing and the first digging of the soil were the responsibility of a man to his wife. Most other labour tasks were the responsibility of women. Women's crops were generally labour intensive seasonal ones "sprouting foods" such as cereals and legumes, while men's crops were generally labour extensive perennial crops or "digging foods" such as yams, taro, cassava, and bananas. Men's crops were also more commonly famine foods (Fisher 1954). The gender links had important implications for contemporary patterns of labour use and may account in part for the predominance of subsistence crops in areas where male labour migration has skewed the labour supply.
Most of the Colonial Government's labour ordinances, and the system of taxation resulted primarily in male labour migration. Much of the legislation was drafted under the assumption that there was idle male labour in the reserves. Some conceded that the encouragement of African men to seek wage employment would pose serious problems for the women and children by increasing their labour load.
With the emergence and development of the market economy, and the relatively higher wages that could be earned in cities and on plantations, gender related patterns of labour use and distribution became entrenched. In Murang'a District, the transition in gender-specific patterns of rural labour availability seems to have taken place between 1924 and 1948. The 1924 census for the district reported a ratio of women to men in the "working age range" of 0.89 to 1 (KNA undated: DC/FH/6/1). The 1948 census, however reported the ratio had increased to around 1.4 to 1 (KNA 1950:DC/FH5/1).
Fig. 2.1 Women and children collecting fuelwood from the Nyandarua Forests, around 1905
Photo: Consolata Fathers, Turin
Trees, with their perennial nature (particularly black wattle which later became an extremely important cash crop), played a similar role as earlier traditional perennial crops. While wattle was not a man's crop (Fisher undated: 231, 241), both perennial crop planting and participation in the migrant labour economy were somewhat gender-specific making wattle the ideal crop for filling a particular niche: wattle could be planted on holdings when men sought wage employment elsewhere providing a source of income during times of environmental or economic stress.
Labour migration in contemporary Kenya
Labour migration continues to be a dominant feature of the rural economy, placing heavy constraints on smallholder agriculture. The Integrated Rural Su