<title>Vacuum freeze-drying, a method used to salvage water-damaged archival and library materials: a RAMP study with guidelines</title>
prepared by
John M. McCleary
General Information Programme and UNISIST
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
Original: English
PGI-87/WS/7
Paris, April 1987
Recommended catalogue entry:
McCLEARY (John P.).- Vacuum freeze-drying, a method used to salvage water-damaged archival and library materials: a RAMP study with guidelines/prepared by John P. McCleary/for the/General Information Programme and UNISIST. - Paris: Unesco, 1987. - vii, 63 p; 30 cm. - (PGI-87/WS/7)
I - Title
II - Unesco. General Information Programme and UNISIST
III - Records and Archives Management Programme (RAMP)
© Unesco 1987
<section>Preface</section>
In order to assist in meeting the needs of Member States, particularly developing countries, in the specialized areas of Archives Administration and Records Management, the Division of the General Information Programme has developed a long-term Records and Archives Management Programme - RAMP.
The basic elements of RAMP reflect and contribute to the overall themes of the General Information Programme. RAMP thus includes projects, studies and other activities intended to:
- develop standards, rules, methods and other normative tools for the processing and transfer of specialized information and the creation of compatible information systems;
- enable developing countries to set up their own data bases and to have access to those now in existence throughout the world, so as to increase the exchange and flow of information through the application of modern technologies;
- promote the development of specialized regional information networks;
- contribute to the harmonious development of compatible international information services and systems;
- set up national information systems and improve the various components of these systems;
- formulate development policies and plans in this field;
- train information specialists and users and develop the national and regional potential for education and training in the information sciences, library science and archives administration.
This RAMP study covers the conservation of archival documents and the application of freeze-drying to the salvage of documents damaged by flood. As indicated by the author, the study summarizes a broad spectrum of data on freeze-drying and cites two methods in current use for drying water-damaged archival and library material, gives ideas on disaster preparedness planning and identifies recommended literature which is given in the list of references accompanying the study
Comments and suggestions regarding the study are welcomed and should be addressed to the Division of the General Information Programme, UNESCO, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France. Other studies prepared as part of the RAMP programme may also be obtained at the same address.
<section>Foreword</section>
Freeze-drying is a familiar term thanks to the propaganda given certain consumer foods and beverages available on the market. These vary from dehydrated strawberries to brownish Crystals in a Jar that with hot water are converted to a cup of coffee. Some people may know that such products are made in a vacuum chamber, the same type as those used as simulators for training astronauts, or testing satellites and moon vehicles before launching them off into space. But, mention a vacuum chamber or simulator as an effective tool for drying a ton of documents soaked by a broker water main, or stacks of books soaked by the fire hoses used in fighting a blaze, and the number of those up-to-date diminishes.
Among archivists and librarians are many who remember "reading something about it" in professional periodicals, but retain a fleeting idea of what the process is, how it works, how it applies to them. Hence, the purpose of this study: to fill the information gap. To this end, the study summarizes a broad spectrum of data that includes, among other relevant facts, the behavior of paper when wet, its vulnerabilities in this condition, stabilization by freezing, vacuum chambers and how they dry, and selected case histories where such chambers were used successfully to salvage water-damaged documents and books.
The study cites two methods in current use for drying water-damaged archival and library materials: vacuum freeze-drying by sublimation and vacuum-drying by evaporation. The emphasis is on freeze-drying. Here, the wet materials must first be frozen. This produces a condition of total stabilization which, in turn, provides un unlimited span of time to think, plan, and decide what course of action to take. These advantages, however, do not indicate that vacuum-drying is automatically downgraded. As the study reveals, it is a very effective method of drying. But, since the materials normally are not prefrozen, certain exigencies could arise. For example, depending on conditions, wet materials might have to be placed in a chamber as quickly as possible to prevent attack by mold.
Many people-conservators, conservator-scientists, and manufactures-kindly furnished information on freeze-drying in response to letters written to them by the author. They warrant profuse thanks and gratitude for the time they took from their busy schedules to provide a reply.
<section>1. Introduction</section>
<section>1.1 Water: the ubiquitous hazard</section>
The primary enemies of documents housed in archives and libraries have always been fire and-water, each an agent of a specific type of destruction. Although fires, with their spectacular display and awesome finality, are thought to be the predominate cause of destruction, in reviewing the literature on disasters in archives and libraries, the majority appears to be the result of water. In a fire-gutted building the destroyed holdings may have to be written off. On the other hand, although water can, under certain conditions, be Just as destructive the materials can be saved if appropriate action is taken.
Of the many recorded reports on disasters where water used to extinguish a fire did as much or more damage than the fire, there are two striking examples. The first was witnessed by Schmelzer (1), librarian of the Library of the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City. In November 1966 a fire broke out in one of the top floors of the ten story building. AS a result some 70,000 books were practically burned to ashes. However, because of the open multitiered stack structure of the library, the water used to extinguish the fire poured down seven floors and damaged the remaining 150,000 volumes.
The second case, reported by Stender and Walker (2), involved one of the largest archives known: The National Personnel Records Office in South St. Louis, Missouri, which contains millions of individual records of former federal government employees, both military and civilian, in a six story building of solid concrete. In July 1963 a fire broke out on the sixth floor. Through a continuous flood of water, the firemen were successful in confining the fire to that level. But after the fire was extinguished, all Fix levels of the center had several inches of water on the floor. Water flowed freely through the building, especially through utility areaways and points where internal pipes ran through the floor. Broken water lines on the sixth floor added to the flood conditions. Some 10,000 cubic feet (280 cubic meters) of water-damaged records were removed for treatment from the lower flooded floors along with the several thousands of cubic feet or records from the sixth floor
that suffered both fire and water-damage.
Although the water used to extinguish a fire can wreak destruction greater than the fire, this source of misplaced water is, fortunately, not too occasional thanks to the construction of fire-proof buildings and professional firefighters (3). On the other hand, there are many other sources of water that constitute a potential hazard to collections in archives and libraries. One source can be attributed to nature; tornados, hurricanes, floods, rainstorms, snow. The other to man: leaks in water supply or drainage pipes; breaks and/or leaks in steam pipes in the building; the breakdown of water heaters or air conditioning systems; clogged sinks, basins toilets; leakage of water deposits or tanks; leakage of roofs and windows; seepage in basements; clogged roof gutters and downpipes; broken water mains.
A classic example of the damage a broken water main can cause is found in the well-documented account of the Stanford University flood (4). OF November 8, 1978, an eight inch (25.4 centimeters) water main ruptured outside of one of the Stanford libraries - the Meyer Research Library - where new construction was underway. The rupture site was some 20 feet from the nearest wall. The flow of water was turned off about 20 minutes after the rupture took place. In the meantime, water entered the basement of the library where there were two levels of a metal-tiered construction and damaged some 50,000 research volumes.
<section>2. Water-soaked paper</section>
<section>2.1 Associated problems</section>
<section>2.1.1 Absorption and swelling</section>
Paper has a normal hydroscopic capacity for absorbing water. However, paper made before the middle of the nineteenth century has an even greater capacity for the absorption of water thanks to the greater amount of water-soluble sizing used in that early period. For example, books of this period will absorb up to an average of 80 percent of their original weight. Furthermore, paper of this period used for books or manuscripts is highly vulnerable to microbiological infection. However, such paper will survive total immersion in water for longer periods than paper made after the mid-nineteenth century. Books made after this time were treated with water-resisting sizes; they absorb an average of 60 percent of their weight. So, in estimating the original weight of a collection, if each book weighs about four pounds (1.81 kilograms) when dry and there are, for example, about 20,000 of each period, one must plan for the removal of 64,000 pounds (29,000 kilograms) of water from the
earlier period and 48,000 pounds (21,773 kilograms) from the later (5).
As to swelling of books, the mayor part of damage takes place within the first eight hours after soaking.And since the text block and book covers swell more than the covering material, the tensions produced causes the spine to become concave and the fore-edge convex. The straining forces the case of the book to become partially or completely detached (5).
<section>2.1.2 Microbiological infection</section>
Gallo (6) describes a number of schizomycetes (bacterial) actually low in number, and about 100 species of fungi which, under favorable conditions, attack and infest the organic matter in paper. Although the spores of the fungi and the schizomyceti are present in the raw materials used for the manufacturing of paper waiting for conditions favorable for development, the infection of documents is more attributable to the spores ever present in the air or dust. Spores Deed air to develop; a book or a bundle of manuscripts totally immersed in water are immune from attack. And since the spores of the fungi cause more frequent and greater damage than bacteria, this study will focus on the former.
The microbial spores of the fungal plant, of which the most common is called mold, need the following elements in order to reproduce: humidity, a relatively warm temperature, and a nutrient. The first, humidity, is present in abundance when water floods an archives or library. And a temperature higher than normal is present if the season is warm (the problem is less acute if it is cold), if ventilation is poor, if the air conditioning system breaks down, or if there is heat present generated by an extinguished fire. The third element, the nutrient, is essential because the fungal plant, which has no chlorophyll to convert carbon dioxide to carbohydrates for tissue growth, must get its carbohydrates directly from organic matter. Unfortunately, there is plenty of nutrition available in the cellulose of paper, the protein in parchment and leather, along with the nutrients in animal and starch adhesives used to size, glue and paste.
Kowalik (7) adds that microorganisms not only have cellulose at their disposition but also other substances such as lignin, hemicelluloses, pectins, waxes, tannin, and mineral constituents. Furthermore, paper may contain resinous fillers, dyestuffs, added during the productive cycles, and various impurities which may also form a part of the microbial diet.
In any case, if the temperature is in the 18° to 36°C (65° to 96.8 °F) range and the relative humidity above 65 percent, chances are that mold infection will appear on wetted books and documents in about 72 hours after flooding takes place This, however, is not a hard and fast rule. Waters (8) reports a case where mold developed rampantly on the water-soaked spines of rare books to a thickness of 1/4 to 1/2 inch (6 to 12.7 millimeters) some 52 hours from the onset of a disaster. As a matter of fact, during long-term storage fungi will grow, although slowly, at a relative humidity as low as 60 percent. And recently the National Library of Wales (9) experienced mold infection (no flood involved) on a number of items where the relative humidity was not only well below 70 precept, but in some cases as low as 50 percent.
The first visible evidence of mold infection is a white powdery mass that will appear on the surface of a document or a book. Sometimes you need a raking light to detect it. Even a slight trace is a warning that temperature and humidity are above the limits for safety. At this point, the fungal plant has grown hyphae (root-like organs) into the stratum of the nutrient in order to get food for its development. as the plant metabolizes the substances required for its growth, it secretes citric, oxalic, lactic, and other organic acids which damage the material on which the mold is feeding. At the same time, the plant secretes pigments of green, blue, brown, black, red, and yellow color which are deposited on the host. These stains are practically impossible to remove; they can obliterate the text of a manuscript or book.
When mold attacks paper other complex things happen: the strength supplied by the sizing in paper diminishes; when cellulose suffers the attack, the structure of the paper is damaged to the point that it will become soft or so fragile that it will actually break.
Gallo (6) points out that in some cases fungi can exercise a mechanical action on paper: their hyphae may filtrate between fibers of the paper without actually entering them, or the fruit bodies of the fungi, which are covered with bristles, infiltrate between one feat and another; in both cases the pages of a book or documents in a bundle are welded together.
<section>2.1.3 Adhesion of leaves</section>
When a bundle of documents or a book has been soaked and permitted to dry under favorable conditions, it will begin to lose its water content from the outside surface. Capillary action permits the interior water to move outward and carry with it all varieties of water-soluble materials such as dyes, pigments, adhesives, and acids. In a book, the concentration of these materials, the acids and adhesives in particular, will cause the edges of the text block to become embrittled and edges stick together. Ii these text blocks are left in this condition after drying, serious degradation of the cellulose in the paper will be speeded up (8).
Books on coated paper present special problems. Coatings are usually applied to paper in order to obtain uniformity of surface, to enhance opacity, smoothness, and gloss. The basic components of coatings contain pigments such as China clay or a solubilized protein (10). Waters (8) notes that in the presence of water, starch-based coatings and some casein mixtures may revert from dry adhesive to gel and then back to the solid on drying. When these adhesive mixtures are in a fluid state, any pressure will cause the coatings to weld together and create a permanent bond during the drying cycle.
<section>2.1.4 Migration of inks and dyes</section>
In case of wetted hand-written documents or bound volumes where inks have been used, the archivist and librarian face the problem of feathering or migration of those inks. In the two principal categories of inks, those made from carbon pose no problem since this organic material is not soluble: its binding medium (glue or gum), even when long decayed, leaves the carbon particles embedded in the paper fibers. However, there are inks that may look like carbon but are, in fact, quite soluble. In the second principal category are the so-called iron inks which are compounded from gallotannic acid in the presence of iron in a binding medium. Where carbon remains on the surface, iron inks soak into the paper so that the insoluble iron compounds formed when the ink matures are held as an integral part of the paper surface. In those cases where mature iron inks become a rusty brown or yellowish color it is not safe to assume that all inks of these tones are of iron and therefore
insoluble. These same colors can appear with inks made of sepia or beechwood root which are impermanent (11)
Through all times inks have been made according to a multitude of recipes, and as a result vary in substance, appearance, and permanence. Some more modern inks are made "permanent" for fountain pens by using iron sulphate and tannic acid. However, the dyes used for toning will feather in water. Some inks used for writing have little more than a dilute aqueous solution of one or more synthetic dyestuffs. Other "permanent'' inks like those made of iron compounds will run or feather in water until they are matured or, said in another manner, properly oxidized. As for colored inks, most of them are soluble with or without aging.
While most holdings in archives and libraries are of non colored paper, the majority of the more modern material, even if it appears to be white, contains coloring matter added to improve appearance. For toning or coloring there are two mayor classes of colorants used: colored pigments and water soluble dyes. Of these the latter are the most used. The word ''soluble" means that a dye is soluble in water and colors the fibers from a solution in water. Such colors are impermanent and will run when wetted
<section>2.1.5 Time</section>
The problems associated with water damage to archival and library materials - absorption and swelling, mold infection, blocking or adherence of leaves, migration of inks and dyes get worse with the passage of time; salvage becomes more difficult, costs may go up. Future repairs and restoration may become more complicated, more expensive and time consuming. In short, time is a problem if it is not available. However, there is a way to by an unlimited amount: you do it with a process called stabilization by freezing.
<section>3. Stabilization by freezing</section>
The most effective method found to date, and the most generally accepted by conservators for the stabilization of water-damaged archival and library materials is freezing at low temperatures. A level of about -30 °C (-20 °F) is recommended; the frozen materials remain in cold storage. Quick freezing, such as the so-called blast freezing, is a method used to produce the formation of the smallest ice crystals possible. Slow freezing produces large, needlelike crystals.
<section>3.1 Advantages</section>
<section>3.1.1 Halts mold attack</section>
Without the conditions required for the reproduction and development of the spores, mold infection ceases upon freezing. True, the mold spores are not destroyed by freezing; they remain in a dormant state until a more favorable environment is available. But the fact remains that the infection is effectively checked and its pernicious damage cannot take place.
<section>3.1.2 Stabilizes soluble inks and dyes</section>
Freezing has the additional advantage of stabilizing inks, dyes, dyestuffs, colorants, etc. used for manuscripts, maps, sketches, drawings, and such, that are soluble in water. Later, when freeze-drying takes place, migration or feathering of inks or dyes can be restrained since the liquid stage is by-passed.
<section>3.1.3 Prevents adhesion of leaves</section>
The problem of blocking or adhesion of leaves to each other is primarily confined to books and periodicals printed on stock that uses a coating pigment with a binder of casein and starch, two highly water-soluble substances. If wetted material of coated stock is permitted to dry it will turn a book to a clay-like brick. Restoration is impossible. At the moment the only known salvage method considered practical, especially where large quantities of water-damaged material are involved, is freezing whilewet then freeze-drying.
<section>3.1.4 Permits orderly, unhurried planning</section>
The freeze stabilization of water-damaged archival and library materials lifts a tremendous load from the shoulders of those who have suffered a disaster. Stabilization permits time to confer with experts on the selection of drying methods. There is time to assess damage, to see what can be discarded, replaced, microfilmed; time to determine what repairs or restoration might be required; time to rehabilitate a damaged storage area, or to find an alternate location.
<section>4. Vacuum freeze-drying</section>
<section>4.1 A primer on freeze-drying</section>
<section>4.1.1 Units of measurement</section>
First, it may be helpful to review the terms used commonly to express the amount of pressure to which the vacuum chamber used for drying is subjected. As the reader will note further on, freeze-drying is one of the processes carried out in a vacuum; the conditions are below normal atmospheric pressure Normal (sea level) atmospheric pressure is 1.033 kilograms per square centimeter, or 14.7 pounds per square inch, 760 torr or 1,000 millibars. In scientific parlance, 1 atmosphere is equivalent to 760 torr (1 torr is equivalent to 1 millimeter of mercury whose symbol is Hg). For many yearn the unit of measurement for pressure was in mm Hg. Then, in recognition Torrecelli' s work - the invention in 1843 of the mercury barometer - the unit was renamed the torn However, the two terms, mm Hg and torr are current and will be used interchangeably in this study.
As a matter of information, the unit of measurement in the Systeme Internationale D'Unites (SI System) is the Pascal which is related to the bar. Another Unit used but considered obsolescent is the micron.
Table 1. Typical Units Used to Measure Vacuum Pressure.
Torr
mm Hg
Micron
Pascal
Millibar
<section>4.1.2 Sublimation/evaporation</section>
For the purpose of this study, freeze-drying is defined as a method of drying wetted archival and library materials by freezing, then under vacuum conditions by converting the solid to the vapor phase; the liquid phase is by-passed.
When a liquid is converted to the vapor phase by heating, the action is called evaporation. As a solid (frozen), its Conversion to the vapor phase by the application of heat without going through the liquid phase is called sublimation. An example of sublimation: preservation in nigh mountainous regions where water in meat freezes then evaporates (sublimes) with no liquid phase to produce unwanted side effects.
The process of both sublimation and evaporation depends ultimately on the relationship of temperature and pressure to the kinetic energy (energy of constant motion) present in water as a liquid or solid. For example, in a kettle of water, as the temperature is increased the kinetic energy increases and permits molecules from the liquid to escape as vapor. Maximum vaporization occurs at the boiling point, 100°C (212 °F) at 1 atmosphere. Conversely, the vapor pressure of water, that is, the pressure of the vapor in equilibrium with the liquid, is 760 mm Hg at 100 °C. If the atmospheric pressure is reduced to say, 525.8 mm Hg, as would be the case if the same kettle is boiled on the top of a mountain, the boiling point will be reduced by several degrees to 90 °C (194 °F). The reason: at this temperature the vapor pressure of water is 525.8 mm Hg.
Water as a solid behaves in much the same way as water as a liquid except that the temperature at which the energy of motion of the solid (ice) permits the release of water vapor molecules begins at the opposite end of the thermometer scale: the freezing point and below. The vapor pressure scales become numerically very low. By using selected temperatures below the freezing point together with suitable pressures, the sublimation of the solid will take place. This will be explained later in the text.
<section>4.1.3 Temperature-pressure values of water</section>
A graphic method of explaining the temperature-pressure influence in water as a solid, a liquid, and a vapor is in the temperature-pressure equilibrium curves of pure water shown in Figure 1. At the triple point TP, at a pressure of 4.58 mm Hg and a temperature of 0 °C (32 °F), the three states of water - solid, liquid, vapor - can exist in a state of equilibrium. The solid exists in the area between A-TP and B-TP; the liquid between B-TP and C-TP; the vapor below the area A-IPC.
A point on any curve represents a condition of equilibrium between any two states at a definite temperature and pressure. If the temperature is raised and pressure is increased the solid enters the liquid zone and melts. And if the temperature is reduced and pressure held constant or reduced the solid can become vapor. In other words, sublimation becomes possible because there is no ''liquid" zone between the '"solid" and "vapor" zones. If the system varies in either temperature or pressure from the triple point value at least one of the three states disappears.
Table 2. Vapor Pressure/Temperature Relationship for Water/Ice.
°C
Torr
°C
Torr
°C
Torr
<section>4.1.4 Vapor pressure</section>
Ice within a chamber evacuated of air and maintained at a given temperature will give off molecules in the form of water vapor. Thin escape (sublimation) is continuous. The molecules will bump into each other and the chamber wall; some will return to the surface of the ice. Eventually, the rate at which the molecules return to the ice will equal the rate at which they leave the ice. At this point, the water vapor and ice are in a state of equilibrium; the pressure at which this occurs is called the equilibrium vapor pressure. If the temperature in the chamber is, say, 20 °C (-4 °F) the pressure will reach 0.78mm Hg. This is the equilibrium vapor pressure and, consequently, the vapor pressure as seen in Table 2. The pressure exerted by vapor depends only on temperature as long as there is some liquid present.
<section>4.2 Conditions required for freeze-drying</section>
First, the object must be in a frozen state from which, as we have seen, water vapor molecules escape. Next, in order to induce continued sublimation a method must be found which will remove the water vapor molecules in the vicinity of the ice. The most effective method is to draw the molecules away by creating a colder surface (condenser) with a lower vapor pressure elsewhere, but near the vicinity of the ice. Under this condition water vapor molecules will diffuse to the colder surface where they will recondense and remain trapped as ice crystals.
To illustrate this frozen object-condenser relationship: if the chamber where the frozen object rests has a temperature of, for example, -14°C (6.80 °F) its vapor pressure is 1.36mm hg according to Table 2. If the temperature of the nearby condenser is -40 °C (-40 °F), the vapor pressure on the cold surface is 0.097mm Hg. This is equivalent to a vapor pressure ratio of 14 to 1, a difference that will go far in drawing water vapor away from the frozen object.
The next step is to find a method of providing an easier path for the water vapor molecules to travel on the way to the condenser trap. This requires the reduction of the air and other non-condensable molecules with which the water vapor molecules will collide. An effective method is the use of a vacuum pump system.
The rate at which freeze-drying proceed" will depend largely on the rate at which the frozen object gains heat. As ice sublimes heat is absorbed; this energy is required to speed up the release of molecules in the form of water vapor. This energy is called the latent heat of sublimation. If it is not replaced the temperature of the frozen object will suffer a progressive decrease in the rate of sublimation.
For small chambers sufficient heat energy from surrounding outside air and the room temperature will suffice. The frozen object is supplied with heat input through the walls and door of the chamber through conduction or radiation.
Resistance heating, or similar device, is normally used to supply heat energy when there are large qualities of frozen materials to undergo freeze-drying: In any case, the amount of heat energy supplied to the frozen object must not exceed the rate at which water vapor leaves the object, otherwise there can be a change from the solid to the liquid state. In such a case sublimation does not take place.
<section>4.3 The basic components of a freeze-dry system</section>
Figure 2 illustrates a simplified freeze-dry system whose basic components, usually placed in series as in the diagram, comprise a chamber, a condenser, and a vacuum pump. The chamber can be of any cylindrical size as long as it can withstand an exterior pressure of 1.033 kilograms per square centimeter (14.7 pounds per square inch). It must be vacuum tight, refrigerated, and have an opening that provides easy accessibility.
The important feature of a refrigerated condenser is that it should be located in the direct path of moving water vapor molecules where they can be trapped. When contact with the condenser surface is made, the water vapors give up their heat energy, turn to ice crystals, and are removed from the system and prevented from traveling to the vacuum pump.
Condensers are primarily of two types, internal or remote. The choice depends on the application desired. In the remote type the condenser is housed in a vacuum chamber which is separate from the chamber that houses the frozen objects. This is shown in Figure 2. This type of condenser can be isolated by a valve that will permit defrosting. Smaller freeze-dryers can be defrosted with warm water or natural air. Some mid-size freeze-dryers have internal condensers designed to form an ice "plug" that can be pulled out after Using hot gas to that it loose.
Apart from the technical design features required of a vacuum system, the pump should have the capacity to reduce the chamber pressure to levels below 4mm Hg. At pressures above this level the ice DO longer sublimes to water vapor but turns to liquid. A look at Figure 1 will bear this observation out.
There are two refrigeration compressors in the simplified freeze-dry system shown in Figure 2. One serves the frozen object; it should have the capacity of producing controlled temperatures that go below -5 °C (23 °F). The other serves the refrigerated condenser and should have the capacity to produce temperatures of 40 °C (-40 °F) or less. Keep in mind that the force that drives the water vapor from an ice surface is the difference in vapor pressure produced by the difference in the temperature between the frozen object and the condenser.
As already pointed out, heat energy is required for the sublimation process. Where it appears that conducted or radiated heat will not suffice for the quantity of materials to be freeze-dried, heating devices can be installed. In certain types of proprietary vacuum chambers warming devices are incorporated with the design.
<section>4.4 Degree of vacuum required for freeze-drying</section>
For freeze-drying, Rowe and Snowman (12) state the degree of vacuum required is usually between 0.3 and 0.03 torn These values are made up of the partial pressures of air and water vapor in the chamber, the sum of which equals the total measured pressure. For example, 0.3 torr could have an air component of 0.03 torr and a water vapor of 0.27 torn
RHM Research Ltd (13) place frozen documents in a freeze-dry chamber (the shelves are cooled to -30 °C or -22 °F before loading) and apply the vacuum to a level of 0.1 torr (condenser temperature is-50 °C or -58 °F). About one hour later heat is applied to the chamber shelves at 40 °C (-40 