<title>Women encounter technology: Changing Patterns of Employment in the Third World</title>
Edited by Swasti Mitter and Sheila Rowbotham
Routledge London and New York
The United Nations University
INTEC - Institute for New Technologies
Published in association with the UNU Press
First published 1995 by Routledge 11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada by Routledge 29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
© 1995 UNU/INTECH
Typeset in Times by LaserScript, Mitcham, Surrey
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Mackays of Chatham PLC, Kent
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Women encounter technology: changing patterns of employment in the third world/edited by Swasti Mitter and Sheila Rowbotham. p. cm. - (UNU/INTECH)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-415-12687-8
1. Women - Employment - Effect of technological innovations on - Developing countries. 2. Information technology - Developing countries. I. Mitter, Swasti, 1939- II. Rowbotham, Sheila. III. Series: UNU/INTECH studies in new technology and development.
HD6223.W654 1995
331.4'09172'4 - dc20 95-7345
CIP
ISSN 1359-7922
ISBN 0-415-12687-8
This collection of essays explores the effects of information technology on women's employment and the nature of women's work in the third world. Contributors discuss the challenges faced by women, along with their responses and organizing strategies, as they adjust to new technologies in less affluent communities. Also outlined are the roles that family, ideology, state policies and trade union structures can play in distributing information technology-related employment among women and men. Particular chapters highlight differences in the interests and needs of different groups of women, challenging the concept of a monolithic, specifically feminine vision of technology and science. The book provides a critique of postmodernism and ecofeminism and suggests ways in which modern technologies could promote gender equality in the developing world.
In looking at the impact of information technology on the working lives of women in the third world, this volume begins to redress the imbalance in the literature, which has so far tended to focus mainly on the experiences of first world countries. Presenting fresh research from leading academics around the world, Women Encounter Technology lays a vital foundation for further debate and research in this important area.
Swasti Mitter
is the Deputy Director of the United Nations University Institute for New Technologies (UNU/INTECH), Maastricht, the Netherlands, and holds the Chair of Gender and Technology Studies at the University of Brighton, UK. Sheila Rowbotham has written extensively on women in history and the contemporary position of women. She is a Research Fellow in the Department of Sociology, University of Manchester and an Honorary Fellow in Women's Studies at the University of North London.
UNU/INTECH Studies in New Technology and Development
Series editors: Charles Cooper and Swasti Mitter
The books in this series reflect the research initiatives at the United Nations University Institute for New Technologies (UNU/INTECH) based in Maastricht, the Netherlands. This institute is primarily a research centre within the UN system, and evaluates the social, political and economic environment in which new technologies are adopted and adapted in the developing world. The books in the series explore the role that technology policies can play in bridging the economic gaps between nations, as well as between groups within nations. The authors and contributors are leading scholars in the field of technology and development; their work focuses on:
o the social and economic implications of new technologies;
o processes of diffusion of such technologies to the developing world;
o the impact of such technologies on income, employment and environment;
o the political dynamics of technology transfer.
The series is a pioneering attempt at placing technology policies at the heart of national and international strategies for development. This is likely to prove crucial in the globalized market, for the competitiveness and sustainable growth of poorer nations.
1 Women Encounter Technology
Changing Patterns of Employment in the Third World
Edited by Swasti Mitter and Sheila Rowbotham
2 In Pursuit of Science and Technology in Sub-Saharan Africa
J.L Enos
3 Politics of Technology in Latin America
Edited by Maria Inês Bastos and Charles M. Cooper
4 Exporting Africa
Technology, Trade and Industrialization in Sub-Saharan Africa
Edited by Samuel M. Wangwe
To Will, Rana, Pamina and Partha, with love.
<section>Contributors</section>
Liliana Acero
(Ph.D. Sussex, UK, 1982), is Director of CIS (Centro de Investigaciones Sociales) in Argentina. The CIS studies the role of women and gender in various social spheres. She has edited or written several articles and books in women's studies. Her current research examines the social effects of environmental changes in the aluminium industry in Brazil. Her contribution to this anthology was prepared while serving as an Associate Professor and Tinker-Lampadia research fellow in the Sociology Departments of the University of Massachusetts and Brown University, USA.
Fatma Alloo
is an activist and journalist who has worked with a number of newspapers and radio stations in England, Tanzania, and Uganda, as well as being associated with the Women's Global Network on Reproductive Rights and coordinating the Aiding Villages in Development programme in Zanzibar. She was a founder member of the South-South forum in Geneva and has served on the production teams of several international magazines. She is at present Chairperson of the Tanzania Media Women's Association, as well as serving on a number of development bodies.
Nirmala Banerjee
is Professor of Economics at the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta. Previously, she worked as an urban planner, and she retains an interest in the urban economy and industrialization. Her research focuses on the analysis of women's issues, particularly women's work experience. She is deeply involved in the women's movement in India.
Maja Bucar
graduated from the Faculty of Economics in Ljubljana in 1980. Her Master's dissertation on 'Women's employment in the restructuring of global industry' was completed in 1985. The following year she was visiting Research Fellow at Boston University. She is currently Senior Research Fellow and Director at the Centre for International Cooperation and Development in Ljubljana. She has published a number of articles on international economics and new technologies.
Fatima Gaio
is a Senior Lecturer in production engineering and development economics at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. Her recent research interests include: the development of software activities and export opportunities in newly industrializing economies; the diffusion of emerging organizational and information technologies, and their social impact; and the gender structure of employment.
Charlene Gannagé
is an Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at the University of Windsor, Ontario, Canada. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Toronto in 1984. She is author of Double Day, Double Bind: Women Garment Workers (Women's Press, 1986), and co-editor of Working People and Hard Times: Canadian Perspectives (Garamond Press, 1987). She teaches in the areas of labour studies and women's studies.
Sujata Gothoskar
is currently attached to the Workers' Solidarity Centre in Bombay, India. She has also worked with women's campaign groups on diverse issues, and has been involved in research for unions and training for non-governmental organizations. She writes regularly for newspapers and journals in India, the Women's Feature Service, and the Asian Labour Update.
Ursula Huws
divides her time between lecturing in the School of Policy Studies, Politics and Social Research at the University of North London, freelance writing and lecturing, and managing Analytica, the economic and social research consultancy of which she is the director. She has published numerous reports and articles on various aspects of work, technology and gender relations and has acted as a consultant to the European Commission, the International Labour Organization, the World Health Organization and a variety of national and local government departments, NGOs, companies and trade unions.
Pavla Jezkova
is an economist with a working experience in developing countries in Africa and Asia. At the time of writing she was a staff member of UNIDO, working in the area of integrating human resources issues in general, and gender issues in particular, into industry-related policy analysis and research. She is presently working as a freelance consultant in Southern Africa.
Swasti Mitter
was born in West Bengal, India, and educated at Calcutta University, the London School of Economics and Cambridge University. She is the Deputy Director of the United Nations University Institute for New Technologies (UNU\INTECH) in Maastricht, the Netherlands. At UNU\INTECH she coordinates the research programme on gender, technology and development. She simultaneously holds the chair of gender and technology studies at Brighton University, UK. She has written on the areas of women and industrialization as a consultant for a wide range of international agencies, including the European Commission, ESCAP, ILO, UNDP, UNIFEM, and UNIDO. Her books include Common Fate, Common Bond: Women in the Global Economy (1986), Computer-aided Manu- facturing and Women's Employment (1992) and, with Sheila Rowbotham, Dignity and Daily Bread: New Forms of Economic Organisation Among Poor Women in the Third World and the First (1994, Routledge).
Cecilia Ng Choon Sim
teaches Gender and Development Studies at Universiti Pertanian Malaysia, where she is an Associate Professor. Her present research and writings focus on technological change and gender relations in the service and industrial sectors. She is currently seconded as a Research Fellow to the United Nations University Institute for New Technologies in the Netherlands. Cecilia is also active in the women's movement in Malaysia.
Mayuri Odedra-Straub
completed her Ph.D. at the London School of Economics on 'The Transfer of IT to Developing Countries' in 1990. Since then she has worked as a consultant with the Commonwealth Secretariat in London, as editor of PC World Africa, and as a lecturer in Information Systems at the National University of Singapore. She is currently working as an independent consultant in Germany.
Ruth Pearson
is Senior Lecturer in Economics at the School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. She has researched and written widely on industrialisation and women's employment, particularly in Latin America, the Caribbean and Europe. Her recent work has focused on new information technology and the internationalization of service sector employment. She is also director of a graduate teaching programme in Gender Analysis and Development, and is engaged in research and consultancy on reproductive technologies, macroeconomic change and household responses.
Sheila Rowbotham
has a background in economic and labour history and is the author of several books, including Women, Resistance and Revolution (1972), Woman's Consciousness, Man's World (1973) and Women in Movement: Feminism and Social Action (1993, Routledge). She has been active in labour organizing and the women's movement for many years. Her interest in economic development and global labour links grew out of her work at the Economic Policy Unit of the Greater London Council, 1983-6. She has worked as a consultant research adviser to the Women's Programme at the World Institute for Development Economics Research (WIDER UNU), and has held research fellowships at Birkbeck College, London University, and Manchester University, UK. She is Research Fellow in the Department of Sociology of the University of Westminster.
Carol Yong
is a freelance researcher, and has worked on a range of issues concerning women and rural indigenous communities. She now works in Sarawak with the Institute for Community Education.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
We should like to acknowledge a number of debts. First of all to Judy Wajcman whose book Feminism Confronts Technology ( 1991) inspired the title of our own. We wanted to pay homage to her contribution and, at the same time, wished to highlight our differences. The essays in this book bear testimony to the fact that the relationship between women and technology is not always, or necessarily, confrontational.
We are immensely grateful to our contributors who, in the midst of their many other professional commitments, produced on time the papers for the workshop 'Information Technology and Women's Employment'. The papers submitted for the workshop, which took place on 26-29 April 1993, were subsequently edited to provide the material for this book.
Professor Peter Dronke of Cambridge University generously spared his time to go through most of the papers and gave suggestions as to how to avoid making too many alterations to the writing of the non-English-speaking contributors, in order to retain their individual style as well as clarity.
Jane Williams, of UNU/INTECH, has made a significant contribution to the book by liaising with the contributors on the one hand and with the publisher on the other. Without her shared excitement, we could not have completed the editing work so swiftly.
We also take this opportunity to thank Sen McGlinn for his superb copyediting. His commitment to perfection, in the case of language as well as in the citation of references and tables, has made it possible for the publisher to meet the deadline without agony.
Professor Charles Cooper, Director of UNU/INTECH, has been a pillar of strength in lending us all possible encouragement and financial support for reducing the labour involved in preparing the manuscript. It was heartening to know that he shared our conviction that a gender focus was essential for formulating appropriate technology policies.
Some of my other colleagues, inside and outside the Institute, likewise deserve a special mention. Dr Renée Pittin, of the Institute of Social Studies at the Hague, gave valuable comments on the papers as a discussant at the workshop. Rohini Banaji offered useful reflections on the Slovenian paper. The paper was read by Miriam Pandel in the absence of Maja Bucar, who could not travel to Maastricht at the last stage of her pregnancy. We are grateful to Anneke van Luijken of IRENE (International Restructuring Education Network Europe), who provided a critique of the paper by Cecilia Ng and Carol Yong. Irene Santiago, from UNIFEM, New York, provided her expertise and advice in shaping the book. As a discussant, Hedva Sarfati, from the International Labour Organisation, Geneva, lent ILO's own perspective on women's opportunities in new white collar employment in less developed countries. Dr Ludovico Alcorta and Dr Maria-Ines Bastos of UNU/INTECH commented on some of the papers.
Professor Gu Shulin of UNU/INTECH suggested ways of taking the work forward in China.
Finally, Swasti is grateful to Rana, Pamina and Partha for providing her with a home environment where the limits of postmodernism in the study of technology are discussed with just as much gusto as the next evening meal; Sheila is more evasively relieved that the case for or against 'pomoism' has not yet crossed her threshold.
<section>1. Beyond the politics of difference</section>
An introduction
Swasti Mitter
It is not that there is a lack of thinking and writing about the impact of information technology on women's working lives. Indeed, there has been a plethora of literature in this field, especially since the mid-1980s. The literature, however, reflected a certain class and regional bias, as it focused mainly on office work and almost exclusively on the experiences of first world countries.' In the last decade, in my professional capacity, I have attended and contributed to a large number of workshops and seminars, in Europe and in the United States, on the subject of women and IT. In the discussion and formulation of areas of concern, I invariably felt dismayed at the lack of voice of third world women, and at the lack of an authentically international perspective. I noted a shift in the mood of academic gatherings in the 1980s - reflecting contemporary obsessions with nationhood, and with tradition and identity. In the climate of identity politics, there was,
understandably, little chance for recognizing and comparing workers' experiences across cultural boundaries - in spite of the pervasiveness of the information revolution and the globalization of the market economy.
I often thought of taking up the challenge of redressing the balance, of documenting, however roughly, the changing position of women of the third world. In such a venture, I knew I could rely on the research and documentation assembled by some of my friends - friends whom I have collected, like precious pearls, in different phases of my working life. I was, of course, aware of the limitations of such an initiative and the difficulty of encapsulating, in one short-term project, the wide-ranging experiences of the whole third world. Yet I was convinced that only such a bold, and perhaps foolhardy, initiative, would lead to a more systematic and integrated investigation and analysis.
My vision became a reality in 1991, with the support and enthusiasm of two leading feminist scholars: Sheila Rowbotham and Fatima Mernissi. Well known for their work in recovering women from the oblivion of history (Rowbotham, 1992; Mernissi, 1994), it is not surprising that they encouraged my plan to document women's role in, and response to, IT in our time. It is because of their initiative that I received an opportunity to place my project, for consideration, in the research programme of the United Nations University. To my great elation, Lal Jayawardena, who was then the Director of WIDER (World Institute for Development Economics Research), liked my project proposal and passed it on to Professor Charles Cooper, who had just taken up the Directorship of INTECH (Institute for New Technologies) at Maastricht. From 1992, INTECH as an institute, and Charles Cooper as my colleague, gave me unstinting support: in commissioning the papers, in organizing the workshop, and in
helping to bear the human and financial cost of editing.
The essays in this anthology, thus, are contributions towards filling a major lacuna in the literature of women's studies and of development economics. They document the impact of information technology on the working lives of women in third world countries. The writings are by thirteen committed academics, and convey more than just empirical observations. They raise questions of women's autonomy and agency and try to articulate women's needs and demands. Challenges that women face in adjusting to the demands of information technology are the focal points of the essays; yet women's responses and organizing strategies when confronted with such challenges equally permeate the arguments and analyses. They alert us to the roles that family, ideology, state policies, and trade union structures play in distributing IT-related employment between women and men.
<section>Who are the women of the third world?</section>
The essays focus mainly, but by no means exclusively, on the third world. Indeed, over the years, the definition of 'different' worlds itself has become somehow elusive and contentious. With the rising economic power of countries such as Japan, it becomes difficult to include all affluent countries even under the oft-used blanket category of western nations. Likewise, the entry of the east European countries into the category of developing nations poses definitional problems. Whether these countries of eastern Europe, previously described as the second world, would now like to be seen as pans of the third is far from clear. Terms such as 'economies in transition' are makeshift jargon, to designate precisely those countries which are uncertain about their status and alliances. In any case, given the hybrid nature of the cultural identity and consciousness of peoples in most societies (Bhaba, 1994), it is prudent to stay clear of an exclusive and binary categorization. The
effects of postcolonial migration, and the rise of underprivileged migrant communities in the so-called 'first world', give yet another reason to remember the interconnections between different national economies and regional blocs. In this anthology, the term 'third world' refers simply, and admittedly roughly, to non-affluent communities and nations. In this extended sense it includes the ax-socialist countries of eastern Europe, as well as immigrant groups residing in technologically and economically developed nations.
The anthology does not exclude consideration of the experiences of women from richer countries on strategic grounds. The success and failure of women in having their voices heard in rich countries provide a valuable point of reference for women of the third world. Gender - or the social construction of the role of women - is only one of many factors which determine the impact of information technology on a worker's life; ethnicity, religion, age and class, in some cases, play even greater roles in defining one's position in the world of work.
By highlighting the differences in the interests and needs of different groups of women, the anthology challenges the validity of any monolithic, specifically feminine vision of technology and science. The contributions in this volume, independently of one another, affirm the view that, instead of demanding an essentialist, ahistoric, universal, woman-friendly technology, it will be more rewarding to study, in the context of the current technological revolution, the needs and experiences of groups of women in different societies. Women, even in a single society, do not form a homogeneous group. In their dual role as mothers and workers, however, the majority of women do face certain common difficulties. Women's access to and control over childcare and reproductive technology, understandably, determines their ability to share the benefits of IT. Women's entry into the world of new tech urban employment in turn augments, as the essays highlight, their social power and control
over their fertility.
<section>Accounting for women's position in information technology</section>
It is precisely in the context of women's autonomy and choice in poorer countries and in less affluent communities that it is now pertinent to focus on the impact of information technology on employment opportunities. In doing so, it is important to bear in mind the distinctive features of the current revolution in the mode of production, which is primarily knowledge-intensive. IT comprises a set of technologies that actively process information rather than merely storing or transmitting it. Computers, the key hardware, and non-material software systems form its essential core.
The convergence of computing, telecommunication and satellite technology in recent years alters the structure of work not only in the economies that are at the centre of Research and Development in this field, but also in countries that primarily adapt and adopt these technologies for market orientation. Even in nations which are in economic terms relatively poor, IT substantially changes the traditional production process as well as the marketable goods and services produced. The demand for components of IT-related hardware - such as microchips or for information-processing activities - such as data entry or software programming - creates new areas for employment in developing countries. In addition, the telecommunication revolution, which allows companies to shift parts of their manufacturing and service production to geographically distant locations, makes it possible for low-wage countries to receive some amount of labour-intensive relocated work from the first world
countries. The evolving international division of labour now encompasses a vast range: from the production of semiconductors or telecommunications equipment to service-related software programming and data entry.
In this scenario, it has not been easy to ascertain whether women, in aggregate terms, have benefited from the information revolution or lost out. In some spheres, women, especially older women, are now threatened with imminent technological redundancies, especially in manufacturing. The skills needed for traditional labour-intensive assembly-line work have given way to new requirements for polyvalent, cognitive skills. The spread of information processing work, especially in banking, finance or telecommunication, by contrast, has opened up new opportunities for women who are computer-literate and young enough to learn newer skills. In the sphere of self-employment, information technology, as the contributions in the volume show, heralds new possibilities for women and men; yet women, more than men, fail to achieve their potential because of their lack of access to business and marketing skills.
Against this background of contradictory trends, it is futile to formulate a generalized strategy for giving women access to education and training. The opportunities and barriers that women face in gaining appropriate skills depend too much on the historical specificity of the situation and on their class backgrounds for this to be possible. As it is important to have a clear vision of the commonality and differences in the interests of different groups of women, it is equally strategic to move beyond an ahistoric, and thus simplistic notion of an unchanging women's response to technology. The empirical work in the anthology, in order to avoid such an approach, is deliberately presented in a historical perspective: of women's entry into and exit from the invention, application and management of technology in different periods.
By charting the contributions of women who have been obliterated from history, Sheila Rowbotham argues in her paper that:
Rather than viewing history in terms of an undifferentiated structure of patriarchy, it is possible to see women emerging intellectually in some periods and forced into retreat in others . . . examination(s) of both the barriers which have prevented women from gaining access and the circumstances which have made it possible for women to . . . contribute to technology . . . have a significant and direct relevance to the contemporary position of women.
Indeed, it is not that women did not play any role in the development of information technology. But their contributions have been forgotten or obliterated from history because women, as a group, have remained invisible in the public domain of commercial decisions and vocational training. The marginalization of Rosalind Franklin's role in the discovery of DNA, the key concept of biotechnology, highlights the difficulty even extremely privileged women face in gaining recognition, even in recent times (Rose, 1994: 150-153). The picture that emerges out of the papers in this anthology is clear. Women's role in the formulation and construction of technology is best understood not in terms of their essential differences from men but in terms of material conditions that include them in the market and institutions, or preclude them from these. As I claim in my own paper in this anthology:
The technological innovations become commercially successful if and when the creator of the innovation could make use of political, economic and legal networks. Thus the dominant group in a society determines the shape and direction of a society's techno-economic order - and the image of an inventor has almost always been male.
<section>It and the world of work: Manufacturing and services sectors</section>
The employment implications of IT assume a special importance in the context of an uneven distribution of economic and political power. In the past, women's limited access to paid employment and corporate networks has led to a bias in the adoption of technology and to a differential impact on women and men.
It is important at this point to explore why the subject of women and IT has received so little attention in recent research and literature. The reason can hardly be the lack of relevance of computers to women of the developing world. In urban areas of the majority of countries, the use of computers is no longer a novel phenomenon, even among less privileged women of poorer nations.
The case study of TAMWA (Tanzania Women's Association), as documented by Fatma Alloo in this anthology, demonstrates how IT could enhance the power of journalists and media people to disseminate news and views for educating and for mobilizing a wide range of non-elite women. The effective use of desktop publishing and printing work augments TAMWA's income generating activities. TAMWA does not have to be at the cutting edge of technology. Reasonably cheap, and by western standards old, computers allow TAMWA to be effective in networking and to remain sustainable in the long run. As Fatma Alloo so passionately asserts:
The fact that we can produce so-called 'first world' quality in spite of being a so-called 'third world' group has been an empowering process. . . . [It has led to] the demystification of information technology for that class which needs it the most in order to have their voices heard.... For example, we produce brochures on the laws which affect women's lives, written in a simplified Kiswahili, with visuals and big letters for the new literates in Tanzania. Information technology can be used to destroy [Africa's] 'poor and powerless' myth, and to mobilize a community for empowerment and social change.
The current research and documentation are not extensive enough to make possible a quantitative estimate of the impact of IT on women's manufacturing employment in the developing world. The sectoral and country studies, as documented here, merely give a 'bird's-eye view' of the fundamental transformation that IT is generating in the production process of some developing countries.
Argentina and Brazil - two major Latin American countries - have been in the forefront of the adoption of new technologies in sectors such as textiles, which provided a major source of employment to women. On the basis of extensive interviews and published data, Liliana Acero constructs the way in which women are responding to a new industrial culture - where companies are automating not just to save labour costs, but also to obtain higher efficiency and flexibility in order to meet international quality standards. Her paper delineates the demands women themselves are making in relation to the formal and informal training system that companies and the state are providing for workers.
Acero highlights the complex way in which technological changes affect the quality and quantity of women's work. In some ways, she agrees with Braverman's 'degradation of work' hypothesis, which postulates that advances in technology essentially lead to deskilling and feminization of work. Yet her paper points also to a contradictory trend: the new production process increasingly demands technical and managerial expertise and polyvalent skills for core occupations. Acero's work highlights the factors, social and educational, that bar women from the opportunities to upgrade their skills, so as to have access to these core jobs. Her observations on women's status and role at work and at home stress the need to have a deeper insight into the links between private and public domains in workers' lives. New technology, in reducing the skill components of assembly-line jobs, makes these more accessible to women. Increased job opportunities, however, bring new tensions in workers'
domestic lives. Acero documents the life of a typical woman textile worker in Argentina: 'My marriage started to break down when I started work.... I had more chances than he did. So thi