<title>Population, land management, and environmental change</title>
The UNU global environmental Forum IV
Edited by Juha I. Uitto and Akiko Ono
The United Nations University is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world, and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a world wide network of research and postgraduate training centres, with its planning and coordinating headquarters in Tokyo.
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
The UNU Global Environmental Forum IV, Population, Land Management, and Environmental Change, 25 May 1995, was organized by the United Nations University in cooperation with the United Nations Environment Programme. It was supported by the Global Environment Centre Foundation and sponsored by Obayashi Corporation.
The United Nations University
Tokyo, Japan
© The United Nations University, 1996
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
The United Nations University, 53-70, Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-2811 Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Telex: J25442 Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
UNU Office in North America
2 United Nations Plaza, Room DC2-1462-70, New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 963-6387 Fax: (212) 371-9454 Telex: 422311 UN UI
Typeset by Asco Trade Typesetting Limited, Hong Kong
Printed by Permanent Typesetting and Printing Co., Ltd., Hong Kong
Cover design by Takashi Suzuki
UNUP-956
ISBN 92-808-0956-3
01500 P
<section>Preface</section>
Juha I. Uitto
The United Nations University is an autonomous academic organization under the United Nations umbrella, with headquarters in Tokyo. According to its charter, the University's mandate is to carry out research, postgraduate education, and dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems facing mankind. It has also a specific mandate towards capacity building in the developing countries to assist them in dealing with the questions of development. An international community of scholars, the United Nations University works through networks of scientists from each of the world's continents. These networks serve to focus the issues to be researched and to bring together the brightest minds to cooperate in finding solutions to the international problems.
The purpose of the UNU Global Environmental Forum series is to disseminate research results on issues pertaining to global environmental change to a broader public. Since the beginning of the series in 1991, the Fora have covered a wide variety of issues. The first one, entitled "Monitoring and Action for the Earth," was concerned with new technologies for monitoring and observation of the changes occurring in the terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The second Forum, in 1993, focused on environmental change affecting rainforests and drylands in South-East Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Chinese drylands. The third Forum's title was posed in the form of a question: "Will Tropical Forests Change in a Global Greenhouse?" It examined the complex and multi-faceted interlinkages between global warming and the sustainability of tropical rainforest ecosystems and their biological diversity.
The fourth UNU Global Environmental Forum took place in Osaka, Japan, on 25 May 1995. Its theme was "Population, Land Management, and Environmental Change." The Forum focused on the research carried out under the University's international collaborative research programme with the same title. This publication reproduces the papers presented at the Forum in an edited form. The first three papers set the objectives of the research programme (Harold Brookfield) and outline some of the underlying key concepts, including farmers' participation (Michael Stocking) and the role of women (Janet Momsen). The following four chapters highlight preliminary results from the research undertaken within the field research clusters of the programme in Papua New Guinea (Graham Sem and Ryutaro Ohtsuka), northern Thailand (Kanok Rerkasem), and the Amazon (Christine Padoch). The final chapter by Shunji Murai presents a different perspective to the population carrying capacity at the global level.
The Forum was organized jointly with the International Environmental Technology Centre of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP/ IETC), and in cooperation with the Global Environmental Centre Foundation. The Forum, as well as all the earlier ones, was sponsored by Obayashi Corporation.
<section>Opening remarks</section>
Takashi Inogach
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the Global Environmental Forum organized by the United Nations University. Although this is already the fourth Forum, it is the first one to be held in the Kansai region. Therefore, it is of special importance to us to address the audience here today.
As many of you realize, this conference was originally scheduled to be held on 19 January 1995, but the Great Hanshin Earthquake that occurred just two days earlier on the other side of Osaka Bay so tragically forced us to postpone the event. We sincerely regret the change in plans and any inconvenience it may have caused you. However, obviously the postponement of the Forum was only an insignificant consequence of the earthquake disaster that brought so much destruction and suffering to the inhabitants in the Kobe area.
Environmental issues and the quest for sustainable development are at the centre of international attention today. The global environment is under increasing stress due to human activities. The world is experiencing an unprecedented growth in human population, associated with rapid economic growth, industrialization, and urbanization. Environmental problems can be broadly divided into two types: those phenomena that are truly global, affecting the earth as a whole, such as global warming or the depletion of the atmospheric ozone layer; and those with more localized, yet severe effects. The latter are typically expressed in deforestation, loss of topsoils due to erosion, and the conversion of agricultural land to urban land uses. There is urgent need to improve mankind's understanding of these complicated phenomena and their complex interlinkages. Scientific knowledge is required to back up the concrete actions needed at local, regional, and global levels to halt
environmental degradation and move towards sustainable development.
One of the main foci of the United Nations University's research and training programme is environment and sustainable development. Following the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), or the Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro three years ago, UNU appointed a high-level advisory team to prepare a plan of action for the University in response to the recommendations of the Earth Summit. The ensuing document, the UNU Agenda 21, defines the scope and focus of our environmental research and capacity-building activities in view of our specific strengths and comparative advantages, as well as the need for complimentarily and cooperation with other actors in the field.
Today's Forum is entitled "Population, Land Management, and Environmental Change," a title it borrows from a large international collaborative research programme carried out under UNU. The PLEC programme was initiated around two years ago to study the sustainability, or lack of it, of agricultural systems in smallholder areas in the tropical and subtropical parts of the world. These agricultural systems, essential for feeding an ever increasing population, are under severe pressure from multiple sources, including population growth, commercialization of the economy, and land-use changes. PLEC examines the impacts of land management practices on the sustainability of agricultural systems. It also studies the conservation of biological diversity in the managed agricultural ecosystems. The basic premise of the research is that many of the indigenous agricultural systems are highly adapted to the local ecosystems and are very conservation oriented. However, they are rapidly
disappearing due to socio-economic changes in the society. The research programme works through a network of locally based research clusters around the world, covering a range of locations from the Brazilian Amazonia and the Caribbean, through West and East Africa, to South-East Asia. Key scientists involved in the PLEC programme are present here today and will give you more detailed information on the various aspects of research and the preliminary hypotheses and findings.
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the role of our partners in organizing this Forum. UNEP, the United Nations Environment Programme, is our co-organizer. They have recently set up a new International Environmental Technology Centre here in Kansai, which will certainly play an important role in the transfer of environmental technologies and capacity building in developing countries. We also wish to thank the Global Environmental Centre Foundation for cooperating with us in making this Forum happen.
Last but not least, I wish to express our gratefulness to the sponsors of the UNU Global Environmental Forum series, Obayashi Corporation. Since 1991, Obayashi has supported UNU in the dissemination of research results on the important topics of global environmental change and sustainable development, and our cooperation has become an institutional feature in the UNU programme. It is our sincere hope that this cooperation will be carried on long into the future.
<section>Welcoming address</section>
Richard A. Meganck
I feel greatly honoured to have been invited to address this distinguished gathering in Osaka on behalf of the United Nations Environment Programme.
Over the past 30 years we have observed in many parts of the world rapid population growth, mismanagement of land and water resources leading to low agricultural performance, and increasing environmental degradation. Are these disturbing trends connected? New studies confirm that they are. For example, Africa's population, agriculture, and environmental problems are strongly linked in a complex nexus that hinders development and threatens the region's food security, health, and natural resources. And just as the problems are connected, their solutions need to be integrated and mutually reinforcing to reverse this downward spiral.
For that reason, the importance of this Forum cannot be overemphasized. The stakes are high. They are nothing less than a sustainable future for humanity.
Two and a half years ago, heads of states attending the Earth Summit in Rio called for urgent action on sustainable development. Yet 30 months later, the primary message of the Earth Summit - the urgent call for action has been obscured by economic recession, fratricidal conflicts, natural and man-made disasters, and escalating poverty. Moreover, while the Earth Summit's Agenda 21 acknowledged the relationship between population, consumption, and natural resources, it failed to adopt the policies needed to address population growth and development. Now the challenge is to integrate UNCED with the outcomes of the United Nations' Cairo population conference. But we can redeem ourselves. A forum such as this one today that is being organised by the United Nations University and sponsored by
Obayashi Corporation provides us with the opportunity and the responsibility to answer that urgent call for action - and to advance the sustainable development agenda in a meaningful way.
Regardless of a country's level of development, population growth means increased energy use, increased resource consumption, and environmental stress. It cannot be clearer that we are draining our planet's ability to support ourselves.
For many of us living in developed countries, we are becoming well acquainted with population-related problems, whether we recognise them as such or not. Air and water pollution, difficulties in siting landfills, loss of migratory fish stocks, congested roads and waste in our cities are just symptoms of the problem of population growth.
For those living in developing countries, population growth affects the environment and quality of life in very basic ways. Rapid population growth increases pressure on resources, often forcing communities into unsustainable practices for the simple purpose of obtaining the food, fuel, and shelter needed to survive - literally forcing people into acts of environmental degradation.
Clearly, it is not an easy job to shape reasoned and responsible solutions to the most pressing problems of our time - population and consumption. The United Nations has devoted a series of conferences to this subject. This road actually started in Rio with the Earth Summit in 1992; from there it went in September last year to Cairo for the International Conference on Population and Development. The next stop was Copenhagen for the World Summit on Social Development last March; then it is on to Beijing for the World Conference on Women in September this year, and finally to Istanbul in June 1996 with a City Summit called Habitat II Conference.
This unprecedented continuum of conferences spans some of the most serious and pressing challenges of human security that will confront the world community in the new century. Cumulatively, the conferences already held and those still to take place have begun adopting a more holistic and humane approach towards our global problems, and towards the cooperative solutions they require.
The effects and endeavours of the United Nations University fit well into this concept. Its Programme on Environmentally Sustainable Development, the Zero Emissions Research Initiative, and the Global Environmental Fora all focus on global problems which require a vision and concerted effort to overcome. If overpopulation is, indeed, our greatest overall problem, then surely research, education, and training must be our most effective long-term weapons against it, for the elimination of deprivation and ignorance.
The United Nations Environment Programme's International Environmental Technology Centre - based here in Osaka and also in Shiga Prefecture would like to join forces with UNU and the experts assembled at this Forum to find answers on how to ensure the sustainability of development processes. The answers do not lie in an "end-to-development" philosophy, not in restrictions of the legitimate aspirations of developing nations, not through coercive policies or limitation of individual choice, and not in deepening ideological divisions.
Whether we focus on controlling unchecked rise in population growth or the unsustainable trends in land management or the resulting environmental changes, what is required is:
o a global commitment to action;
o the assumption of individual responsibility; and
o a return to the original meaning of the word "development" - meaning the unfolding of potential.
We at the International Environmental Technology Centre know that unfolding this potential means to address not only the scientific, technological, and economic aspects of global development problems, but also the human, social, and legislative issues involved. We try, bearing all these aspects in mind, to promote the utilisation of environmentally sound technologies in the hope of helping to create a more equitable and less wasteful society. I believe that the experience we have gained in Japan, in North America or western Europe through our own industrialisation histories, and the appropriate technology we have been able to develop in the process, may be of real assistance to developing countries and countries with economies in transition. Because mismanagement in our past world of modest population and limited technological power could be tolerated far more readily than it can in the crowded, high-tech global megalopolis of tomorrow, we have to do better, we urgently need
new thinking.
It only remains for me to thank you all for your patience in listening to me. I wish the UNU Global Environmental Forum number IV every success, and I am convinced it will make a most valuable contribution to reversing the disingenuous spiral of population-environment linkages towards the direction of sustainability.
<section>1. People, land management, and environmental change: The problems that a United Nations University programme is studying</section>
Harold Brookfiel
<section>Background</section>
The project described in this introductory paper focuses its attention on one specific part of the whole complex relationship between people, their society, and the land. We concentrate on small-farm regions of the tropics and subtropics and, within this, on how farmers manage or mismanage their land and its biological diversity, and on why they do so. Some such areas are well managed, and some suffer severe degradation. Dealing with small-farm regions, we encounter great diversity of farming practices, often within quite small areas, and we term this "agrodiversity" (Brookfield and Padoch 1994). Although PLEC (People, Land Management, and Environmental Change) includes some experimental research based on farmers' practices, it draws information principally from what farmers do and know, and from its own field research. PLEC is also a capacity-building project, with a main objective of creating a multidisciplinary network of specialists in environmental management, qualified
also to understand the societal forces which create the conditions within which small farmers manage their land and biota.
We do not try to cover the whole of the tropics and subtropics, but instead concentrate our efforts on a few areas where these problems can be studied in greater depth. Six "clusters" of PLEC scientists have been formed, based in universities or government research organizations, in Africa, Asia-Pacific, and tropical American regions. They are linked together by the core project network. Four clusters work only in humid areas but two, in West and East Africa, extend into the dry subhumid margins. In mid-1995 there are 70 scientists in PLEC, 53 of them working for institutions in the developing countries. The distribution of the clusters, and the areas in which they work, is shown in figure 1. A good deal more about some of these clusters and their work is presented in the following papers.
To explain better what we are doing, we sometimes use supplementary titles for our project. One such is "Agrodiversity, Land Management, and Biodiversity." We argue that the greater part of the conservation problem, whether of land or biodiversity, lies in agricultural areas where crisis conditions have widely been generated by population growth, commercialization, deforestation, and land degradation. We urge a positive rather than a negative view of this situation, and propose that one of the most undervalued elements is the ability of a significant proportion of the world's small farmers to modify their farming systems in a comparatively short period of time, often in ways that make sustainable use of biodiversity as well as the land. Their object is production and not conservation, but an objective of sustained production does call for conservationist methods, and many farmers have or acquire the knowledge to adopt such methods and do. Going further, we also seek to
persuade that farmers' adaptations and the knowledge on which they are based could often be successful, if societal conditions permit and assist. People manage the land and its biological diversity; moreover, they suffer the consequences of wrong decisions. One principal objective of PLEC is to give farmers' knowledge and practices an equal place with the findings of external science in the search for sustainability with conservation.
This paper does not describe the work of the project, though some of this is used, but discusses a part of the background. This paper looks at the specific question of intensification and innovation in land-resource management. It emphasizes some recent African material. PLEC argues that farmers can and do change their systems of management when pressures arise, and there is already abundant evidence to support this from within the project, as well as from a wider literature. My aim is to look outside PLEC's own evidence, and put it into a wider context. To discuss this question, I draw initially on two papers which I wrote about a decade ago, and which are here reconsidered (Brookfield 1984, 1986). This short paper is part of a rethinking process that I hope to develop further in other writing now under way. The reconsideration presented here is in the light of some recent literature concerning the way in which land management has adapted, with considerable success, to
increase in population and to the need to manage land degradation. Some of this adaptation constitutes reclamation of degraded land and this aspect, not stressed in the mid-1980s' papers, is given greater weight here.
<section>Intensification and innovation</section>
To begin, it is necessary to define some basic terms. Intensification is properly measured against constant land, and means measures which will enhance productivity on that land. More specifically, what is usually implied is the intensification of inputs, meaning their increase on constant land up to - or even beyond - the point of zero marginal return. In most of the literature the inputs that are discussed are those of labour, since increases in capital input are generally "lumpy," and less easy to analyse. However, where changes are introduced into an agricultural system the inputs are applied in qualitatively new ways, and a new "curve" of intensification is originated. Such changes are best separated from progressive intensification, and thought of as innovations.
Innovations, in turn, need to be distinguished into those which are specific to a particular crop or crop cycle, and those of greater durability. The latter may be purely organizational, such as a change in land tenure arrangements, although these normally accompany changes in the farming system. A major set of innovations takes place when, for example, a mainly pastoral system becomes dominantly agricultural. Certain innovations create capital in the land, often termed "landesque capital." Mounds, ridges, terraces, irrigation and drainage systems, dams, created land and created soil, agroforests, fishponds and the like, constitute such capital. Their physical evidence may remain on the land after abandonment of upkeep, and some relinquished innovations may remain capable of being brought back into service after many years. Most successful physical innovations have the effect of changing the conditions under which soil fertility, structure, and soil water are managed, or of
reducing or minimizing erosion from sloping land. They are changes in the direction of greater sustainability of production.
All innovations are not equal. Some are of only a minor nature, though they may be important. An example might be the deliberate fostering of a particular tree species as a part of general fallow management, improving nutrient recycling along with other benefits. Another might be the introduction of row-planting of rice in place of more random planting in a wet field, to facilitate weeding with higher planting density. Major innovations, however, include the terracing of hillsides, the introduction of a system of irrigation, the placement of mulch in mounds or under ridges, or anything which creates a major change in the system of management. The distinction is easier to draw conceptually than in practice but it is useful because major innovations are those which mark a real change in the conditions of production and, often, the creation of enduring landesque capital.
The relationship of major to minor innovation and of both to intensification is fairly easily understood in the case of wetlands. Wetlands may be agriculturally usable when water levels are low without any special works at all, but crops are at risk from unexpected variations in water level. Production is insecure. Once the wetlands are drained, or ridged, however, dry land is created. The effect of the major innovation is an immediate boost in crop security and often in per-crop yield as well. Such a system may then be elaborated with new minor innovations such as varying the height of the ridges, and working them more intensively by applying more labour. The initial transformation of the land surface was, however, the major innovation, greatly changing the conditions of production. There may be further major innovations, for example involving management of the water level. However, most subsequent elaborations are of a minor order, accompanying intensification of inputs
into the new system.
It is common to see major innovations on difficult sites that could not have been managed sustainably without them. Wetlands and steeplands can both be used without innovation, and so can difficult soils, but their continued productivity cannot often be achieved without some form of physical transformation of the site. There are few steep hillsides that can be worked for a long period without loss of soil, unless there is some form of slope protection. While on naturally resilient slopes the problem may be considerably less than many observers, seeking to introduce high-technology management, may have believed, there are always advantages in the introduction of protective measures. However, it is not only in such obvious locations that innovations are important. Where land has been cleared from forest, for example, considerable changes take place in its micro-climate and, where the general climate is characterized by drought, the effect of this drought may be greatly
intensified on treeless land. Innovations both to adapt agriculture for greater drought tolerance, and to restore some tree cover, may therefore be highly advantageous.
Rarely are innovations introduced all at once, unless by major external intervention. Both logical reasoning and observed experience show that they demand farmers' experimentation, either spontaneous or using new information they have received. Sustained and widespread adoption only takes place after clear advantages have been demonstrated. So little has the adaptive capacity of farmers been valued during the past two or three generations of development research and intervention, that the view of farmers as experimenters has until very recently indeed been derided, and it is still derided in some areas. Yet farmers experiment constantly, with new crops, new trees, new tools and practices, and new ideas. Many experiments, even if successful, are allowed to lapse, but a proportion survive and are more widely adopted. It is this proportion of enduring innovations, repeated across region after region, that is responsible for the enormous diversity of farming systems found across
the world.
There is, however, a problem with some systems which involve a large inheritance of landesque capital from an earlier period of time, even a very recent period. The maintenance of this capital can be an onerous burden, absorbing a substantial amount of labour input, and income, that cannot therefore be devoted to current production and income-gaining. Modern change usually includes substantial growth of off-farm employment, whether or not it involves emigration from rural areas. The employment is often selective of young people, and the farm population grows older. The effect of a heavy dependence on landesque capital is most obvious in the intensive hydraulic systems of Asia, with their heavy dependence on irrigation, terracing, and their works. Writing of China, but with much wider potential application, Elvin (1993/4) writes of "technological lock-in," which can lead swiftly from apparent sustainability to unsustainability. While this is not yet a problem in the specific
cases discussed below, it is already there as a threat.
One of the reasons why farmers' experiments have been so little recognized is that most external observers remain in a farming region only from hours to, at most, a very short period of years. Yet change in farming systems takes place across periods of decades and it is only now, when modern observations can be set against those of from 20 to 60 years ago, that the amount of largely spontaneous change can clearly be seen. It could have been realized sooner, by logical thinking about what must have taken place to produce present management systems in the many areas where whole new crop complexes have been introduced by transfers between continents within the past one to five hundred years. Except in an academic literature, however, the necessity to accept farmers' experimentation as a reality did not arise. And a good deal of the academic literature was also put aside as irrelevant by the practitioners of "development," or was used only in a highly selective fashion. One of
PLEC's secondary objectives is to strive for larger incorporation of the results of good research into diagnosis, management, and development practice.
<section>A case in East Africa</section>
A useful body of literature has emerged in recent years on the modification of African agriculture, principally in the face of rising population pressure. In what follows, I concentrate heavily on a small part of this literature. A considered official view is also the classic view that, while African farmers may have the ability to change their farming systems, the process is too slow to cope with the rate of contemporary population growth (Cleaver and Schreiber 1992). A recent group of academic studies leads to a less negative conclusion, noting a considerable amount of successful adaptation, but leaves the case regarding population growth open (Turner et al. 1993). Several of its contributors still regard it as "inevitable" that continued growth of population will lead ultimately to land degradation. Very different is the basic conclusion of a detailed study of change in the Machakos district of Kenya, which concludes that increasing density of population over most of the
present century has been a major force for improved environmental management (Tiffen and Mortimore 1992; Tiffen et al. 1994). Specifically, increased demand and closer interaction generated by a denser population, coupled with increased labour supply and economies of scale, have more than outweighed the negative effects of population growth. After a six-fold increase in population over 60 years, dryland farming in a drought-prone subhumid region "has been turned toward a new logic of sustainability" (Tiffen et al. 1994, p. 12).
There is more to the Machakos case than this, however. The processes of change involved first a progressive, indeed rapid, degradation which endured through the 1940s and later in some areas. Its most obvious, and best described, characteristic was soil erosion, but deforestation, declining soil fertility, and declining availability of water were also important elements. Already in the 1930s, however, improvement was recognizable in some areas, accompanied by a shift from largely pastoral farming supplemented by rotational cultivation toward mixed farming in the wetter areas, and with the beginnings of terracing and water control. External intervention was strongly directive and was concerned primarily with soil conservation, a pattern which continued until the 1950s. The imposed innovations were only selectively accepted by the farmers. Their family structure was at the same time shifting from extended toward nuclear families, more closely identifying the individual
household with a specific tract of owned land, so that restorative management arose increasingly at the family-farm level, and not over whole landscapes. From the 1950s onward colonial government discouragement of cash cropping was replaced by encouragement of an already strong trend toward planting of coffee and other commercial crops and, coupled with incomes earned off the farm, cash crops began to provide money capital for investment on the land. Top-down intervention began to be replaced by p