<title>Women, households and change</title>
Edited by
Eleonora Masini and Susan Stratigos
UNITED NATIONS UNIVERSITY PRESS
ã The United Nations University, 1991
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University, Toho Seimei Building, 15-1 Shibuya 2-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel.: (03)3499-2811
Fax: (03)3499-2828
Telex: J25442
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
Typeset by Asco Trade Typesetting Limited, Hong Kong
Printed by Permanent Typesetting and Printing Co. Ltd., Hong Kong
Cover design by Tsuneo Taniuchi
HGA-3/UNUP-766
ISBN 92-808-0766-5
United Nations Sales No. E.91.III.A.3
04500 P
The United Nations University (UNU) is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world, and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and post-graduate training centres, with its planning and co-ordinating headquarters in Tokyo, Japan
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
<section>Note to the reader from the UNU</section>
Analysis of the impact of macro-events on women and the role of women in determining changes in the household is important for a better understanding of society. In conducting such an analysis, the adoption of the life-course approach, both in retrospective and perspective terms, is particularly useful to identify changing relationships among individuals within the same household and the long-term implications that these changes have on the structure of society.
On this basis, the Household, Gender, and Age Project of the United Nations University conducted between 1983 and 1988 a series of case-studies in Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Kenya, China, and Sri Lanka. After introducing the genesis of the HGA project, its research activities, and the methodology adopted, this volume presents a synthesis of the results of the project research.
Acknowledgement
The United Nations University is grateful to the Division for the Advancement of Women, United Nations Office at Vienna, for its editorial contributions that have helped to make possible the publication of this volume.
<section>Foreword</section>
This book is the fruit of an innovative project designed to expand the boundaries of our understanding of women's contribution to development and the obstacles they face to participating and receiving full benefit from it. It began as part of the Household, Gender and Age programme of the United Nations University, under the leadership of Eleonora Masini. A series of consultations initiated by Elise Boulding took place in Tokyo in 1979, Oslo in 1980, and Dartmouth, New Hampshire, in 1981. These were followed up by Eleonora Masini in meetings in Rome in 1981 and 1982. By this time the fundamental framework and focus of the research was established and in 1982 attention turned to identifying locations and researchers in different regions. This led to a series of national studies based on a common motivation and methodology. The studies varied according to the resources available and the specific problems, but they were linked by a common purpose and for that reason represent
comparative research at its best.
The Division for the Advancement of Women of the United Nations Office at Vienna joined the project in its final stages. During a visit to Vienna at the cud of 1989 Elise Boulding suggested that assistance was needed to prepare the case-studies for publication and more popular dissemination. The question of the impact of change on women and households was one that the Division was researching more thoroughly as part of its policy analysis work in the context of the implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, so it had experience to contribute to the project Using resources of the Trust Fund for the Monitoring, Review, and Appraisal of the Strategies the Division provided the services of consultant Susan Stratigos to edit the material and assist with the Division's chapter.
The study itself deals in an innovative way with some of the key microeconomic and micro-social aspects of advancement of women: the sharing of responsibilities and power within the household, the cumulative effect of both discrimination and its elimination on cohorts of women. By both its findings and its methodology, it should open Up new areas for thought, research, and action in the effort to achieve equality and equity between women and men.
HEITOR GURGULINO DE SOUZA
Rector, UNU
MARGARET JOAN ANSTEE
Director-General, UNOV
<section>Prologue</section>
In a moment of truth back in 1979, three women from Europe, Africa and North America, sitting on a Programme Advisory Committee established by the Rector of the United Nations University (UNU), suddenly realized that the research programme they were discussing - dealing with pressing world problems of human and social development, natural resources, and food security- was almost completely gender-blind. Even though we were into the fifth year of the United Nations International Women's Decade and the concept of women's participation was supposed to be built into all development research, the proposals before us all assumed a male labour force. You find what you look for, and these researchers were not looking for women.
Wenche Barth Eide of Norway, Frede Chale of Kenya, and I wondered how a more differentiated perception of women and men as agents of change with different but overlapping roles, responsibilities, and contributions could be inserted into development models. We thought in terms of relating macro-phenomena to the micro-realities of daily life. We sought a perspective that could make women visible, yet not repel those who reject the idea that women should be the focus of special studies. The answer was the household. Here, in all its cultural diversity, is the primary living unit of human beings, where the species is reproduced and nurtured, the base from which individuals participate in the whole range of tasks that shape and change a community and a society. Looking at people in households means seeing each member as an individual, a source of reproduction and production, of resistance to change and of change. It means seeing men and women, children and old people in relation
to their community as well as in relation to each other. With this concept of the household-in-community as an ecosystem, the Household, Gender, and Age Project was born.
There was understandable resistance among feminist researchers to using this framework to study women. They saw the danger of stereotyping women as homemakers, but others also recognized it as a potential source of new insights into women's part in modernization. Rector Soedjatmoko of the saw the possibilities, and with his support the project went forward.
The most significant aspect of gender differentiation is women's procreative role, which makes the female life-course much more complex than the male. Once men reach adulthood, their roles do not change much except through seniority, but women's roles change from decade to decade in shifting patterns of production and reproduction. Both the life-course analysis and the time-budget components of the research described in this book arose from the need to penetrate the character of gender-differentiated role sets in relation to the overall process of development.
So began the long search for a satisfactory theoretical framework and appropriate methodologies, for colleagues and research teams. The goals as the initiating group saw them were, first, to create models that would set new standards for gender sensitivity in all development research in the UNU, the entire United Nations system, and the academic community generally, and, second, to provide material that would change the way policy-makers approached development planning by providing a more realistic picture of the people and resources involved. In an ideal society, there would be a substantial overlap between male and female roles and real equality in decision-making in the household and the community. An important part of this study was to uncover actual patterns of participation and decision-making in the household.
In fact the practical goals of the project were quite modest, but they continued to focus on helping policy-makers. However, real life does not fall into neat categories, and the difficulties of international comparative research arc enormous. The results are not earth-shattering, but they provide very substantial food for thought. What follows are my reflections, as an interested outsider who participated in the birth of the project, on the findings of the studies reported in this book.
Because modernization and development imply change, the reader will be expecting change. What is striking in reading these studies is the impression that although much of the edifice of development has been erected on the backs of women living at the lowest economic Ievels, these women themselves experience little change in their own lives, except for the worse.
The power of historical tradition, including the domination associated with patriarchy, appears again and again in these studies. In Kenya, the patriarchal inheritance and social system force dispossessed women and their dependants from their rural villages to the plantations, where the proportion of female-headed households is therefore above the national figure. The administrative staff there frankly admitted that these households provide the bulk of the stable labour force: men emigrate to the city, unwilling to accept the low pay, bad housing, and substandard working conditions. The women stay on, in desperation, in order to feed their children. In Sri Lanka, women who have the courage to migrate to the Middle East as domestic workers in order to help their families may come home to find that husbands and kin have frittered away their hard-earned savings. There may be little left for the woman if she cannot control her own earnings. In China, too, though there arc new
job and income opportunities, women nevertheless feel that it is proper for men to decide what is to be done with family resources.
One constant in the lives of all these women is domination of men as fathers, husbands, employers, and authority figures in the community. This patriarchy is not linked to any particular political or economic form, nor to any specific social class. It persists in the great variety of national settings covered hi these reports. Patriarchy may not be impermeable, but it is certainly highly resistant to the many factors of change operating in the societies studied. Internal, urban, and international migration changes the circumstances of women's lives drastically and requires new strategies and new skills, but male dominance in the household and at work remains untouched. Industrialization and technological change leave women trapped at the bottom of the skill ladder. Demographic transition may change the socio-economic profile of a country, but poor women, rural and urban alike, still have large families. Whether women are poor or rich, whatever autonomy they have operates
within a patriarchal frame.
Many of the advances we associate with modernization - education, better jobs, fertility control - go primarily to middle- and upper-class women. The great difference between their experiences, on the one hand, and lower-class women on the other is particularly striking in the Colombian study, though it certainly pertains to the other countries too. Increased educational opportunities appear to benefit them more. They are of little use to poorer girls if they are kept at home to contribute to the family's subsistence, or "voluntarily" drop out of school because the pressure of domestic responsibilities is too great. On the other hand, the evidence from these studies is mixed, and it may be that better-educated women have fewer job opportunities. Both push and pull factors keep them at home in domestic roles instead, a phenomenon that has also been observed in Europe and North America in various phases of industrialization. The newly generated factory jobs for women, whether
in Argentina or Sri Lanka, are not necessarily linked to educational levels and they may go to the less educated, least skilled women. The pay frequently keeps them close to, or even below, the subsistence level they were at before.
In situations of such complexity, the importance of cohort studies to reveal real changes in the lives of people over time cannot be overestimated. Each of these research projects identified women from two or sometimes three different birth cohorts or groups born at a certain time. The experiences of women now in their childbearing years are different to those their mothers had. While class differentiations are still strong, younger women as a group have a little more education, better family planning, and a greater variety of jobs than their mothers. They have lost their rural roots; they may not have extended families to fall back on; and they lack the wider experience of the hidden economy that rural women traditionally have, but they arc doing the they can with what they have available.
The old story of women's double workload comes through in every study. By separating remunerated work from the home, modernization makes it more difficult to combine childbearing, child-rearing, and domestic maintenance with it. Since reproduction and domestic maintenance must continue in any case, employment outside the home frequently doubles the working hours of women. All the time-budget data in the studies show this. The little extra domestic labour contributed by men hardly makes a dent in that female burden. At least in the working classes, leisure is a male, not a female, phenomenon.
Women learn new skills. Whether in resettled villages or in migrant streams, by applying modern technologies or expanding craft opportunities, women are finding new ways to generate income. However, much of this activity is in the informal or hidden economy, so it is not reflected in official statistics. Nor do the economic rewards bear much relationship to the skill or ingenuity involved.
Many of the women in these studies have resettled in semi-urban or urban areas and so lost the support of extended family structures. This makes the double load doubly hard, since there are no reserves of help to cope with child care or illness and other misfortunes. Nor do the new channels of communication that arc supposed to come with modernization work for them. There may be jobs, but they don't know how to find them. There may be services, but they don't know about them.
Women's horizons arc widening, but some of the evidence may disappoint the idealists. Consumerism rears its unattractive head whenever there is cash beyond the subsistence level. There seems to be little interest in education for its own sake, school drop-out rates are high even in the absence of economic pressures, and the Chinese researchers are probably not the only ones who found that young literate women were reading romances, not newspapers. Yet it was heartening to find an interest in voluntary organizations and community issues among some Sri Lankan women. Perhaps further research might find more of this in the other countries studied.
I have already commented on the slowness of change in the lives of the women studied in contrast to the magnitude of the macro-level changes taking place in each society. In considering the future, it is very important to take account of the different stocks of knowledge available to older and younger women. I-or example, the traditional knowledge stock of rural societies, ranging from the use of plants, herbs, and healing practices to kitchen-gardening and food-processing and the production of tools and articles for household use, is not necessarily at the disposal of young urban women today. Nor are the community support systems of rural societies available to them. New knowledge stocks can grow up, as studies of urban kitchen-gardening in third-world cities show, and comparable mutual aid structures can also develop, but this takes time and energy that the hard-pressed urban poor may not have. If third-world societies are to develop their full social and economic
potential, attention must be paid to the maldistribution of resources that leaves women too exhausted and overworked to participate in shaping the conditions of their lives and the lives of their families and communities.
What are the needs that emerge from these studies? I would not put more formal education for women first, although that is important, as the results indicate that education relates only loosely to job opportunities. Rather, I would make improved wages and working conditions and the availability of child care a priority; then skill training, and community-based adult education activities along the lines of the Paolo Freire model of conscientization, which could help retrieve and adapt rural knowledge stocks to urban settings. It could also make women more aware of possibilities and of themselves as agents of change and co-shapers of their lives and their communities. Increased levels of formal education for women should be in addition to, not in place of, these other priorities. Additional schooling will only improve the quality of life of women and the societies they live in when basic standards of living are such that they are able to take advantage of it. While education
is statistically associated with more effective family planning, it is not actually a prerequisite for fertility control. Throughout the ages, women without the benefit of literacy have controlled family size according to their perception of social needs.
The way different generations have managed to sustain and reproduce life under conditions of rapid social change compels our respect for the strength, versatility, and resourcefulness of women. These studies also reveal the pressures modernizing societies put on one institution - the household - and one gender-women. We now lament failed development. What has failed is a set of attitudes and structures built by men and maintained with the help of women, which prevent women from being equal partners in development. With more resources available to women, and a more equitable distribution of workloads between men and women, the development story would read very differently. While the failures have been more severe in the third world, the problems underlying them are to be found on all continents. The picture that emerges of women living at the poverty level in the countries in this project is not so different from that revealed in studies of low-income female-headed households
in industrialized countries, like that recently carried out in Colorado, where I live.
More research is needed on the hidden needs of women and the hidden resources that women represent. We need more women and men planners and policy-makers sensitized to these resources and needs. The original goals of the Household, Gender, and Age Project will be fulfilled if further research takes gender into account and thus presents a more complete picture of what is happening to people as third-world countries struggle with development imbalances, and if international, national, and private-sector planners recognize gender differences in their programmes.
Of course, this project does not stand alone here. It was developed in co operation with the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), and with the advice of women scholars in a number of countries who are working in complementary ways on the problems addressed here. Yet the growing number of non-governmental women's networks, United Nations special units, and government programmes focused on women in development have not yet had sufficient impact on mainstream research and planning.
The weight of history is against basic changes in the role and status of women and it will take unremitting efforts to integrate women more fully into decision-making everywhere. The researchers who conducted these studies were themselves subject to the pressure of inadequate resources, and are to be commended for having persevered under conditions that would have overcome less hardy students of society. The rigidity of formal academic requirements meant that some of the most talented local investigators were not eligible for training programmes designed to empower third-world women to conduct their own research. Each national research group worked as best it could within its particular constraints, with the resources at hand. The documentation they have produced on the life-course of the hundreds of women studied will have value far beyond the reports in this book. This study is just the beginning.
To all the women and men whose work has gone into the collection and processing of the data on which these reports are based, I say thank you! To all who read these reports I ask: what are the next steps?
ELISE BOULDING
Dartmouth College Professor Emerita of Sociology
<section>The household, gender, and age project</section>
Eleonora Barbieri Masini
Co-ordinator, United Nations University Household, Gender, and Age Project
There has been considerable analysis of the many technological and social changes of the last 30 years at the global, regional, or national level. There have also been numerous case-studies on specific women's issues in different parts of the world, especially since the United Nations World Conference on Women in Mexico City in 1975. However, very little has been done to analyse the nature of the changes that have occurred at the level of individuals or of micro-units like the primary living unit, the household. Only very rarely has there been any in-depth study of households, and yet the changes that occur there may have a strong influence on the attitudes, behaviour, and aspirations of its members.
Over the last couple of decades, the whole world has been affected, albeit in different ways, by a number of trends that have been part of the global historical process. These trends may be classified in a number of ways. For example, there have been significant demographic changes characterized by a sharp drop in fertility rates with a consequent ageing of the population in developed countries, and an increasing and increasingly young population in many of the developing nations. There have been economic trends related to the globalization of world markets. Politically, decisions taken in one part of the world have come to have immediate repercussions on other parts of it. These macro-trends are in turn interconnected and influence each other in ways which shape the complexity of contemporary socio-economic reality.
Considerable attention has been paid to these macro-trends and their mutual influence at the global level. Much has been written and spoken about their current or future development. In the United States, for example, a study entitled GLOBAL 2000 was conducted at the end of the 1970s. The World Bank has done a number of studies on the future of different regions, and there have been numerous national future-oriented studies on agriculture and food production, energy, and other specific topics, as well as on clusters of interconnected themes.
Micro-analysis of specific events or situations has also been developed in both industrialized and developing countries by intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and other interested agencies. What appeared to be lacking at the beginning of the 1980s was the nexus between the two levels: the influence of the macro-event, for example population change, on the micro-level, the individual or small community. Still less attention had been paid to the impact of such changes on the household, even though, as the primary living unit, its own internal changes have a considerable impact on the larger community and indeed on society as a whole.
The purpose of the Household, Gender, and Age project (HGA), initiated in the early 1980s by the United Nations University (UNU), was precisely this: to establish the nexus between macro-level historical events and the micro-level of the household. The project developed from a series of meetings held in Tokyo in 1979, Oslo in 1980, and Dartmouth and Rome in 1981. These consultations sought to develop research perspectives that would capture the relationships between societal and individual change over time, with special emphasis on the role of women in the development of a given community or society. In early 1982 the group met again in Rome and the basic elements of a methodological framework and the initial focus of the research were established.
The basic motivation of the project was born out of analysis of historical processes and the need to understand both the dynamics of their impact on individuals, particularly women, and households, and the influence that the latter in turn have on macro-level events.
Conceptually, the three components of the HGA project were set out in its very name. They were defined at a meeting in Addis Ababa in 1983 at which they were established as the common starting-point for all parts of the project. The household, in all its different cultural connotations, is the primary social living unit. In it are encapsulated a cluster of activities of people who live together most of the time and provide mutual physical, socio-psychological, and developmental support and functions within the broader organization and environment of the community. Gender was selected as an analytical device for looking at the world and considering individuals both within and outside the household; the emphasis was on the role of women. Age was incorporated as a means of re-examining traditional categories with particular reference to the social and economic implications of birth-cohorts, of generations, and of the gap between them. An indication of the conceptualizations
revised on the basis of the completed research appears at the end of this chapter.
Anticipating the diverse cultural connotations of these key concepts in the different countries studied, the project set down some guiding principles for the interpretation of the household. The household was not only defined in the conventional way, that is by co-residence, but also in terms of the kinship, monetary, or other obligations of non-resident members to the basic co-residential unit.
An initial topology the household was constructed as a working hypothesis and this was used by almost all the researchers, though with varying emphases. It was based on the location of the household, income categories, the dwelling in terms of physical space - not only as a place of residence, but also, where applicable, as a production unit - the headship and composition of the household, and the internal power structure, in terms of gender and age, in relation to its productive and reproductive functions. In fact, as will be shown, the results of the field-work modified some of the general assumptions about household form and function.
In order to analyse changing relationships within the household and between the household and the rest of society, the project focused particularly on the roles, activities, and status of women in their domestic, cultural, and community contexts. In other words, the project analysed the lives of women in different age-cohorts, both within and outside the household, in order to obtain not only information about their present situation but also their perceptions of their past and the future.
It was hoped to provide a fuller understanding of development processes by taking the role of gender and age into account. In many cases, this approach brought important policy implications to light. The research shows how women are affected by change, but it also shows how they affect change.
The main focus of the country investigations of which the project was composed varied according to the different problems, socio-economic conditions, and cultural background in each location. However, the impact of development projects on the socio-economic and cultural organization of the household and women's changing labour-force participation rates, and the interconnected issues of sexuality, fertility, and family-planning, were examined in every study, especially in relation to work, education, and domestic power structures. Particular attention was paid to the implications of migration in those countries where this was a significant factor. The effects of economic, technological, and ecological change were other major considerations.
The HGA project sought to understand the impact of macro-events on the women and households, to bring women's participation in social change into focus, and to indicate to decision-makers how this participation could be enhanced by policies designed to support households and women in the present and the future. The primary target group was national decision-makers involved in development planning, labour issues, all levels of education, and health and nutrition.
The other target group was international decision-makers, whether in the various United Nations specialized agencies or other organizations involved in development. Although women's participation in the labour force and political issues has come to attract the attention of more researchers in recent years, little account has been taken of changes in the lives of women and households, especially at the deeper psycho-sociological levels which affect and arc affected by macro-changes. Information about these emerges quite clearly from research on the lives of women in relation to the household and its other members.
Each study came up with suggestions for concrete action, either spontaneously or at the request of UNU. There is clearly much to be done, and it is important that the UNU and other academic bodies should bring such issues to the forefront, demonstrating the linkages between what is happening and what can or should be done by governments and other decision-making bodies on the basis of a clearer understanding of the interrelated aspects of various changes.
The life-course approach was chosen as the most suitable for capturing the impact of macro-changes on women and the household and the long-term implications that such changes have for the structure of society. The methodology, described in detail by David Kertzer in the second chapter, facilitates the measurement of changes that occur among groups of people, in this case women in the same age-cohort, in relation to specific events in each country. The researchers found that linking macro-events to what had happened to the individuals in their households was a useful way of helping even those women with very little education to recall what had happened in the course of their lives and to reconstruct their own histories, as they looked back and related each year of their life to events in the wider environment. This approach can also provide an indication of the possible attitudes and behaviour of the next generation, and even of structural changes in response to macro-events,
although this was rarely accomplished in the HGA project. However, it was sometimes possible to take the aspirations of younger women as seen through the eyes of their mothers as an indirect indication of possible behaviour, although, as future studies show, trends also have alternatives, and these may be overlooked without a thorough knowledge of local conditions that might contradict general patterns (Masini, 1986).
The life-course methodology is a long-term approach which is both retrospective and prospective. It is therefore able to depict the roles, activities, and status of an individual in relation to changing social, cultural, and economic circumstances. It is based on the p