<title>In pursuit of science and technology in Sub-Saharan Africa: The impact of structural adjustment programmes</title>
J. L. Enos
UNU/INTECH Studies in New Technology and Development
© 1995 UNU/INTECH
In pursuit of science and technology in Sub-Saharan Africa
This volume examines the progress of Sub-Saharan African countries in advancing science and technology in the context of the Structural Adjustment Programmes they have undertaken.
John Enos looks at the pursuit of science and technology both before and after structural adjustment programmes have been attempted in Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. He looks at the efficiency with which the research and development has been carried out, the transferability of scientific and technical resources from one activity to another and the directions in which advances are channelled. The institutions that receive resources are identified as well as the rates at which those resources are allocated. Finally, John Enos looks at who makes the decisions governing the resources devoted to furthering science and technology and with what objectives.
The findings in this important study will be of interest to students and academics in economic development and to professional economists and administrators directing economic development agencies, as well as to officials in economic planning and finance ministries in developing countries.
J. L. Enos
is a Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford.
UNU/INTECH Studies in New Technology and Development
Series editors: Charles Cooper and Swasti Mitter
The books in this series reflect the research initiatives at the United Nations University Institute for New Technologies (UNU/INTECH) based in Maastricht, the Netherlands. This institute is primarily a research centre within the UN system, and evaluates the social, political and economic environment in which new technologies are adopted and adapted in the developing world. The books in the series explore the role that technology policies can play in bridging the economic gap between nations, as well as between groups within nations. The authors and contributors are leading scholars in the field of technology and development; their work focuses on:
o the social and economic implications of new technologies;
o processes of diffusion of such technologies to the developing world;
o the impact of such technologies on income, employment and environment;
o the political dynamics of technology transfer.
The series is a pioneering attempt at placing technology policies at the heart of national and international strategies for development. This is likely to prove crucial in the globalized market, for the competitiveness and sustainable growth of poorer nations.
1 Women Encounter Technology
Perspectives of the Third World
Edited by Swasti Mitter and Sheila Rowbotham
2 In Pursuit of Science and Technology in Sub-Saharan Africa
The impact of Structural Adjustment Programmes
J.L. Enos
3 Politics of Technology in Latin America
Edited by Maria Inês Bastos and Charles M. Cooper
4 Exporting Africa
Technology, Trade and Industrialization in Sub-Saharan Africa
Edited by Samuel M. Wangwe
In pursuit of science and technology in Sub-Saharan Africa
The impact of structural adjustment programmes
J. L. Enos
ROUTLEDGE
London and New York
The United Nations University
INTEC
Institute for New Technologies
Published in association with the UNU Press
First published 1995
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
© 1995 UNU/INTECH
Typeset in Times by LaserScript, Mitcham, Surrey
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Mackays of Chatham PLC, Chatham, Kent
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
Enos, John L. (John Lawrence), 1924 -
In pursuit of science and technology in sub-Saharan Africa: the impact of structural adjustment programmes/ J.L. Enos.
p. cm. - (UNU/INTECH studies in new technologies and development)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Structural adjustment (Economic policy) - Africa, Sub-Saharan - Case studies. 2. Technology and state - Africa, Sub-Saharan - Case studies. 3. Science and state - Africa, Sub-Saharan - Case studies. I. Title. II. Series.
HC800.E56 1995
338.967- dc20
CIP
ISBN 0-415-12689-4
ISSN 1359-7922
<section>Preface</section>
There have been many studies of the effects of the Structural Adjustment Programmes on the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, but, almost without exception, they have concentrated on the macro-economics: effects on government revenues and expenditures, imports, exports and the balance of payments; and output, income and growth. The effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes on smaller units of the countries' economies sectors and on smaller units still - have been very few. Yet it is the smaller units in the economies - the organizations and individuals - which bear the costs of adjustment and which derive the benefits. The macro-economic changes are just the statistical summaries of the micro-economic adjustments.
It is, therefore, appropriate that there should now be micro-economic studies of the effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes; and it seems, to us at least, particularly appropriate that one of these studies should address, albeit at one remove, the future that the programmes are designed to ameliorate. That future will be influenced greatly by the technical progress that the Sub-Saharan African countries are able to achieve. And that progress will be greatly influenced by their relative success in advancing their science and technology.
That their advance starts from a pitifully low platform is one of the facts that emerges from our study: countries whose current spending on advancing science and technology, so defined as to include not only formal R&D, but also informal R&D, and technical education and training, should not surpass a few US dollars per capita, are securing little advance. Countries whose current incomes and expenditures are so low are little equipped to shift substantial resources into achieving more rapid advance of science and technology.
It was within such a depressing context that the Institute for New Technologies (UNU/INTECH), one of the research institutes of the United Nations University, decided to investigate the current situation and future prospects for pursuing science and technology in Sub-Saharan Africa. The idea came from UNU/INTECH's Director, Professor Charles Cooper, and the task was assigned to us. In order to be able, within the time and research funds available, to penetrate sufficiently deeply into the subject, we decided to concentrate on four anglophone countries' experiences: one country selected from West Africa - Ghana - and three from East Africa Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. What follows are their stories, augmented with occasional incidents from their Sub-Saharan neighbours.
The first of our accomplishments, and it is no minor one, is a statistical one. We have been able to compile time series of the four countries' expenditures on advancing science and technology, covering a span of at least several years, up to the present, which include periods before and after Structural Adjustment Programmes took effect. These time series measure aggregate expenditures on advancing science and technology, and are further broken down into those expenditures on formal R&D and technical education and training; and into expenditures by sector (public vs private; agriculture vs industry vs services; and domestically financed vs financed from abroad).
Armed with these various measures of the extent of pursuit of science and technology we embarked upon their analysis, in addressing those questions that seemed to us to be most important. Theory suggested that we examine the efficiency with which R&D is carried out, the transferability of scientific and technical resources from one activity to another and, most significantly, the directions in which advances are channelled. Present concern suggested that we examine the rates at which resources are allocated to the various activities, what institutions are engaged in providing those resources, and who make the choices that decide the outcomes. Our findings appear in the various chapters of the text, and our policy recommendations, based upon these findings, appear in its last chapter.
Performing a task such as this was well beyond the capability of a single individual. Besides the advice and criticism of Professor Cooper we sought those invaluable aids to inquiry from Professor Sam Wangwe at UNU/INTECH, and from all their able and solicitous colleagues. In carrying out the field work we profited in Kenya from the assistance of Mohammed Mwamadzingo, now of the Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex; in Tanzania from introductions to leaders of research institutes and of the University of Dar es Salaam by Dr S. Nyantahe; and in Uganda from Mr Alan Whitworth and his colleagues at the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. In Ghana, M. Gebril Mersha single-handedly gathered the data, doing a splendid job. The staff of the UNDP offices in the capital cities were most helpful in enabling us to make the best use of our limited time and in bringing to our attention their detailed compilations of statistics on foreign donations in Kenya
and Tanzania. Finally, our thanks must deservedly go to the directors of the research institutes and advisory bodies in the four countries and to their associates; to the Vice-Chancellors and their faculties in the universities and to the directors and their staff in the technical colleges; to the administrators in the government ministries; and to businessmen and consultants in the private sector. That all these men and women should have gone to so much trouble to give us guidance and support has made our study more enjoyable. They all enabled us to eliminate many errors; any that do remain, in spite of their efforts, are our responsibility alone.
J.L Enos
Magdalen College, Oxford
February, 1994
<section>Part I: Introduction</section>
<section>1 Scope and method</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
Until the middle of the twentieth century the history of Africa was not one of a continent acting, but of one acted upon. It was only with the attaining of national sovereignty that the constituent countries of the continent began to achieve some independence of action. Yet independence is not easily won, it is not effortlessly retained; even now, Africans are frequently required to reserve certain areas of decision-making to foreigners, or to relinquish other areas over which they have previously gained control.
Such an area is that of economic policy-making. Typically, the newly sovereign African country is able to choose its own economic policies, and apply them to the best of its ability. Nevertheless, the environment within which the policies have been applied has not been conducive to success: dissent from within and shocks from without have put African economies under great stress. Moreover, the high expectations of the liberated populace have raised the standards which that policy must attain if it is to be successful.
It is not surprising, therefore, that many African countries have been unable to meet the aspirations of their people. It is also not surprising that, in their disappointment, they have had to turn to those with wealth for help.
When help is sought by one or two, the response can take into account the particular characteristics of both grantor and recipient: each programme of assistance is specific to the occasion. When, however, many countries appear on the international scene seeking help, the wealthy - wealthy countries, wealthy institutions - naturally establish rules and procedures governing their response. They systematize or regularize the provision of assistance. Moreover, if the number of appeals places pressure on the administrative capacity of the wealthy to respond, they tend to create new agencies which specialize in the allocation and management of assistance: the IMF and the World Bank are today the two primary agencies. Finally, if the number of appeals is rising sharply, the grantors, in fear of still further commitments and in their superiority, begin to impose conditions upon the help they provide.
The help they do provide can be, and usually is, substantial. Grants, loans and other financial support, and technical assistance from the primary agencies, from the wealthy countries that support them, and from commercial and philanthropic organizations are great attractions for developing countries. But along with financial help come the conditions multi-facetted, nearly uniform and primarily economic in nature, imposed upon the poor African countries by the agencies of the wealthy countries, designed both to raise the productive capacity of the recipients and to achieve other, possibly associated, ideological and political goals. Together, the provision of funds and the imposition of conditions are commonly called Structural Adjustment Programmes.
<section>Objectives of the study</section>
If the enunciated objective of Structural Adjustment Programmes is to help make the recipients more productive, the enunciated objective of this study can be posed as the question: do Structural Adjustment Programmes help to make a few of the institutions of the recipients more productive? Not all the institutions, for the study is not of sufficient scope to address such a monumental question, but only those institutions which attempt to advance the recipient country's science and technology.
Why focus on the advance of science and technology? The answer is clear, if not entirely lacking in controversy: the productivity of a country's population depends more than anything else in the long run on that country's ability to achieve technical progress. In the short run, to be sure, improvements may be secured through increases in the efficiency with which existing scarce resources are applied, through reallocations of the scarce resources to different sectors of the economy and different types of organizations, and through increased availability of imports financed by foreign loans; but these are once-and-for-all advances. After the short-run improvements have been secured, subsequent progress depends greatly upon the country's developing and absorbing new techniques, upon its making and exploiting advances in science and technology. In the long run it is advances in science and technology that are crucial for economic success.
Hence our concern with science and technology, and with the effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes on their advance. But just as we shall be able to study only a sample of those institutions that are assigned the task of advancing science and technology, so we can only consider a few countries. Since the majority of developing countries have adopted, or are adopting, Structural Adjustment Programmes, there is a large universe to select from. A lack of readily available material on the achievements of institutions engaged in furthering science and technology has prevented us from carrying out the sort of statistical analysis on the macro-economic effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes attempted by several authors (World Bank, 1988a and 1990; Harrigan and Mosley, 1991; Faini et al. 1991; and Stewart, 1991). We therefore limit ourselves to a few countries, choosing Ghana in West Africa, and Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda in East Africa. Like most countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa these four are quite poor, with few reserves to cushion themselves from external shocks and internal dislocations. The majority of their populations is engaged in agriculture; their manufacturing is erected on a fragile base; their governments' revenues are scanty and expenditures over-committed; and a large fraction of their overseas earnings are consumed in servicing foreign debt. Adjustment to the IMF/World Bank's satisfaction would be expected to be very difficult, and to take a very long time, years or even decades, rather than months. Like other grave economic matters capital investment, education, health, the birthrate - the phenomena on which we are focusing are not altered on short notice. Nor can our observations, extending over at most a decade, provide other than a guess at what will be the lasting effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes on the pursuit of science and technology.
Definition of terms
Science and technology are imprecise terms; yet if we are to measure the effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes upon them, and their effects, in turn, upon the economies under adjustment, we must consider the terms' meaning.
Figure 1.1 may be of some use in setting limits to the terms 'science and technology'. The figure displays the chief scientific and technological institutions within a country, comprised of those which provide scientific and technical education; those independent institutions which carry out R&D; and producers (firms, government ministries, para-statals, plantations, etc.), a few of which conduct R&D, as commonly defined, and many of which also assimilate and improve upon the techniques they employ. The main flows between these institutions - flows of individuals and flows of information (or knowledge and know-how, which tend, in Sub-Saharan Africa to flow with individuals) - are indicated by the arrows. Like others who write about science and technology (e.g. Forje, 1989: 18) we shall consider all the institutions and their links, human and intellectual, i.e. all the stocks and flows in Figure 1.1, to constitute science and technology. We shall also include, to the extent
possible, the mores encountered, i.e. those attitudes, inducements, rules and procedures that set the environment within which science and technology are advanced.
To draw a figure, and to say that our subject is all it contains, is not to make the task any easier nor the measures any more precise. Everyone who studies science and technology recognizes that the terms are not only imprecise but also incomprehensible. Relevant outputs from scientific and technical education and R&D institutions are unquantifiable; those from the educational establishments, to whose graduates numbers can be attached, do not reveal their standards of attainment nor their future potential. Where numbers can be ascribed to the scientific and technical education, and R&D institutions they are of the nature of inputs - so many scientists employed within and R&D laboratory or so many engineers and technicians working on improving a company's manufacturing process. These data give no indication of whether or not the individuals are working together harmoniously, whether or not the results of their efforts will be applied expeditiously. Data of this last sort,
qualitative material on the effectiveness of institutions' expenditures on science and technology, emerge only after thorough investigation.
<section>Sampling procedure</section>
We have already mentioned that our sample of countries numbers four, from among the larger number comprising Sub-Saharan Africa. For these four countries we shall try to obtain as much data as possible on the overall commitment to science and technology. To place these aggregative measures in some perspective we shall relate them to other more familiar macro-economic data.
Completeness of measure is beyond our means for the institutions indicated in Figure 1.1: we did not have the resources to investigate more than a few R&D organizations nor more than a few firms which, in addition to producing their goods and services, improve upon their techniques. Our sample is thus quite small. The reader should not be too disappointed, however, for the universe of institutions is not so much larger. In Forje's 'Directory' of major research establishments in Africa (Forje, 1989: 267-81) 14 are listed for Ghana, of which we investigated five plus two more not listed; 16 for Kenya, of which we covered two, plus two more not listed; seven for Tanzania, of which we covered three, plus two more not listed; and seven also for Uganda, of which we covered one (with multiple establishments), plus one more not listed.
In total, for the four countries, 44 R&D establishments are listed; we covered 11, plus seven others, in depth. Adding the seven extra establishments to the 44 in Forje's 'Directory' brings the total of 51, and our sample to 18, which is one-third of the universe. Such a small sample does not warrant a sophisticated statistical analysis, so we shall use the quantitative material derived from the case studies as illustrative, attributing to it little more credence than the qualitative material simultaneously gathered. But to write of sophisticated analysis is to broach the topic of methodology to which we come next.
<section>Approach to the study</section>
There is thought to be an ideal way to approach a study similar to this one. In brief, one draws upon an established body of theory, which yields, as logical deductions, hypotheses. Some hypotheses may be obvious, some surprising, but all should be relevant to the issues arising in the study. One then collects data with which to confront the hypotheses. Provided that hypotheses have not been falsified by the data, their implications can be drawn; if they fail to pass the tests, the hypotheses must be rejected, the theory reformulated, and data gathering and testing renewed. These five stages formulating theory, deriving hypotheses, collecting data, testing hypotheses against data, revising, and determining implications - may have to be undertaken again and again, before one can be satisfied with the outcome.
In the social sciences the ideal is never attained. Theories are never sufficiently precise: often, two or more incompatible bodies of theory purport to cover the same issues. Even if there is only one generally accepted body of theory, it may not yield enough interesting hypotheses. When the issues to be studied are complex, as they usually are, the theory may be equally complex, so complex as to make it impossible to deduce hypotheses logically, i.e. to determine the general behaviour of the system the theory encapsulates.
Succeeding difficulties that arise in attaining the ideal are a lack of conformity between the elements of the theory (variables, parameters) and the units of observation. The data may not provide the exact measures of the hypothetical terms or, alternatively, the hypotheses may not contain variables which rank large in the data. Even if the hypothetical terms and the categories of data match perfectly, data are seldom available in sufficient number and precision to permit the application of discriminating tests. Finally, the time and resources devoted to carrying out a study are usually so limited as to prevent more than one circuit, or perhaps one-and-a-half circuits of the five-stage scheme.
How close does this study of the effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes on the pursuit of science and technology come to the ideal? We shall attempt to answer this methodological question in terms of the five-stage scheme already mentioned. First, as regards the theory, there is none that perfectly suits our purpose. The phenomena we are dealing with Structural Adjustment, as defined by the IMF and World Bank, and the pursuit of science and technology - are respectively, macro-economic and micro-economic (and macro-political). Theory that contains both macro - and micro-economic variables is rare. In the formulation of macroeconomic theory, the behaviour of individual economic agents is usually neglected or, if it is included, is embedded in a highly simplified system (usually specified to be perfectly competitive) from which a representative agent is detached. In the formulation of micro-economic theory, phenomena external to the agents or to some collection of agents,
say an industry, are not accommodated explicitly. In conventional microeconomic theory, for example, structural adjustment would be an exogenous factor, i.e. a set of elements not represented in the theory itself. In between the realms of macro-and micro-economic theory there are a few formulations upon which we can draw, although even in these few there are some unwelcome assumptions.
But we will address these matters more fully in the next chapter, which will be devoted to theory, where we will also observe how numerous and provocative are the hypotheses that can be deduced. Moving on to the third of the five stages of the typical study we can ask now to what extent are the data we can collect likely to be similar in their definitions to the variables in the theory?
At the level of the economy, data, and their counterparts in theories, are often closely connected, if not entirely congruent. Aggregate statistics like GNP, investment, exports and imports, government revenue and expenditures, etc. provide reasonable estimates of the same variables appearing in theory. Prices, e.g. wage and profit rates, interest rates, exchange rates, can diverge, in practice and in theory, both as regards their definitions and their coverage. A few of the theoretical terms used to set standards or support judgements, such as welfare and utility, do not have statistical counterparts.
If there are some difficulties at the overall level in matching theoretical variables with their empirical counterparts, these are as nothing compared to the difficulties in matching at a micro-economic level. These variables which rate so large in micro-economic theory outputs, inputs, prices, costs, profits - are almost impossible to measure at the level of the producer. What is the output of an R&D laboratory? What is the likelihood that one can discover the costs of manufacture of a small, privately owned company? What are any firm's profits? And those assumptions which underlie the theory - e.g. profit-maximizing entrepreneurs directing institutions staffed with knowledgeable, rational and dedicated workers carrying out orders with supreme efficiency; costless and instantaneous shifting of resources from one activity to another in response solely to market signals etc. - can they be brought within the scope of an enquiry? Can data of any kind measure the mobility of
resources to inducements that may never have been offered before? Yet, as we shall see almost all theory, the micro-aspects of the IMF/World Bank theory of Structural Adjustment for example, depends for its solution on just these sorts of assumptions. If all economic agents are presumed to exhibit these attributes, the assumptions may be acceptable, in the interest of obtaining solutions to the theory. But if some agents, say those operating in the private sector, are presumed to exhibit them, and other agents, say public sector operators, are presumed not to exhibit them, data should be available to reflect this distinction. Yet it is extremely unlikely that data sufficiently precise and reliable to satisfy all critics, will be available. There may be enough indications for us to make up our minds, and enough of these may be communicable to enable others to come to similar conclusions, but there will never be enough to confirm or reject the assumptions, and consequently to
confirm or reject the hypotheses derived from that part of the body of theory that is supported by the assumptions.
Summarizing, our data will in all likelihood not conform closely to the variables in the theory, and if perchance they did, they will not be of sufficient number and precision to be wholly persuasive. Moreover, considering the fourth stage of investigation, the stern testing of hypotheses against evidence, this must be imperfectly performed. With few countries, few institutions, and a short time span, we are not able to provide enough observations to warrant any econometric analysis. Our statistical measures will be simple, as befits the data, and our conclusions tentative, as necessitated by the wide departure from the ideal.
<section>Outline of the book</section>
As mentioned above, the next chapter will be devoted to theory, which provides the guide to our inquiry. Several theories will be considered, one of which generates hypotheses relevant to the issues we are studying. This most useful theory, presented as a model, will be covered in as much detail as necessary to instruct the reader; the others in much less detail.
In Part II, consisting of four chapters, one each on Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, we will present our data. The same format will be followed for each country: beginning with a brief recording of recent economic events and statistical aggregates; continuing with a report on individual institutions in the fields of agriculture, industry, appropriate technology and education; ascending to a compilation of resources devoted to advancing science and technology; and finally drawing a few implications for the country's future progress.
Part III contains the analysis. The data from the four countries will be assembled, together with other relevant information. To the extent possible the effects of Structural Adjustment Programmes on the pursuit of science and technology will be determined, first at the level of the entire economy (Chapter 7), next at the level of the sector of economic activity - agriculture and industry, exports and imports and non-traded goods, public and private activities (Chapter 8), and finally at the level of the individual institutions where scientific and technological tasks are performed (Chapter 9).
Part IV contains the conclusions, divided into two chapters, the first (Chapter 10) devoted to summarizing the results of the analysis in the preceding three chapters; and the second deriving implications for the future, both under the current regime of Structural Adjustment and under alternative, possibly more attractive regimes.
We now move on to the exposition of the theory, which not only suggests questions but also provides a framework which can support different programmes of Structural Adjustment, for there is little to be gained by trying to evaluate current programmes in the absence of alternatives.
<section>2 Choice and application of economic theory</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
Economic theory can be put to many uses. The conventional use is the clarification of thought: specifically the explicit recognition of certain phenomena, their precise definition, the determination of their relations one to another, the elimination of logical inconsistencies, and the deduction of principles, often too subtle to be grasped intuitively. These principles, or hypotheses, can then be confronted with evidence and, if they are in conformity with the evidence, can be given some credence.
There are other, less methodologically pure, uses for economic theory. Theory can be used to buttress policy which was formulated previously in time or chosen for different, non-economic reasons. In economics, theory describes an Ideal, an environment organized in a simple fashion, containing elements identical in nature and following identical rules of behaviour. If the focus of the theorist is on the individual economic agents, and if the theory is powerful, it will generate interesting hypotheses about their performance and, perhaps, on the performance of all other agents of their type. If the focus is on the entire economy, the theory will generate interesting hypotheses on the performance of all the agents together. Whether the theoretical environment is small, containing just one agent, or vast, containing an infinite number, it describes completely and perfectly an economy: the economy is Ideal in the sense that its performance is predictable under the conditions
specified. If the policy already chosen properly meets the conditions, then the performance of the system under the chosen policy can be predicted. If, in addition, the performance is an improvement upon the performance of the system in the absence of the policy, support for the policy is gained. The theory tends to justify the policy.
Theory is also used to contradict other theories. If an hypothesis, or set of hypotheses, is