<title>Sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropics</title>
BY RATTAN LAL
The United Nations University is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world. and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and postgraduate training centres, with its planning and coordinating headquarters in Tokyo.
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
United Nations University Press
TOKYO o NEW YORK o PARIS
© The United Nations University. 1995
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of tile United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University.
53-70. Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-2811
Telex: J25442
Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
Produced by Emilia, Inc., Tokyo
Printed by Permanent Typesetting and Printing Co.. Ltd., Hong Kong
UNUP-876
ISBN 92-808-0876-1
03500 P
<section>Note to the Reader from the UNU</section>
The work presented in this volume emanates from a United Nations University project on Climatic, Biotic, and Human Interactions in the Humid Tropics. The project was conceived to tackle the complex problem of reducing environmental degradation while simultaneously satisfying the development needs and aspirations of populations in the humid tropics.
Particularly important for the preparation of the present volume was a comprehensive field study carried out on the transformation of the tropical rainforest in Southeast Nigeria. The study investigated the effects of deforestation and land use on soil, hydrology, micro-climate, and productivity, with the specific objectives to (i) build a basic scientific body of knowledge that enables the rational use of land and water resources; (ii) provide guidelines for the management of land resources for economically viable and sustained productivity; (iii) create awareness of the food production potentials and limitations of the humid tropics; and (iv) provide training opportunities.
This volume draws upon the above, as well as other related research carried out under the United Nations University project, to provide guidelines for sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropical regions of the world
<section>Summary</section>
The humid tropics ecosystem covers about 1.5 billion ha of land area, has a total human population of about 2 billion distributed over some 60 countries, and contains about I billion ha of the remaining tropical rainforest of the world. Relative distribution of the humid tropics comprises 45% in Latin America, 30% in Africa, and 25% in Asia. Rainfall of the humid tropics ranges from 1500 to 6000 mm/yr, with constantly high temperatures exceeding 18°C throughout the year. Predominant soils of the humid tropics are Oxisols (525 million ha) and Ultisols (413 million ha), comprising 63% of the total land area. These soils are old, highly weathered, and low in inherent soil fertility. Soils of intermediate fertility include Entisols (212 million ha) and Alfisols (53 million ha), comprising about 18% of the land area. Soils with good fertility and high productivity include Inceptisols (226 million ha), Histosols (27 million ha), and Mollisols (7 million ha), and comprise only
17.5% of the total land area. Other soils also are found in the humid tropics, but in very small proportions. The rate of tropical deforestation for the decade ending in 1990 was estimated at 0.9% for Latin America, 0.8% for Africa, and 1.2% for Asia. Deforestation is estimated to contribute between 1.1 and 3.6 pa-C as CO[2] per year to the atmosphere, a major factor in the so-called "greenhouse effect".
Predominant farming systems of the humid tropics include shifting cultivation and bush fallow systems in Africa and Latin America, rice based cropping systems in southeast Asia, tree crops and plantations in lowland wet forest and pre-montage moist and wet forest ecoregions, and livestock-based systems in Central and South America. The resource-based agricultural systems are subsistence and sustainable only at low levels of productivity and low demographic pressure. Introduction of intensive agricultural systems can lead to problems of soil and environmental degradation. Principal soil degradative processes include soil erosion, leaching, fertility depletion and nutrient imbalance, decline in soil organic matter content and soil biodiversity, deterioration of soil structure, and disruption in mineral recycling mechanisms.
Consequently, sustainable use of soil and water resources is a major concern. Because sustainable development implies meeting the needs of the present without compromising future needs, it is important to manage soil and water resources successfully to satisfy changing human needs. In this context, there are several improved and innovative technological options for sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropics. These include ecologically compatible methods of deforestation and land development, and science-based techniques of soil and crop management of existing lands. If deforestation is inevitable, it must be done either manually or by shear-blade methods followed by in situ burning. It is desirable that cleared land is sown with an appropriate cover crop for providing an immediate ground cover. Installing erosion control measures and adopting erosion-preventive systems is a high priority. Mulch farming, conservation tillage, and vegetative hedges and
strips established on the contour are conservation-effective measures.
Nutrient management is crucial for sustainable use of those soils with low inherent fertility. Nutrient recycling is important so that losses can be reduced, and requirements for chemical fertilizers can be minimized through returning crop residues and other organic wastes. Crop residues contain large quantities of nutrients, including 5 to 35 kg of N. 1 to 4 kg of P,5 to 30 kg of K,4 to 25 kg of Ca, 1 to 8 kg of Mg, and 30 to 100 kg of total nutrients per Mg of crop residue. In addition to crop residue, appropriate cover crops can be grown to produce in situ mulch. The biomass from leguminous crop cover is rich in N. P. and other plant nutrients, and biological nitrogen fixation is important to enhancing the nitrogen supply of these soils.
Agroforestry systems are also important in erosion control and nutrient recycling. There are several tree species with high net biomass production. These trees are also efficient in nutrient recycling from the sub-soil horizons. Pruning and foliage from these trees in one year may contain 100 to 800 kg/ha of nutrients. With proper management, 20% to 30% of these nutrients can be available for crop production.
Research conducted in different agro-ecoregions has shown that substantial increases in production of crops, livestock, and trees can be achieved by adopting these improved and science-based technologies. Synergistic effects are achieved if supplemental doses of chemical fertilizers are used in conjunction with organic residues and pruning from woody perennials and leguminous trees. For each hectare of already cleared land on which these improved techniques of soil and crop management can be adopted, several hectares of tropical rainforest can be saved from the urgent need for deforestation and conversion for food crop production.
Sustainable systems of soil and water management have distinct attributes and characteristics. Principal attributes include erosion control, maintenance of soil organic matter content, enhancement of soil structure, replenishment of nutrients harvested through a judicious combination of organic residues and chemical fertilizers, and improvement of soil resilience and quality. Major characteristics of sustainable systems are highenergy flull that leads to an increasing trend in per capita productivity, and soil restorative ability to sequester carbon in soil and biomass, thus Improving environmental quality.
Considerable progress has been made in developing improved and creative technologies for increasing and sustaining production in the humid tropics. However, a lot remains to be done in understanding the basic principles and processes that govern soil degradation and soil quality; developing and adapting soil restorative technologies; developing local adaptive research networks in fine-tuning problem-solving technologies; disseminating existing knowledge through training; and identifying policy considerations that promote the use of improved technologies.
<section>I. Introduction</section>
Agricultural sustainability and judicious use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics are major global issues of modern times because of the interplay among human population, socio-economic and political factors, and natural resources of the fragile ecoregion. Mismanagement of soil resources and inefficient, resource-based agricultural systems are causing serious degradation of the ecoregion and perpetuating food deficit, malnutrition, and poor standard of living. In an attempt to develop the "last frontier", vast areas of tropical rainforest (TRF) are devastated annually by fire, machete, axe, chainsaw, bulldozers, and defoliants to grow food for the ever-growing population produce industrial raw material, and develop the infrastructure for new migrants into the region (NRC, 1993a). Ecologically incompatible methods of forest conversion, inappropriate land uses, and unscientific systems of soil and crop management based on fertility-mining techniques accelerate
soil erosion, pollute natural waters, disrupt water and energy balances at micro- and meso-scales within the ecosystem, and disrupt cycles of elements (e.g., C, N, and S) with global ecological consequences (Post et al., 1990). A major global consequence of deforestation, burning, and conversion to unsustainable land uses is the release of staggering amounts of CO, and other radiatively active or greenhouse gases into the atmosphere (Woodwell et al., 1983; Detwiler, 1986; Detwiler and Hall, 1988a, b; Crutzen and Andreae, 1990; Houghton, 1990a, b; Houghton and Skone, 1990; Schlesinger, 1991, 1993; Lal et al., 1994). If improved and scientific methods of forest conversion, land uses. and agricultural systems are not adopted in the near future, gross disturbances of the fragile TRF ecoregion can lead to irreversible degradation of soil and the environment (WRI, 1992 93; Oldeman, 1994).
<section>A. Sustainability and soil quality</section>
Sustainable agricultural systems imply successful management of resources for agriculture to satisfy changing human needs while maintaining or enhancing the quality of the environment and conserving natural resources (TAC, 1989; CGIAR, 1990b). High productivity is an important aspect of agricultural sustainability in the humid tropics. However, most of the prevalent land uses and predominant agricultural systems in the humid tropics are characterized, with a few notable exceptions of silviculture and rice-based systems, by low crop and animal productivity, rapid decline in productivity with continuous use, and high rates of soil and environmental degradation. Land-use systems based on fertility-mining practices of low input are usually unsustainable. Sustainable management of soil resources implies maintaining high productivity per unit area on a continuous basis, enhancement of soil quality, and improvement in environmental characteristics (Lal and Miller, 19931. Major
attributes of sustainable land use are:
- using land resources on a long-term basis;
- meeting present needs without jeopardizing future potential;
- enhancing per capita productivity;
- maintaining/enhancing environmental quality; and
- restoring productivity and the environmental regulatory capacity of degraded and impoverished ecosystems.
The principal objective of a sustainable land-use system is to maintain a high level of productivity, maintain or improve environmental and aesthetic attributes, and enhance soil quality. Sustainability is intimately linked to soil quality (Fig. 1), which must be maintained or enhanced. Inputs in Fig. 1 refer to additions of off-farm essential nutrients and amendments, while management refers to judicious use of on farm resources to minimize waste and the risks of soil and environmental degradation.
Soil quality refers to the soils ability to produce economic goods and services, and maintain acceptable standards of environmental quality and functions within the ecosystems potential and constraints (Lal and Miller, 1993). Soil quality depends on a range of soil properties and processes. Soil properties important to its quality are soil structure, soil organic matter content, plant-available water and nutrient reserves, aeration, and rate and magnitude of nutrient cycling and transformations. Deterioration in soil quality affects the soils life-support processes. Soil processes important to soil quality include accelerated erosion, leaching soil organic matter, and fertility depletion leading to nutrient deficiencies and toxicities, and anaerobiosis.
<section>B. Sustainability and forest conversion</section>
Deforestation of TRF by unsuitable methods and conversion to agricultural land use with resource-based systems can adversely affect the soil properties and processes that lead to a rapid decline in soil quality with a negative impact on sustainability and environmental quality. These adverse and negative effects have been the basis of rethinking about continuous cultivation in the humid tropics (Fearnside, 1987; Lugo, 1988; Goodland, 1991). In these cases, anthropogenic perturbations set in motion interacting soil and environmental degradative processes (Fig. 2). Soil degradative processes include: (i) decline in soil structure as related to compaction, crusting, decrease in water retention and transmission properties, poor aeration, and impeded root growth: (ii) reduction in the quality and quantity of soil organic matter and disruption in cycles of C. N. P, and S. leading to nutrient depletion and toxicity and decline in soil biomass carbon and soil biodiversity; (iii)
perturbation in the hydrological cycle, in conjunction with deterioration in soil structure, leading to high losses due to runoff and accelerated erosion, high evaporation causing frequent drought stress, and increase in leaching losses of bases and other plant nutrients; and (iv) perturbation of energy balance leading to high soil and air temperatures decrease in the minimum relative humidity, and overall aridization of the micro- and meso-climates. There are, of course, some positive effects favorable to crop growth (e.g., increase in radiation and less competition for water from deep-rooted trees).
<section>C. Attaining sustainability</section>
The objective of using improved technology is to minimize the magnitude and rate of soil degradation set in motion by conversion of TRE to agricultural land uses, and to enhance soil quality and resilience so that productivity can be sustained with minimal adverse impact on soils and environment. Some data with promising results from on-station experimentation in Africa, Latin America, and Asia are available on sustainable use of soil resources in the humid tropics. Given the re search information on productive potential and technical know-how available for sustainable management of these regions, it is technically feasible to manage these resources intensively for sustained agricultural production without jeopardizing their future potential (Jurion and Henry, 1969; Sanchez et al., 1982, 1983; Sanchez and Benites, 1987; Lal, 1986a, 1987c, 1989c; Juo, 1989; Alegre and Sanchez, 1991).
<section>D. Objectives</section>
The objective of this compendium is to collate available research information on scientifically proven methods of deforestation for conversion to agricultural land use, and on soil and crop management systems for sustained use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics. The compendium provides an overview of the improved and science-based technological options for sustainable production and cites examples of appropriate techniques along with their impact on production, soil properties, and environment. The material presented is written simply so that it can be used by practitioners, extension agents, policy makers, and others interested in developing and managing TRF ecoregions. Careful evaluation is also done to identify knowledge gaps and the need to fine-tune technology by adaptive research for representative soils and ecological conditions. Although most of the examples cited are drawn from the research done in West Africa, the compendium identifies generic
technological options that can be adapted further to achieve sustainable use of soil resources in the TRF ecoregion. The focus of this compendium is on soil and water management, with full realization that other aspects (i.e., pest management, improved crops and cultivars, cattle ranching, socio-economic and policy considerations) are also important to sustainable use of these resources. Therefore, readers are referred to other literature on these important topics (Fearnside, 1983, 1986; Hecht et al., 1988: Ehui and Hertel, 1989, 1992a, b; Buschbacher, 1990: NRC. 1993a).
<section>II. Humid tropics</section>
The humid tropical bioclimate occupies a vast region of the world (Fig. 3) and contains parts of as many as 60 countries that are partly or completely located within this bioclimate. By the year 2000, as much as 33% of the world population, or about 2 billion inhabitants, will be living in the humid tropics (Bonell et al., 1993). NRC (1993a) estimated that relative distribution of the humid tropics includes about 45% in the Americas, 30% in Africa, 25% in Asia, and only a small fraction in the Oceania and Pacific islands.
<section>A. Climate</section>
Humid tropics are the climatic regions where mean monthly temperatures are consistently high and exceed 18°C throughout the year, and where rainfall exceeds evapotranspiration for at least 270 days in a year (Salati et al., 1983; CGIAR, 1990a; Lugo and Brown, 1991). Detailed analysis of forested bioclimates in the tropics is given by Holdridge (1967). The annual rainfall ranges from 1500 to 2500 mm, with some regions receiving rainfall in excess of 6000 mm per annum. The mean rainfall in the humid tropics is about three times the world average. On the basis of moisture regime and temperature, the humid tropics are also termed "warm humid tropics". It is the amount and distribution of rainfall rather than variations in the temperature that determine the seasons (e.g., rainy season vs. dry season).
<section>B. Vegetation</section>
A wide range of vegetation types grows in the humid tropical bioclimate (Plate 1), with numerous tree species of varying height, canopy structure, and biomass (Holdridge, 1967; Lanly, 1982; Whitmore, 1984; Brown et al., 1989; Grainger, 1991). The most predominant vegetation of the humid tropics consists of TRF in the lowlands, moist deciduous forest in regions with a pronounced dry season, and montane forest in the high lands (Holdridge, 1967). The TRF, the climax vegetation of the humid tropics. is diverse and complex (Wilson and Peters, 1988; Myers, 1989), and occupies about 10% of the worlds land area. Distribution of different types of vegetation within the humid tropics is described in the report by the Forest Resource Assessment Project (FAO, 1992). The TRF vegetation is characterized by:
- high biodiversity comprising 40%, to 50% of Earth's five to ten million species;
- high plant biomass ranging from 200 to 400 Mg/ha, with most of the biomass accumulating in the first 8 to 10 years;
- concentration of a large proportion of the total nutrient capital within the plant biomass;
- rapid rate of nutrient recycling;
- multi-storey canopy of mature TRF containing numerous species occupying different strata; and
- a virtually closed ecosystem for most nutrients and water within the mature or high TRF.
<section>p013.jpg Fig. 3 Geographical distribution of the humid tropics</section>
Table 1 Ecological constraints to sustainable land use for intensive agricultural production
Ecoregion
Mean annual temperature (°C)
Mean annual rainfall (mm)
Constraints
Lowland rainforest
Forest conversion and land development. disposal of large biomass. Acid soils, low nutrient reserves, especially P. Al, and Mn toxicity, Ca deficiency, accelerated erosion, soil compaction, leaching losses, weed and pest incidence, grain drying and storage.
Pre-montane forest
Forest conversion methods mechanized on fragile soils on undulating to steep terrains, mass wastage, and accelerated soil erosion and land degradation, acid soils of low fertility, nutrient imbalance (e.g., Al and Mn toxicity, P deficiency), weed and pest incidence. crop drying.
The principal ecological constraints of the TRF ecosystem for intensive agricultural land use are shown in Table 1. These constraints are primarily biophysical due to climate, vegetation, and land characteristics.
<section>C. Soils</section>
Similar to vegetation, the soils of the humid tropics are also diverse and highly variable (Sanchez and Buol, 1975; Van Wambeke, 1992). Predominant soil types are shown in Table 2 and are briefly described below:
Oxisols:
Oxisols are the predominant soils of the humid tropics and occupy 35.3% of the total land area. These are old, highly weathered, acidic, permeable, and well-drained soils and occur in regions without a marked dry season. Clay minerals are predominantly kaolinitic, and occur with or without plinthite or laterite. The TRF is the climax vegetation of these soils. The occurrence of savanna-type vegetation in Oxisols may be due to degradation of TRF and soil resources.
Table 2 Predominant soils of the humid tropics
(10^6ha)
Soil
Total area
Regional distribution
Americans
Africa
Asia
Oxisols
Ultisols
Inceptisols
Entisols
Alfisols
Histosols
Spodosols
Mollisols
Vertisols
Aridisols
Total
(Recalculated from NRC, 1993a)
Ultisols:
These soils are similar to Oxisols but are relatively less weathered and younger, and occupy 27.7% of the humid tropics. These soils occur in regions with isotherms between 25° and 28°C, with annual rainfall between 1500 and 2000 mm, and in warm humid climates with a marked seasonal deficit of rainfall. The knolinitic clay minerals are relatively more active, and Ultisols have relatively higher nutrient reserves and effective cation exchange capacity than Oxisols.
Inceptisols:
These are young soils, but they have distinct horizonation and are very fertile. They occupy about 15.2% of the land area in the humid tropics. Three principal types of Inceptisols occur in the humid tropics. Aquepts are alluvial soils formed along the flood plains and occupy 120 million ha or 8.0% of the humid tropics. Andepts are soils of volcanic origin, young, extremely fertile, and occupy only 12 million ha or 0.8% of the humid tropics. Tropepts occur in warm humid climates, have base saturation of about 50%, contain relatively high amounts of soil organic carbon (SOC) ranging from 8 to 12 kg/m^2/m depth (Van Wambeke, 1992), and occupy 94 million ha or 6.3% of the humid tropics.
Entisols:
These are also young soils but without distinct horizonation. These soils are generally featureless because of the shorter time they have had to form distinct characteristics or because they have been formed on relatively inert parent material. There are three distinct suborders within Entisols. The most predominant sub-order is Psamments. These are coarse textured soils with high permeability. low water holding capacity, and low nutrient reserves. Psamments occupy about 90 million ha or 6.0% of the humid tropics. Fluvents are formed along flood plains and are recent alluvial deposits. These soils occupy about 50 million ha or 3.4% of the humid tropics. The Lithic sub-order or shallow and rocky soils occupy 72 million ha or 4.8% of the humid tropics. Lithic soils are marginal for agricultural production. Together, Entisols cover about 14.2% of the humid tropics.
Alfisols:
These soils occur in the semi-humid and sub-humid tropics in cool to hot humid areas with a prolonged dry season. Alfisols are less weathered in comparison with Oxisols and Ultisols but are more strongly weathered than Inceptisols. In general, Alfisols are fertile and productive soils but have the severe soil physical limitations of crusting. compaction, erosion, and drought stress during the dry season. Alfisols occupy 3.6% of the land area and are of relatively minor importance in the humid tropics.
Histosols:
These soils have relatively high organic matter content, with carbon content ranging from 12% to 18% in the surface horizon. These soils are formed in wet conditions. With good water management, they can be highly productive. These soils occupy only 27 million ha or less than 2% of the humid tropics.
Spodosols:
These soils are characterized by a sub-surface horizon (illuvial) with relatively high organic matter content along with high concentrations of aluminum and iron oxides. The surface horizon is usually leached (eluvial) and is often light (albic) in color. Spodosols occupy only 19 million ha or about 1% of the humid tropics.
Other Soils:
Mollisols and Vertisols also occur in the humid tropics. Mollisols occupy 7 million ha (0.5%) and Vertisols 5 million ha (0.3%). Mollisols are highly productive, dark-colored, and are agriculturally important soils. The surface horizon is characterized by high soil organic matter content and a well-defined granular or crumb structure, and responds favorably to inputs. In comparison, Vertisols are also dark-colored soils, but they contain a high content of expanding-type clay minerals. On drying, these soils develop wide and deep cracks and have poor trafficability.
Soil-related constraints to crop production for different soil orders are shown in Table 3. Oxisols and Ultisols together cover about 63%] of the total land area of the humid tropics. These soils are highly acidic (pH 4 to 5), often contain toxic concentrations of Al and Mn, and are usually deficient in essential plant nutrients (e.g., N. P. Ca). Liming and frequent additions of phosphorus are essential to improving agronomic productivity. Once nutritional constraints are alleviated, decline in soil structure can also be a problem under intensive mechanized agriculture. Deterioration in soil structure leads to crusting, surface and sub-soil compaction, surface runoff, and accelerated erosion. Alfisols are relatively more productive soils with favorable soil fertility and nutritional properties. However, Alfisols have more severe soil physical constraints than Oxisols and Ultisols. Alfisols are severely constrained by rapid decline in soil structure, crusting, compaction,
hard setting, high losses due to surface runoff, and accelerated soil erosion.
Highly productive soils of the humid tropics with only slight or moderate constraints to intensive agriculture are Inceptisols, Histosols, and Mollisols. These are young and fertile soils, and those of alluvial and volcanic origin and Mollisols are extremely productive. However, the distribution of these soils is extremely limited, covering only 17.5% of the area in the humid tropics. Although these soils are less prone to soil physical and nutritional problems, mismanagement and inappropriate land-use systems can lead to compaction, erosion, and nutrient depletion.
Table 3 Soil-related constraints to intensive agriculture in the humid tropics
Soil
Nutrient deficiency
Nutrient toxicity
Structural deterioration
Compaction
Erosion/ landslides
Effective rooting depth
Oxisols & Ultisols
N. P. Ca Zn
Al. Mn
Crusting. hard setting
Surface and sub-soil compaction
Sheet/rill erosion
Shallow to medium
Inceptisols
P
Gully erosion
Entisols
P
Single-grained loose structure
Gully erosion
Shallow
Alfisols
P
Crusting. hard setting
Surface and sub-soil compaction
Accelerated erosion
Shallow to medium
Histosols
Spodosols
N, P
Al
Sub-soil compaction
Sheet erosion
Shallow to medium
Mollisols
Vertisols
P
Cracking trafficability
Sub-soil compaction
Severe sheet erosion
Medium
<section>D. Predominant farming systems</section>
The term "farming system" implies a resource management strategy involving integrated management of crops, trees, and animals, along with labor and capital to optimize the use of land resources. Primary land resources involved are climate, vegetation, soil, and water. Types of major farming systems prevalent in the humid tropics are outlined in Fig. 4, and briefly described in Table 4.
Traditional Systems:
These are extensive farming systems involving the harvesting of minor forest products, shifting cultivation and related bush fallow systems, or nomadic herding. These systems are subsistence, resource-based, and rely primarily on labor input. In the humid tropics of Africa and America and parts of southeast Asia, traditional systems are based on shifting cultivation and bush fallow rotation (Okigbo and Greenland, 1976; Ruthenberg, 1980), on extractive use of native forest (Fearniside, 1983; Asabere, 1987), or on traditional agroforestry systems (Denevan et al., 1984; Gomez-Pompct, 1987a, b). Shifting cultivation is practiced primarily on low-fertility acid soils (Nye and Greenland, 1960; MacArthur. 1980; Ewel et al., 1981) for growing a mixture of crops involving root crops, plantain (Musa balbisiana) and bananas (Musa acuminta), upland rice (Oryza sativa), and beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) (Plate 2). Because these systems are based on little or no inputs and are practiced on
infertile soils, they are usually inefficient and less productive. These systems have the following characteristics:
Table 4 Predominant farming systems for different ecoregions in the humid tropics
Ecoregion*
Rainfali* (mm/yr)
Farming systems
Lowland
Moist forest
Root crops (yam. cassava sweet potato), rice
Wet forest
Plantations (e.g. bananas plantain citrus)
Rainforest
Tree crops (e.g. rubber, cocoa, oil palm)
Pre-montane
Moist forest
Root crops upland rice beans
Wet forest
Coffee, tea pineapple. cocoa
Rainforest
Timber crops and tree plantations
Lower montane
Moist forest
Suh-tropical vegetable, root crops
Wet forest
Coffee. tea cash crops
Rainforest
Tree crops
* (From NRC 1993a)
Yam = Dioscorea spp.
Pincapple =. Ananas comosus
Cassava = Manihot esculenta
Cocoa= Theobroma cacao
Sweet potato = Ipomea batatas
Coffee = Coffea arabica
- highly diverse and complex, involving simultaneous growing of as many as 12 crops on the same field because mixed cropping is the general rule,
- resource-based and labor-intensive, with minimal dependence on purchased inputs. Restoration of soil fertility is based on lengthy fallows. The duration of cropping vis-à-vis fallow depends on climate, vegetation, soil type, and demographic pressure: and
- small farms of I to 2 ha that can be managed by manual operations performed by the farm family.
Traditional systems are ecologically viable and socially acceptable as long as there is enough land for lengthy (10 20 years) restorative fallow and expectations for yield and standard of living are not too high. In fact, introduction of alternative farming systems in some ecologically sensitive regions of the humid tropics has met with only limited success.
Semi-Commercial Farming Systems:
These systems are used widely in southeast Asia, Central and South America, and parts of Africa. Systems based on intensive wetland rice cultivation have been used successfully for centuries in southeast Asia (Plate 3). Agroforestry systems based on growing food crops in association with small-holder perennial crops are other examples of such systems. Perennial crops most commonly grown are rubber (Heavea brasiliensis) coffee (Coffea arabica), oil palm (Elaeis quineensis) and tea. Coffee - and tea-based systems are prevalent in premontane ecoregions, and rubber and coffee based systems are practiced in lowland rainforest biome
In contrast with traditional systems of shifting cultivation, some purchased inputs are used in semi-commercial farming systems. It