<title>Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands</title>
UNU Global Environmental Forum V
Edited by Juha I. Uitto and Jutta Schneider
United Nations University Press
TOKYO - NEW YORK - PARIS
© The United Nations University, 1997
The UNU Global Environmental Forum V, Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands, was organized at the United Nations University Headquarters, Tokyo, 13 June 1996. It was sponsored by Obayashi Corporation.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University, 53-70, Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-281 1
Telex: J25442
Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
UNU Office in North America
2 United Nations Plaza, Room DC2-1462-70, New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 963-6387
Fax: (212) 371-9454
Telex: 422311 UN UI
United Nations University Press is the publishing division of the United Nations University.
Cover design by Takashi Suzuki
UNUP-982
ISBN 92-8080982-2
The United Nations University is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world, and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and postgraduate training centres, with its planning and coordinating headquarters in Tokyo.
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
<section>Preface</section>
Juha I. Uitto
The annual United Nations University (UNU) Global Environmental forums have been organized since 1991, with the objective of highlighting issues pertaining to global environmental change and of disseminating research results to a wider public. This function falls squarely within the mandate of the UNU, an autonomous academic organization under the United Nations umbrella. According to its Charter, the UNU shall be an international community of scholars engaged in research, postgraduate training, and dissemination of knowledge on issues that are the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare, including the environment and the proper use of resources. The Charter further states that the University shall disseminate the knowledge gained in its activities to the United Nations and its agencies, to scholars, and to the public, in order to increase dynamic interaction in the worldwide community of learning and research.
The UNU Global Environmental Forum series responds to this mandate given to the University. The previous forums have dealt with various important dimensions of global environmental change and possible strategies to cope with it. The first one, entitled "Monitoring and Action for the Earth," was concerned with new technologies for monitoring and observation of the changes occurring in the terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The second forum, in 1993, entitled "Environmental Change in Rainforests and Drylands," analysed case studies from South-East Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Chinese drylands. The third forum's title was posed in the form of a question: "Will Tropical Forests Change in a Global Greenhouse?" It examined the complex and multi-faceted interlinkages between global warming and the sustainability of tropical rain-forest ecosystems and their biological diversity. The fourth forum that took place in 1995 had the theme "Population, Land Management and
Environmental Change," focusing on sustainable management of land and biota in smallholder agricultural regions subjected to increasing pressures from population growth, urbanization, and social and economic change.
The UNU Global Environmental Forum V on "Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands" took place at the UNU headquarters building on 13 June 1996. The present report reproduces the papers presented at the forum in an edited form. It also contains a summary of the panel discussion held with audience participation. The order of the papers has been revised in order to achieve better flow of the text. The first chapter contains the keynote speech by Iwao Kobori, outlining the broad issues involved in the development of freshwater resources for arid lands. The following two chapters, by Daniel Hillel and Mohamed Abdulrazzak, focus on an arid part of the world, the Middle East, where water often is the limiting factor for social and economic development. The chapter by Wang Tao and Wu Wei is concerned with a different, yet equally significant, arid land area in China, and especially the requirements for bringing it into productive use in a sustainable manner. Kimio Osuga presents a
specific technological option for the development of freshwater resources, the underground dam, that is being utilized in small islands facing water shortages in Japan. Finally, Isamu Kayane considers the impact of global climate change on groundwater resources. These chapters are followed by a summary of the panel discussion that took place before the closing of the forum.
The forum was organized with the cooperation of our sister organization, the United Nations Environment Programme's International Environmental Technology Centre (UNEP/IETC). The organization of the forum, like all those held previously, was made possible by the generous sponsorship of Obayashi Corporation.
<section>Opening address</section>
Takashi lnoguchi
Fresh water is essential for human survival and development, yet it is becoming an increasingly scarce resource. Providing drinking water for the world's fast-growing cities and water for irrigation to produce food for the burgeoning population is one of the great challenges facing mankind in the decades to come. Fresh water is distributed very unevenly over the Earth's surface. In the vast arid and semi-arid areas of the world, the supply of fresh water is increasingly precarious. These are often the areas where population growth is the highest. Unsustainable and excessive utilization of underground water, for example for irrigation, has in many instances led to serious ecological disturbances. The water-tables have sunk, and the soils have become salinized and mineralized, with serious social, economic, and health consequences. Furthermore, the world's limited freshwater resources are often shared between two or more nations. When water becomes a scarce resource, it also
becomes a source of conflict. It has been said that water, more than oil, will be the resource around which most conflicts will centre in the next century.
The United Nations system considers water from a number of entry points. It is recognized that fresh water is a critical resource, although an international water convention is still awaited. The policies and actions of the United Nations and its various agencies are guided by Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development - the so-called Earth Summit organized in Rio de Janeiro four years ago (UN 1992). One of the all-permeating themes of Agenda 21 is water. Although only one chapter (chap. 18) is directly concerned with the protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources, virtually all the other chapters dealing with the conservation and management of resources for development deal with water issues. Water is an inseparable aspect of life that determines the potential and possibilities of human activities in an environment. Whether we discuss how to combat deforestation, desertification, and drought, or the sustainable
management of fragile mountain ecosystems, where much of the fresh water available for human consumption is stored and generated, water is an unavoidable theme. Similarly, promotion of sustainable agriculture and rural development are contingent on the efficient and economical utilization of freshwater resources. Needless to say, prevention of the pollution of these precious water resources by toxic chemicals or by hazardous and other wastes is equally important.
In response to the UN system-wide Agenda 21, the UNU prepared its own blueprint for the University's actions to promote environmentally sound development - the UNU Agenda 21 (UNU 1993). The main purpose was for the University to build upon its mandate and strengths to adopt a bold, policy-oriented agenda to develop the human resources and build up the capacity of countries and of the international community to plan and implement the environmentally sustainable development strategies postulated by the Earth Summit.
The UNU Agenda 21 identifies water as a critical resource and directs the University to focus its work on the supply and quality of water for human consumption, as well as for agriculture, energy production, and industry, and for the preservation of biodiversity. It is believed that the UNU, operating at the global level and within a context of academic freedom, should be able to deal with the sensitive political and legal issues arising, for instance, with regard to the sharing of international water bodies, including aquifers and groundwater resources. It is also recognized that the UNU should pay attention to water quality assessment and monitoring, especially in the growing number of large cities in the developing world, which are already experiencing serious water shortages.
The University's current research and training programmes approach water issues by reflecting the above considerations. On the one hand, the UNU is concerned with the management of international water bodies, such as rivers and lakes falling within the jurisdiction of more than one country. This approach combines environmental aspects with those of international politics into a project that we call "Hydropolitics and Eco-Political Decision-Making." The project aims at a comprehensive and objective study of water as a limiting factor for regions sharing major international water bodies, with the view of providing bases for sustainable environmental and political management of the critical resources. The project aims to identify not only the issues in disputes concerning water resources but also alternative scenarios that could lead to the solution of complex problems related to water and environment, and to recommend processes through which the concerned countries are likely
to agree on mutually satisfactory solutions to the problems by sharing resources and benefits. The project is also intended to provide a comprehensive and objective environmental management setting for the sustainable development of international water bodies.
In this context, earlier UNU work has focused on water as a critical resource and a potential source of conflict in the Middle East (Biswas 1994). The project looked into hydropolitics, as well as technological options, for policymaking for sustainable development in the region (Wolf 1995; Murakami 1995). It is generally recognized that the UNU's efforts in this field, especially the 1993 Middle East Water Forum, contributed to the Middle East peace process. In other areas, the UNU has studied the peaceful development, in an environmentally sound way, of major Asian rivers (including the Mekong, Ganges-Brahmaputra, and the Salween) and Central Eurasian waters (including the Caspian Sea and the Aral Sea), and their environmental management and rehabilitation (Glazovsky 1995; Wolf and Biswas 1995).
On the other hand, the UNU's work is concerned with environmental governance, which is the entrance point to the projects on the Asia-Pacific phase of the "International Mussel Watch," and "Environmental Monitoring and Analysis." The goal of the "International Mussel Watch" is to provide an assessment of the status and trends of chemical contaminants in the world's coastal waters. These data are critical for protecting both the health of people who consume seafood and the health of coastal ecosystems. Bivalve molluscs are good monitors for several reasons, including their ability to bioconcentrate chemical contaminants and their sedentary nature, which makes them representative of a specific place. The project on "Environmental Monitoring and Analysis" is concerned with capacity building and implementation of regional monitoring systems for improved data and information. The main part of this project focuses on technology transfer and environmental governance in the East
Asian region. The objective of the project is to standardize and calibrate analytical methodologies in the East Asian region, as well as providing high-level training to scientists in the region. The project focuses on technology and knowledge transfer and capacity building, in instructing participants in the generation of reference materials and analyses for a variety of materials, including water. The ultimate objective will be to contribute to monitoring compliance with international environmental accords and to strengthen national environmental laws and policies as they relate to international environmental obligations.
The theme of today's meeting is Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands. This is the fifth annual UNU Global Environmental Forum organized since the commencement of the series in 1991. The purpose of these forums is to highlight contemporary environmental issues and to disseminate research results to a wider interested public, thereby creating greater awareness of the challenges that lie ahead of us. Today we have brought together a group of internationally renowned experts on the management of freshwater resources, particularly in drylands. I trust that their presentations, and the panel discussion this afternoon that will provide an opportunity for audience interaction, will prove thought-provoking and stimulating.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Obayashi Corporation for their generous sponsorship of this forum, as well as those that have taken place previously. This, to my mind, provides an excellent example of cooperation between the public and private sectors in working together towards a more sustainable world.
<section>References</section>
Biswas, A.K. (ed.). 1994. International Waters of the Middle East: From Euphrates-Tigris to Nile. Oxford University Press, Bombay.
Glazovsky, N.F. 1995. The Aral Sea basin. In: J.X. Kasperson, R.E. Kasperson, and B.L. Turner 11 (eds.), Regions at Risk: Comparisons of Threatened Environments, 92-139. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Murakami, M. 1995. Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East: Alternative Strategies. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
UN. 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations, New York.
UNU. 1993. Programme on Environmentally Sustainable Development: UNU Agenda 21. Advisory Team Report. The United Nations University, Tokyo.
Wolf, A.T. 1995. Hydropolitics Along the Jordan River: Scarce Water and Its Impact on the Arab-lsraeli Conflict. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Wolf, A.T. and A.K. Biswas. 1995. Asian Water Forum: Summary Report. The United Nations University, Tokyo.
<section>Welcoming address</section>
Habib N. El-Habr
Water is a scarce resource. Thus, its development, conservation, management, and utilization is a priority for all of us. Freshwater resources constitute fundamental requirements for advancing the human condition on this planet. In recognizing this reality, the United Nations has given considerable emphasis to assisting nations to use these resources in a rational manner, so that they do not degrade the human environment, they are not depleted in an unsustainable manner, and the ultimate result will be the material well-being of humanity on a global scale. It is for goals such as these that we are all here gathered today.
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has a long and rewarding association with the United Nations University (UNU) on the management of fresh water. UNEP and the UNU have co-organized various forums to discuss the same burning topic that is bringing us here together today. In January 1995 together we sponsored the Asian Water Forum; in March of the same year we gathered in Tokyo and Shiga for the Eurasian Forum, and here today we are again looking at the importance of fresh water in the arid lands. From UNEP's perspective, a major goal is to enhance the economic development process in a drainage basin while at the same time ensuring that the environment - aquatic, atmospheric, and terrestrial - does not suffer significant degradation as a result. Put another way, our goal is the effective management of these systems within the context of sustainable development.
This attitude certainly is not unique to UNEP. It was the major topic of the famous Dublin Conference on Water and Environment in 1992 as well as a substantial focus of the UN Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, and a major component of chapter 18 of Agenda 21 (UN 1992). In broadest terms, the concept of sustainable development encompasses the following:
1. The idea of self-reliant development, i.e. within natural resource constraints;
2. The idea of cost-effective development using non-traditional economic criteria;
3. The perception that development should not degrade the environment nor decrease productivity in the long run;
4. Help for the very poor because they are left with no option other than to destroy their own environment;
5. The issues of health control, appropriate technologies, self-reliance in food, clean water, and shelter for all;
6. Concentrating on the environmental systems at greatest risk, whether they be arid lands, watersheds, moist forests, or urban areas of rapid expansion. UNEP was recently designated focal point for water within the UN Secretariat, an exciting and challenging new role we expect to perform in collaboration with all our UN colleagues, especially the UNU. UNEP will also expect to have proactive working relationships with the institutions you represent, be it universities, laboratories, regional organizations, or private sector, in advancing the serious work you are advocating. I wish you all the best in this endeavour and, on behalf of UNEP, promise our continued support and collaboration.
<section>Reference</section>
UN. 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations, New York.
<section>1: Fresh water - A scarce resource in arid lands</section>
Iwao Kobori
In connection with the importation of useful things and conveniences into towns, one must see to a number of matters. There is the water (problem). The place should be on a river, or springs with plenty of fresh water should be facing it. The existence of water near the place simplifies the water problem for the inhabitants, which is urgent. The existence of (water) will be a general convenience to them.
Ibn Khaldun, The Muqqadimah
<section>Introduction</section>
The International Conference on Water and Environment (ICWE) held in Dublin in January 1992 provided the major input on freshwater problems to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), calling attention to the serious problem of optimizing the use of freshwater resources in the years ahead.
The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development
Scarcity and misuse of freshwater pose a serious threat to sustainable development and protection of the environment. Human health and welfare, food security, industrial development and the ecosystem on which they depend, are managed more effectively in the present decade and beyond than they have been in the past.
The problems highlighted are not speculative in nature; nor are they likely to affect our planet only in the distant future. They are here and they affect humanity now. The future survival of many millions of people demands immediate and effective action.
The conference participants call for fundamental new approaches to the assessment, development and management of freshwater resources, which can only be brought about through political commitment and involvement from the highest levels of government to the smallest communities. Commitment will need to be backed by substantial and immediate investments, public awareness campaigns, legislative and institutional changes, technology development, and capacity building programmes. Underlying all these must be a greater recognition of the interdependence of all peoples, and of their place in the natural world.
The Conference also stated that concrete action is needed to reverse the present trends of over-consumption, pollution, and rising threats from droughts and floods. Recommendations for action at the local, national, and international levels were set out based on four guiding principles:
o Principle No. 1: fresh water is a finite and vulnerable resource, essential to sustain life, development, and the environment.
o Principle No. 2: water development and management should be based on a participatory approach, involving users, planners, and policy makers at all levels.
o Principle No. 3
: women play a central part in the provision, management, and safeguarding of water.
o Principle No. 4: Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.
Based on these principles, the Conference developed a series of recommendations that also form a framework for the planning of the International Hydrological Programme.
Freshwater issues also came up at the International Conference on an Agenda of Science for Environment and Development into the Twenty-first Century (ASCEND 21) which was convened by the International Commission for Scientific Union (ICSU) in Vienna in November 1991 in order to make a contribution to the formulation of the future directions of world science as well as to the preparation of UNCED. Amongst the major problems that affect the environment and hinder sustainable development, and that are to be of the highest scientific priority, the problem of water scarcity was also pinpointed. ASCEND recommended, inter alia:
o Strengthened support for international global environmental research and observation of the total earth system;
o Research and studies at the local and regional scale on the hydrologic cycle, impacts of climate change, coastal zones, loss of biodiversity, vulnerability of fragile ecosystems, and on the impacts of changing land use, of waste, and of human attitudes and behaviour;
o Special efforts in education and in building up of scientific institutions, as well as involvement of a wide segment of the population in environment and development problem solving.
After UNCED, Agenda 21 was concluded and chapter 18 (Protection of the quality and supply of fresh water) was presented to all nations concerned. Chapter 18 contains the following text:
Protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources: Application of integrated approaches to the development, management and use of water resources
18.1 Freshwater resources are an essential component of the Earth's hydrosphere and an indispensable part of all terrestrial ecosystems. The freshwater environment is characterized by the hydrological cycle, including floods and droughts, which in some regions have become more extreme and dramatic in their consequences. Global climate change and atmospheric pollution could also have an impact on freshwater resources and their availability and, through sea level rise, threaten low-lying coastal areas and small island ecosystems.
18.2 Water is needed in all aspects of life. The general objective is to make certain that adequate supplies of water of good quality are maintained for the entire population of this planet, while preserving the hydrological, biological and chemical functions of ecosystems, adapting human activities within the capacity limits of nature and combating vectors of water-related diseases. Innovative technologies, including the improvement of indigenous technologies, are needed to fully utilize water resources and to safeguard those resources against pollution.
18.3 The widespread scarcity, gradual destruction and aggravated pollution of freshwater resources in many world regions, along with the progressive encroachment of incompatible activities, demand integrated water resources planning and management. Such integration must cover all types of interrelated freshwater bodies, including both surface water and groundwater should consider water quantity and quality aspects. The multisectoral nature of water resources development in the context of socio-economic development must be recognized, as well as the multi-interest utilization of water resources for water supply and sanitation, agriculture, industry, urban development, hydropower generation, inland fisheries, transportation, recreation, low and flat lands management and other activities. Rational water utilization schemes for the development of surface and underground water-supply sources and other potential sources have to be supported by concurrent water conservation and
wastage minimization measures. Priority, however, must be accorded to flood prevention and control measures, as well as sedimentation control, where required.
18.4 Transboundary water resources and their use are of great importance to riparian States. In this connection, cooperation among States may be desirable in conformity with existing agreements and/or other relevant arrangements, taking into account the interests of all riparian States concerned.
18.5 The following programme areas are proposed for the freshwater sector:
(a) Integrated water resources development and management;
(b) Water resources assessment;
(c) Protection of water resources, water quality and aquatic ecosystems;
(d) Drinking water supply and sanitation;
(e) Water and sustainable urban development;
(f) Water for sustainable food production and rural development;
(g) Impacts of climate change on water resources.
<section>International efforts</section>
Besides those general reminders, independent organizations have executed their own programmes, for example the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Bank, and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). UNEP has been one of the main organs to deal with "desertification" and many other activities including water problems. UNEP is not an executing agency, like the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), but has given many recommendations for research and project-making. Concerning desertification, other agencies such as the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO) or the Club du Sahel and the Comité Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Sécheresse dans le Sahel (CILSS) are also interested in water problems. Needless to say, water shortage is one of the main causes of desertification. FAO, as a representative agency for agriculture, considers water for agriculture as one of the important research items, next to soil.
UNESCO created its Arid Land Programmes (1955-1985) and subsequent global programmes such as the IBP (International Biosphere Programme). The Man and the Biosphere programme (MAB) also includes many topics on arid lands and water.
For potable water and sanitation, the role of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) should not be forgotten. Of course, for meteorological data and analysis of climate change, the role of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is very important.
Since UNCED, the process of each government's reconsideration of Agenda 21 for individual action plans has become a political issue. Although we achieved consensus about Agenda 21, the subsequent practical actions need much funding from each UN member. Especially on issues such as arid lands, that are addressed in the Agenda's chapter 12 on desertification, we have to overcome various barriers including politico-economic issues.
The United Nations University (UNU) started operations in 1975 and is a young family member in comparison with other UN organs, but it has pursued a good number of programmes from the beginning, and its series of publications and independent books on water issues are well disseminated.
We also have a good team on the subject of arid lands. Recently, a group on hydropolitics has become active in organizing a series of forums on various international water bodies. For this purpose, UNU networks extensively with global academic institutions and individuals. Furthermore, UNU, with its complete academic freedom and neutral atmosphere, should be able to contribute in a useful way within the realm of the UN family.
Besides the international organizations mentioned above, we must refer to international organs such as the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), within which we have research centres, such as the International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) and the International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), that are working for the improvement of crops in arid and semi-arid areas.
If we talk about non-governmental organizations (NGOs), we have several international groups such as IHP (International Hydrological Programme), IWRA (International Water Resources Association), IIID (International Institute of Irrigation and Drainage) and IDDA (International Drylands Development Association), and of course in each region and country there are many associations as well. In Japan, few associations of arid land studies exist, but the liaison committee of the Water Sciences Associations in the Japan Science Council is to coordinate those international and national activities. We must also mention grass-roots activities sponsored by non-profit NGOs who carry out several water-related projects (for example in the Sahel).
Table 1 Global Population and Water Use Trends
Year
Water use
Population (billions)
Water withdrawal per capita (m³/year)
Water withdrawal total (km³/year)
Source
: Raskin et al. (1995).
<section>Fresh water - A limited resource</section>
Fresh water is a fundamental resource, integral to all environmental and societal processes. However, fresh water is only a small component of the total water resources. Lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and groundwater aquifers account for less than one-third of all fresh water, with the rest locked in glaciers and permanent snow covers (Raskin et al. 1995). Arid and semi-arid lands are essentially a diverse group of regions with a variety of social, economic, cultural, and environmental problems, the common feature being a shortage of water at certain times. The danger in treating arid lands as a single geographical region is that an experience in a single arid land might be inappropriately applied to another arid land with dissimilar characteristics.
The mobilization of freshwater resources for human use has grown rapidly during the past century. This growth in water use was closely tied to the Industrial Revolution, which ushered in a period of unprecedented growth in population, consumption and resource use. Referring to table 1, total water use since 1900 has increased by a factor of five, owing to increases in both population and use per capita. Since 1950 alone, global population and water use have more than doubled, while economic output has increased by a factor of five.
The myriad natural and human uses of fresh water are linked by the unitary character of the water cycle (Rogers and Lydon 1995). The use and misuse of water in one location can have far-flung effects, altering downstream resources, affecting the reliability of water flows, and degrading water quality and aquatic ecosystems. As the competition for limited resources increases with expanding water use, water quality often deteriorates and ecosystem maintenance is compromised. In the absence of policies to address these tensions, water competition can evolve into discord between groups dependent on the same resources. Inadequate or degraded water is a matter of life and death in developing regions, where perhaps 25,000 people die daily from water-related diseases. Finally, global climate change has the perilous potential to alter precipitation patterns, to increase the incidence and severity of water problems in coastal areas.
Reconciling the objectives of socio-economic development, environmental quality, and ecosystem preservation into a resilient foundation for the future is the essence of the concept of sustainable development. Th