<title>Non-wood forest products in Indochina - Focus: Vietnam</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This document was prepared, under author's contract, by Mr. Jenne H. de Beer of AID Environment, Amsterdam, as one of the several Regional and Country Studies on Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP), commissioned by FAO.
This, along with other similar and related studies will be used for preparing a substantial publication of wider coverage on NWFP.
Comments on the document, (along with supporting materials as relevant), will be greatly appreciated.
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
Objectives and scope
Mr. J.H. de Beer, AID Environment, was commissioned by the FAO Rome to carry out a short study on non-wood forest products (henceforth called NWFPs) in Indochina, with a strong focus on Vietnam.
The primary objectives were to
a) select NWFPs with a significant potential for expanded sustainable output, but for which market intelligence is currently inadequate in the producer countries;
b) identify the market potential of the selected NWFPs.
While in Vietnam, it was revealed to the consultant that in the light of current discussions in that country, a report with a somewhat broader scope was urgently needed.
However, basic information on the NWFP-sector is seriously lacking. In order to comply with this demand, this report aims at providing a prospective, along which the conservation and development of the NWFP sector can be approached.
If only because of the limited time available to the consultant, this report cannot pretend to be anywhere near comprehensive. From the plethora of products which can be considered, only a few were selected. Important aspects, such as the use of NWFPs on the household level, will receive too little attention.
The scope is Indochina as far as products occur in the whole region or as far as the aspects discussed are relevant for the whole of Indochina. However, a clear focus will be on Vietnam. Some specifics will also be discussed for Laos, whilst Cambodia is only referred to in passing.
The report is based on information gathered during travel to the region, supplemented by the study of literature and consultation with traders in Europe and with specialists in international market conditions. Also included is information gathered during earlier visits to Laos.
FAO commissioned the consultant to work altogether one month on this report. An invaluable source for the identification of products was Petelot's monumental four volume work "Les plantes médicinales du Cambodge, du Laos et du Vietnam". Among the other literature consulted, from trade periodicals via case studies to more general publications, Dr. Luang Van Tien's "country paper Vietnam", prepared for the FAO regional expert consultation on non-wood forest products, in November 1991 in Bangkok, deserves special mentioning.
Trade statistics for the region, as far as they do exist, are to be handled with much circumspection, as a very large volume of NWFPs are being traded unregistered. Under-reporting, double counting and the use of unrealistic prices are among the systematic shortcomings of these statistics. Where statistics on volumes and prices of NWFPs produced and traded were available, these were used as a starting point, supplemented by qualified guesses made by local and international traders and experts familiar with the trade in specific products. In other cases these qualified guesses were the only source.
Concepts
The term 'non-wood forest product' encompasses all biological materials other than timber and fuelwood which are extracted from natural forests for human use. These include fibre products such as bamboo and rattan; edible plant products, such as condiments and fruits; animal food products such as bushmeat, bird's nests and honey; non-edible animal products such as live animals, feathers and horns; medicinal plants; and extracts and exudates such as essential oils, resins, gums and dyes.
By 'forest' is meant a natural ecosystem in which trees are a dominant component. However, the trees do not exist in an ecological vacuum but, together with other plants and with animals, are part of a 'web of life'. Forest products are potentially derived from trees, but also from all plants, fungi and animals (including fish) for which the forest ecosystem provides habitat.
This report will deal with NWFPs which are collected in natural forests and indigenous plant species which are grown under forest cover and under an agroforestry system in homegardens. Hence, whereas managed secondary or degraded forests are included as sources of NWFPs, plantations are not.
<section>3</section>
II. The forest resource
In the past, Indochina disposed of vast forest reserves of different types. Although there are no exact figures for the size of the flora or the number of endemics, plant species richness is considered to be highs^1. In the last decades the total land area under closed forest cover has declined rapidly in all three countries; Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia. The main causes of forest degradation and destruction have been uncontrolled or poorly controlled logging and shifting cultivation. Shifting cultivation in particular is a major cause of deforestation where lowlanders with poor agricultural practices inadequate for upland plots, have taken up upland agriculture in large numbers.
1 About 12,000 species of plants are estimated to occur in Vietnam of which only 7,000 have been described; up to 1,000 species are known to be endemic to the country (Vo Quy, quoted in Ministry of Forestry, 1991: 42)
The extent to which the region can capitalize on its rich potential of NWFPs depends primarily on the extent to which the countries of Indochina will be able to reverse the negative trend of deforestation. On the other hand, strengthening the NWFP sector can also contribute to forest conservation, as this would enlarge the benefits from forests for rural people in the region, and therefore the impetus for resources conservation.
Vietnam
Vietnam has 65 million inhabitants, with an average population of 190/km². However, population densities vary widely between the different provinces.
In 1943 Vietnam had extensive tropical forest, with an estimated area of 14.3 million hectares, corresponding to a forest coverage of 43%. The latest inventory shows that the forest area in 1987 was 9.3 million hectares or 28% of the national land area.
According to estimates made by the Ministry of Forestry, the annual loss of forests is some 110,000 hectares. The rate of reforestation is 130,000 - 150,000 hectares per year. This rate compensates for the annual forest loss and has led to some expansion of the forested area. However, in terms of biodiversity, these new plantations are empty, if compared with the natural forest they gradually replace, as they consist of rather uniform stands of only a few exotic fast growing species. At present, large natural forests are only found in the Southern Highlands and in border areas with Laos (Ministry of Forestry, Socialist Republic of Vietnam 1991:33,34). Because of overlogging the forests of the Southern Highlands (central Vietnam) are at present becoming severely degraded.
Laos
Laos has a population of about four million people, of which 85% are living in rural areas. With an average population of 15 people/km², it has one of the lowest population densities in Southeast Asia.
There are large areas of more or less evergreen forest which originally covered about 160,000 km² or about 70% of the land area. Lowland and mountain rainforests occupied much of the northern part of the country, the Annamite mountains along the border with Vietnam, the Boloven plateau and the Mekong plains.
Data on forest cover and rates of forest loss in Laos are in short supply. Perhaps the best estimate is that approximately 29% of the land area is at present under closed forest cover and a further 25% is covered with degraded forest (Collins et al., 1991). There is no doubt that forest destruction and forest degradation have been serious in the recent past. Nevertheless, at present Laos still has considerable natural NWFP stocks.
<section>4</section>
III. The household economy
Altogether it is estimated that there are 24.3 million people living in Vietnam on and near forest lands, accounting for 30% of the country's population (Van Tien, 1991:13).
The importance of NWFPs on the domestic level cannot be overestimated. This particularly applies to the ±7.8 million people of rural ethnic minorities in Vietnam and the 1,8 million people of ethnic minorities in Laos, who make up 45% of the total population of Laos. Some ethnic groups (e.g. the Than and the Tai) spend up to 235 days per year on hunting and collecting forest products (Tran Van Nao, 1987). As is the case elsewhere in Southeast Asia, gathering, hunting, and fishing are all vital adjuncts of traditional forest farming. These activities, together with farming, form an integrated system of resource utilization. In rural households, NWFPs fulfil several functions. They provide food security, health care, materials for implements and construction, fodder, fuelwood, and income.
Food and fodder
Food from the forest, such as game, bamboo shoots, ferns, fruits and nuts, honey, and mushrooms, are consumed as side dishes and snacks. As such it provides a considerable supplement to agricultural crops. Various species of wild tubers, vegetables, and other forest foods are widely used as buffers against seasonal and emergency shortages. In many areas of Vietnam rural people rely entirely on the forest as the source of food and fodder for pigs and cattle for four months per year or more (Gammelgaard 1990:8, Tran Van Nao 1987:5).
The same phenomenon is reported in Laos. The provinces of Savanaketh and Sayaboury, for example, had a bad rice harvest for three consecutive years since 1987, because of droughts and pests. During this time most people relied on wild tubers and other forest food for about four months every year.
Health care
All over rural Indochina traditional practitioners represent the major medical facility which is available. A large part of the ingredients for traditional prescription originates from natural forest resources.
Construction and implements
In rural Indochina wood, rattan, palm and imperata leaves are used. Bamboo however, mainly from secondary forest, is a particularly important material. Houses, furniture, barns, fences and a whole range of implements are made of bamboo. It is appropriately called the poor man's timber (Rao 1991).
Fuelwood
In Vietnam an estimated 23 million tonnes of fuelwood are used annually. In rural areas, together with rice straw and other residues, it is the common fuel for cooking. In thinly populated areas which are still under closed forest cover, fuelwood collection is not considered a problem. In many other areas there is an acute scarcity of the product. In the rural areas of Laos fallen branches, litter, and dead wood are widely gathered from secondary forests and swidden fields to use as fuelwood. With its low population densities, Laos has no scarcity of fuelwood.
Income
As a source of income the sale of NWFPs, both in Vietnam and Laos, often exceeds income derived from the sale of agricultural products, such as rice. In some isolated provinces of Laos, NWFPs indeed do form practically the only source of income apart from opium.
For an example from north Vietnam, see the box below. A few other examples are discussed in the section on products (see also Van Tien, 1991).
NWFPs in the local economy: an example from North Vietnam
The following description of the use of NWFPs in the Bat Xat district in the province of Lai Chau, North Vietnam, is based on observations made by Karl Speth in 1991. This case should not be read as the description of 'the' typical Vietnamese forestal district.
Food: almost all meals are supplemented by vegetables collected in the forest. The forest is thus an important supplier of vitamins and minerals. Three small children accompanying the researcher during the walk came up with four different wild fruits and with edible stems of creepers. Hunting is much practiced in Bat Xat. The main game are wild boar, deer, wild goat, monkeys and many species of birds. Wildlife is however declining at an alarming rate. Wild honey is collected commonly and consumed locally. The wax is used by the Mhong to make textiles shiny. Certain perrenials are collected from the forest floor as supplementary pig-feed.
Traditional medicines: there is a quite common knowledge of the medicinal uses of a wide range of bark, resin, fruit, root, flower or root from trees or herbs occurring in the area. An unidentified bark is locally used for incense.
Construction and implements: bamboos are commonly grown, sometimes covering areas of more than 200 hectares. Different species of bamboos are used for whatever purpose one can think of. It is widely used in construction, but also for purposes from
Income: the herb Tao Qua (Amomum aromaticum) produces aromatic seeds, which are used in China as a spice and in medicines. It is cultivated on the forest floor under a relatively closed canopy in difficult accessible areas. Raising Tao Qua from seeds takes about eight years, from sprouts two to three years. It is a labour extensive crop. Once a year in October-November the men go to the Tao Qua growing areas in the forest and stay there for a week; collecting and drying the fruits that are later on transported on horses. In spring the men have to return only once in order to clean the areas from grasses and the old Tao Qua plants. Apart from the Bat Xat area, Tao Qua is also grown in the districts of Sa Pa and Va Ban. In Bat Xat it is found in 19 of the 22 villages where many families are involved in cultivating and harvesting Tao Qua. A plot of one hectare can yield up to 300 kg of fruits. The fruits are sold over the border to China. One kilo of dried fruits containing the
seeds is worth 8000 to 20,000 Dong (mid-1991 price = US $ 1 2.50).
On top of this, a considerable amount of a very valuable mushroom (possibly Lentinus edodes) is collected. In the town of Sa Pa dried mushrooms are sold at 25,000 to 45,000 Dong/kg dry weight. Co thom, an unidentified herb, is collected from the forest floor and sold in dried form in Sa Pa for a price of 50,000 Dong per kilo. The latter two products are also exported to China. Finally, rattan is collected for the market in small quantities. Depending on the quality one meter of rattan sells for 200-250 Dong.
<section>5</section>
IV. Domestic and export markets
In Vietnam, the NWFP-sector as a whole, including cultivation, collecting, trading and processing, gives employment to hundreds of thousand of people (Van Tien, 1991: 14).
A significant part of the NWFPs harvested are entering the home market for direct consumption or for use in industries which produce for the homemarket. The overall economy of Vietnam is in rapid transition, characterized by the decentralization of control and liberalization of trade and industry. As a consequence more diversified trade channels can be used by producers and customers.
A considerable part of Vietnams NWFP-export is in fact re-export from Laos and Cambodia (e.g. eaglewood). The export trade is in the hands of a few state and provincial companies and numerous small private traders. Until recently, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were the main export destinations for a large number of NWFPs. Trade was based on barter and quality standards demanded in this trade were low. Since the collapse of the Soviet economy, Vietnam is turning to other markets. In fact, the official export to China and a number of other destinations were on the increase already well before the collapse of the Soviet market.
Now Hongkong, Singapore, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand and France are becoming increasingly important customers for NWFPs from Vietnam. China is at the same time an important importer of NWFPs, as well as a major competitor on the world market for products, such as essential oils. Thailand, in the last decade, changed from a country exporting a range of NWFPs into an importer from Indochina. In order to be able to penetrate other 'new' markets a constant effort to keep up quality standards will be needed.
At present, world market prices for raw materials such as spices and essential oils are generally low as a result of a structural oversupply from producer countries and the current recession in North America and Europe. This is particularly true for products which are easily cultivated. On the other hand, the growing demand for natural products in the industrialized countries opens new markets for some specific products. For labour intensive products, such as pine resin, Vietnam has the advantage of comparatively cheap labour.
In the past Indochina as a whole enjoyed a special position on the world market as a supplier of NWFPs. Now, while the Indochinese countries are trying to re-establish international trade links, it should be possible to win back at least a share of their former markets. This obviously will be a long term operation.
Laos is also in the process of liberalizing its economy. A specific problem for Laos is that, being landlocked, it suffers from particular high transport costs for exports.
Although the actual capacity for processing NWFPs in Laos is limited, the NWFP based industry is nevertheless of importance vis a vis the smallness of the national industry as a whole. It includes rattan for the domestic and export market, pharmaceuticals for the domestic market, essential oils (eaglewood and star anise), and the distillation of pine resin for the export market.
Cambodia is at present exporting a range of NWFPs to Vietnam and Thailand. It has no processing capacity of its own. A major problem is that many of the forests where NWFPs used to be collected, are infested with landmines.
<section>6</section>
V. Discussion of some non-wood forest products
5.1 Extracts and exudates
5.2 Medicinal plants
5.3 Fibres: rattan and bamboo
5.4 Edible plant products
5.5 Animal products
In this section specific NWFPs occuring in Indochina are discussed. Again it must be stressed that this section is far from comprehensive. A few examples are given of NWFPs in various product groups. Some products are dealt with in some detail, whilst other products and product groups are discussed more briefly. Several other interesting products, e.g. mushrooms, ornamental plants, flowers, nipah palms and birds' nests are not touched upon here.
The following product groups are discussed below: extracts and exudates, medicinal products, fibres, edible plant products, and animal products.
5.1 Extracts and exudates
5.1.1 Essential oils and incense
5.1.2 Resins and gums
5.1.3 Industrial oil
5.1.4 Tannins and dyes
5.1.5 Insecticides
5.1.1 Essential oils and incense
Essential oils can be defined as a volatile mixture of organic compounds derived by physical means from odorous plant material, such as flowers, herbs, woods, fruits, and roots. Essential oils are the basic raw materials for perfumes on a large scale and for flavouring to a lesser extent, as for flavouring a wider range of other ingredients is available. Essential oils find their applications in the food and in the fragrance industry (perfumes, soaps, detergents), and in pharmaceutical products.
Vietnam is currently expanding its capacity for the production and export of high quality essential oils. A pivotal role is played by the Enteroil company, which was established four years ago within the CNRS (Centre National des Recherches Scientifiques). Enteroil is a specialised export unity. Distillation of essential oils is for the larger part done in smaller cottage industries near the areas where the raw material is harvested. Enteroil acts primarily as a centre of quality control and certification. It has adequate equipment and staff for this purpose. Much energy is invested in extension work aimed at bringing up quality standards with the collectors/cultivators and the cottage industries.
In Laos one sophisticated distillation unit exists in pharmaceutical industry nr. 3 at Vientiane. At present, the distillation unit reportedly operates far below its potential capacity.
Market trends and consumer preferences
In general, this is not the best time for a producer of essential oils to enter new markets. On the one hand there is a considerable oversupply of certain products. Particularly China is dumping large volumes of some oils on the world market.
On the other hand especially the fragrance industry is badly affected by the recession in North America and Europe. In combination this has led to very low prices for a range of essential oils.
From the demand side, prospects in the flavours industry look much better. The reduction of saturated fats, calories, sugar, salt and other components in processed food, has created a strong demand, particulary in the USA, for flavours which are needed to offset diminished palatability. Perhaps even more importantly, natural ingredients are more and more preferred by consumers in the industrialized countries.
Cinnamomum cassia, Cinnamomum loureirii^2 (Cassia)
^2 The difference between the two species is very small.
Cassia trees occur naturally in large parts of Indochina, but most abundantly in north and central Vietnam (e.g. Hoang Lien Son province), where it is also widely cultivated. Wild stands of Cassia trees occur in the eastern provinces of Laos. About 2000 tonnes of Cassia bark are exported from Vietnam annually, at US $ 2,000 - 3,000/tonne. In addition a small amount of cassia oil is exported (about 10 tonnes, at US $ 27 per kg). The volume of export has steadily increased during the 1980s.
Laos: Cassia bark enters local markets (e.g. Pakse, bark from the Baktian district, Champasak province). Cassia in its ground form is used in North America, Europe and Japan in bakery products, in meat and fish seasoning and generally in spice mixes. The oil is used in small quantities by the flavouring industry (e.g. cola type soft drinks). The quantity of cassia entering world trade is in the order of 20,000 to 25,000 tonnes annually, with Indonesia and China being the main suppliers. In the past 'Saigon' cassia from Vietnam was regarded in the USA as the superior quality spice. Although Chinese cassia is now the standard, it is to be expected that Vietnam stands a fair chance to win back a share of the US market after the ban on imports from Vietnam will have been lifted there. This is expected soon after the presidential elections in the U.S.A.
In the areas where cassia is cultivated or collected it forms a very valuable source of income for the local population. Reports from Van Yen district in the province of Hoang Lien Son learn that the local Dao economy, which is focused towards cassia cultivation, thrives very well. The Dao have currently 1000 ha (out of a total of 2400 ha) for Cinnamomum cassia, which area is steadily expanded (Van Tien, 1991:13, H. Bovil, J. Brands, pers. comm.).
Cananga odorata (Ilang Ilang)
This is a large tree, cultivated in home gardens, all over Vietnam. The flowers are used for worship. Domestically the oil is used as a fragrance for soap. At present there is no export of this essential oil. The world market is less than 100 tonnes and is stable, but not growing. In France, the best quality is used in high-class perfume of the floral and heavy oriental types, in which the oil blends well with other essential oils.
Melaleuca leucadendron (Cajeput oil)
In the past melaleuca forests took up a large area in the Mekong delta and along the coast of central Vietnam. In the Mekong delta the total area with stands of Melaleuca has shrunk during the last three decades to less then 100.000 hectares. The Melaleuca forests in central Vietnam also have diminished considerably.
Some cajeput oil is used in the domestic pharmaceutical industry and a small quantity (± 50 tonnes) is exported to Singapore. For cajeput oils as an export commodity the future looks bleak because world market prices are falling rapidly, following the collapse of Eucalyptus oil prices.
Illicium verum (star anise)
This small tree, belonging to the family Iliciaceae which grows in the evergreen forests of southern China and the mountainous regions of Indochina, is being cultivated in the Vietnamese province of Lang Son and in the mountainous regions of Eastern Laos.
Vietnam produces more than 2000 tonnes of star anise seeds per annum. A small quantity is used domestically in tonicums. About 1600 tonnes of seeds are exported to Cuba, China and the Soviet Union. On top of that 200 - 250 tonnes of essential oil are shipped to France and Czechoslovakia. In China, the largest supplier of star anise to the world market, Vietnam star anise is blended and then exported to France. In France it is used as a raw material in the production of alcoholic beverages.
The world market price is at present approximately US $ 7.50/kg for star anise oil, down from US $15/kg a few years ago. The price appears to have stabilized now and star anise oil is considered a fairly good product. Vietnam has one distillation plant for star anise at Lang Son and about eight manual production lines around Caobang and Lang Son. In Vientiane, Laos, a small quantity of star anise oil is distilled annually.
Aquilaria crassna (Eaglewood)
Eaglewood or aloeswood is a resinous incense wood, produced by diseased tissues of certain individuals of Aquilaria crassna, growing in Indochina. This highly valuable product is used in Chinese and Southern Asian medicine as well as for incense and cosmetics in the Middle East. The tree is found in the Annamite highlands in Laos and Vietnam and in the coastal mountains of Cambodia.
The ethnic minorities, collecting eaglewood, make small holes in the trees they encounter to investigate its content. If no eaglewood is found, they leave the tree alone. The scars stimulate the production of eaglewood. A few years later the same trees are investigated again. Only if the tree contains eaglewood, the whole tree is cut.
First grade eaglewood from Indochina values up to US $ 2000/kg in Singapore. From lesser grades the essential oil is distilled in small factories in Ho Chi Minh-city and Vientiane. Eaglewood from Cambodia and Laos is shipped via Vinh and Ho Chi Minh-city. About 100 tonnes of eaglewood is officially exported from Vietnam, but the real export most be much more.
Jasminum sambac oil
This is the product of the flower of a small tree, cultivated in home gardens all over Vietnam. The essential oil is domestically used for flavouring tea.
Fokienia hodginsii (Pemou oil)
Pemou oil is derived from a large tree, up to 30 m. It grows naturally in Vietnam in the northern province of Dai Son, in the central highlands and in the Lam Dong province in the south. Nowadays the tree has become quite rare. The essential oil is extracted from roots and stumps. The timber is exported to Taiwan, where it is used for the manufacture of coffins and furniture. Pemou oil is used as a fragrance in cosmetics (e.g. soap). Its fragrance is described as very good and unique.
Up to 20 years ago Pemou oil was exported to Western Europe (a.o. Germany) at a price of US $ 20/kg. This trade ended after supplies dried up during the war. At present 50 tonnes of oil are exported annually to Czechoslovakia. From the south another 50 tonnes of powder is exported to Hongkong and Singapore at US $ 350/tonne f.o.b. Ho Chi Minh-city.
Homalomena aromatica
Homalomena aromatica is a herb naturally widely distributed in Vietnam. The essential oil is distilled from the root and is domestically used in perfume. The dried root is being used in Vietnamese medicine against skin diseases.
Litsea cubeba oil
This oil is derived from a tree which naturally occurs mainly in the northern provinces of Vietnam. Litsea cubeba is also planted as a shadow plant, e.g. for tea. The oil is obtained from the fruits of the tree. Currently Vietnam exports over 30 tonnes per year. Apart from Vietnam, China is the only producer. China used to export 200-300 tonnes per annum, but exports from this country have fallen sharply in recent years.
Litsea cubeba oil is a competitor for lemon grass oil. The oil is used in its own right in cheap fragrance work, but is more commonly employed as a source of citral and thence as a source of vitamins. The future of this unique oil depends on developments in the price and quality of synthetic citral and changes in perfumers preferences. The main markets are the USA, Western Europe and Japan.
5.1.2 Resins and gums
Naval stores: pine oleoresin and derivatives
The term 'naval stores' denotes the products obtained from the oleoresin of pine trees and includes gum rosin, wood rosin, tall oil rosin, turpentine and a whole range of chemicals derived form turpentine. Various modified forms of rosin are extensively employed in paper sizes, adhesives, printing inks, rubber compounding and surface coatings. Turpentine is nowadays mostly processed to isolate its components which form the basis of a growing chemical industry. Pinus merkusii is by far the more important source for pine resin in the area, Pinus khasya is a minor one. The main production areas in Vietnam are the provinces of Lam Dong and Quang Ninh, in Laos these are the eastern provinces.
In Vietnam natural pine forests are tapped, but pine trees are also much planted. A few hundred tonnes of pine resin are used domestically in Vietnam in the paper industry and for the production of varnish. Laos exports a few hundred tonnes of pine resin to Vietnam. Vietnam exports at present about 4500 tonnes of pine resin and derivatives. Japan is now the main customer.
The present prospects for producers in developing countries of rosin and turpentine are favourable, since tapping is labour-intensive. World demand is strong, while the level of production is declining. The largest exporter, China, is increasingly producing for the domestic market and the production of Portugal, the second largest exporter, has declined dramatically with about 50% in recent years.
Unfortunately for the country, Vietnam has already gone into long term (20 years) delivery contracts with Japan on the basis of relatively low world market prices in the past.
Laos produces over 500 tonnes of pine resin per year, mainly in the provinces of Khammouane and Ziangkhoang. After destillation the resin is exported to Vietnam and Thailand. There appears to be room for a moderate expansion of the industry, based on the tapping of natural stands of Pinus.
Liquidambar formosana
This is a large tree, occurring naturally in the north of Vietnam. Experimental planting by FIPI has revealed that the tree is excellent for soil improvement. The resin has a light fragrance of incense. It is used domestically in cottage industries. There appears to be interest from traders in Hongkong for this resin.
Benzoin, Styrax tonkinensis
The tree Styrax tonkinensis is found in the Northern provinces of Laos. It also grows exceptionally in north Vietnam. In the province of Oudamxai and in the North of Luang Phabang the Styrax forests form part of a shifting cultivation cycle with long fallow. Only under specific circumstances the tree produces the very valuable benzoin resin.
Laos produces over 100 tonnes of benzoin annually, which is exported to France and China. Prices paid in provincial towns to the tappers in the producing areas in April 1991 were about 2000 kip (US $3)/kg, down from 5000 kip/kg a few years earlier. The price for top quality benzoin paid in China in the beginning of 1991 was reportedly 119 Renminbi ($22)/kg. At present the price for top quality benzoin in Europe is between $15 and $20/kg.
Vietnam exports about 10 tonnes per year to France. The only other exporter^3 of benzoin is Indonesia, but the resin is of a lesser quality. The resin is mainly used in the fragrance industry as a basis material for high-class perfumes and balms.
^3 Thailand also exports a small quantity of benzoin, but this originates probably from Laos.
Damar, Dipterocarpus spp.
The Malay word 'damar' was adopted into European trade language to signify 'resin', primarily the type produced by the dipterocarps of Southern Asia. In Indochina damar is produced by various dipterocarps, most importantly D. alatus, a very tall tree occurring in south and central Vietnam, and Shorea vulgaris, occurring in Cambodia, south Vietnam and Laos.
The oleoresin is used as raw material for the production of natural paints, varnish, printing ink and glue and for caulking boats. The annual production by the forestry secto