<title>More than wood - Special options on multiple use of forests</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary
This report describes and discusses the use and development of products other than wood derived from forests and forest lands, in the overall context of multiple-use forestry for sustainable development. It presents a wide range of examples of these non-wood forest products in terms of their use and potential as sources of self-sufficient and sustained livelihoods for low-income rural communities, their commercial and industrial applications and their value in local or distant marketplaces.
Drawing on this analysis, a strategic framework is proposed by FAO for future action to boost sustainable development of these products worldwide, as an integral factor in mainstream development plans and programmes affecting the world's forests, forest lands and people living in forest vicinities.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Written by Robert Lamb
Photography by R Faidutti
Design and Production by edit
Development of this report was coordinated by M.A. Trossero and C.D. Léger of the Forest Products Division who thank the many colleagues and consultants who contributed their ideas and comments to it.
FAO
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
<section>3</section>
Foreword
It has never been more urgent to realise the full potential of forestry for sustainable development both in terms of meeting immediate and future needs of increasing populations, and of the continuity of the natural resource base itself. Achievement of this goal requires a comprehensive approach in which the totality of the contributions of forest resources to society is fully appreciated and wisely utilized.
In modern times, forests have been seen essentially as a source of one product: timber. However forests also provide a multiplicity of other products and benefits such as foods, medicinal products, materials for handicrafts, spices, resins, gums, latexes and wildlife. For example, forest derived medicinal materials alone support a US$ 43 billion pharmaceutical industry. Other than timber trees, forest species also represent a wild gene-pool, which are a safety net for narrowly based industrial agriculture. In both developed and developing countries, the utilization of such non wood forest products (NWFP) can extend the range of benefits from the forest and so provide further justification for their conservation. In low-income countries, enterprises based on NWFP are generally more accessible to disadvantaged groups and women, they diversify opportunities for gainful employment and income generation and therefore hold potential for rural poverty alleviation.
Non-wood products have mostly been neglected or overlooked by planners, partly because their value is often greatest within relatively restricted local economies and partly because they are often outside established marketing channels. These products rarely feature in statistics and are hardly studied; consequently, we have only limited knowledge of their productivity, developmental potential or management regimes for sustainability. Forests which yield little timber are often considered worthless and are soon converted to alternative land uses Yet it has become apparent that with responsible use and proper husbandry, the non-wood forest products, hitherto largely confined to subsistence use, can also support remunerative enterprises which increase the contribution of forestry to development. Our task is to help to make this happen in a sound, sustainable manner and to bring NWFP into the mainstream of modern economies while retaining their accessibility to traditional
societies.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has prepared this booklet to present examples of the wise use of NWFP and to illustrate their importance in diverse circumstances. FAO proposes a strategy for promoting the development of non-wood forest products. Central to the success of the approach would be the need to increase knowledge among policy-makers of the potential of these products, to indicate which NWFP have growth potential, to encourage the application of greater technical and marketing assistance programmes to such high-potential products, and to disseminate information on opportunities with a view to capturing entrepreneurial interest. FAO believes that success will require effective partnerships between local people governments, NGOs and the commercial private sector.
This report is action-oriented and provides a framework for medium- and long-term endeavour. Of particular importance it sets out a number of crucial immediate objectives which must be achieved to clear the way for future success. Both the topic and the approach are particularly appropriate in the wake of recent international commitment to sustainable development made at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Forest landscape in Fouta Djallon. The forest represents wealth (Guinea Conakry).
<section>4</section>
Key issues
Advantages of versatile forestry
Tomorrow's needs - tomorrow's forests
Priorities
Obstacles to developing non-wood products
Advantages of versatile forestry
National authorities should ensure'...sustainable management of all forest ecosystems and woodlands,.. giving particular attention to human needs for economic and ecological services, wood-based energy, agroforestry [and] non timber products... Agenda 21, Chapter 11
An earlier report in this series (Forests, Trees and People) examined forests as multi-purpose providers of better livelihoods and prospects for communities in low-income rural areas It drew attention not only to more obvious forest products such as timber, fuelwood or charcoal but also to often overlooked forest produce other than wood. This natural bounty includes fruits, fibres, oils, gums, funghi, 'bush meat', medicines and a host of other goods and benefits.
In many cases, the importance of these outputs to local or even national economies can equal or sometimes surpass that of wood or wood products, yet their worth and potential are rarely quantified and hardly ever factored into investment, development or management schemes at any level.
The present report focuses entirely on these outputs and their promise as positive factors in future development action. It spotlights their social, economic and environmental importance, especially in view of recent international commitments to sustainable development agreed at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development, which highlighted necessary points for concerted action in Agenda 21.
Free access to non-wood products is often essential to millions of people in rural areas, especially women and all members of indigenous, migrant or landless groups, whose choices in life would be desperately few without them. As well as catering to dietary, medical and other pressing needs, they can be traded on local markets, creating steady or seasonal employment for many who otherwise have no prospect of jobs or income.
Outside the local community and economy, some of them command high value as specialty goods in the urban marketplace or even in world trade, creating wealth that can (in principle at least) be re-invested in new or improved development infrastructure at every level.
From a resource manager's point of view, non-wood forest products offer scope for innovative variations on the standard repertoire of forestry, agriculture and forest industry practice. They can make integrated approaches to land use, such as agroforestry, still more versatile. They can make sustainable forestry practices easier to promote by enhancing the value and fringe benefits of standing forests, so deflecting local pressures to over-harvest the timber component.
As well as supplying diverse economic and social benefits, non-wood forest products are a vital influence on living world concerns. At the level of primary environmental care, they can relieve human pressure on natural ecosystems by enabling people to use forests and woodlands sustainably (that is, without depleting their regenerative capacity), while still obtaining secure livelihoods.
By providing economic incentives to conserve natural biomass they bolster larger scale action to protect watersheds or prevent soil erosion. They also provide an extra line of defence against global trends like adverse climate change or general loss of biodiversity (genes, species and ecosystems).
Most of today's staple food crops and many standard industrial, commercial and pharmaceutical products originated as non-wood forest products. Doubtless some of tomorrow's staple products will also emerge from this sector, which represents the 'investment account' of our stake holding in the forest gene bank, while regular forestry or agriculture are its 'current account'.
DEFINITIONS
Non-wood forest products can be defined as all goods for commercial, industrial or subsistence use derived from forests and their biomass, which can be sustainably extracted from a forest ecosystem in quantities and ways that do not downgrade the plant community's basic reproductive functions. 'Forests' embraces the global range of vegetation types where woody plants normally predominate.
Changing perceptions
Non-wood forest products are increasingly seen as a distinctive source of sustainable development innovations (below) rather than (above) as a 'grey area' of minor by-products overshadowed by more widely recognized uses.
Non-wood products
To date, development programmes have focused on forests as sources of timber and of fuelwood. Little attention has been spared for non-wood uses. Action programmes involving national and international organizations are needed to spur growth in this sector.
Forest area and rate of deforestation in tropical regions
The world's forest cover is presently shrinking fastest in tropical regions - at an average rate of 0.9 percent a year during the 1980s. FAO studies suggest that loss of biomass from tropical forests over the same period has occurred at an even higher rate than the loss of forest area revealed here. By encouraging slower utilization of the timber resource, non wood forest products present opportunities to match harvesting of all forest products to natural regeneration processes.
Tomorrow's needs - tomorrow's forests
Urgent and decisive action is needed to conserve and maintain genes, species and ecosystems, with a view to the sustainable management and use of biological resource... The participation and support of local communities are elements essential to the success of such an a approach. Agenda 21, Chapter 15
Sustainable forestry will rely increasingly on growth in the use of non-wood forest products alongside timber, fuelwood and other wood products. Such growth will probably continue to depend largely on market forces and natural opportunities coupled with the basic requirements of rural communities and their ability to innovate. However urgent, environmental protection and conservation concerns cannot be relied on by themselves to award non-wood forest products top priority on the 'shopping list' of development investment, still less in the survival stratagems of needy people.
FAO sees market development harnessed to sustainable forestry as the most worthwhile recipe for more and better use of non-wood forest products in the future. In this perspective, non-wood forest products are not thought of as alternatives to conventional forestry, but as offering potential for multiple-use of forest resources (including conventional forestry) to meet the diverse and changing needs of people in a diverse and changing environment.
Examples mentioned in this booklet show the broad range of these options. They are not all drawn from developing regions; societies profit from non-wood forest products (or suffer from their depletion) wherever forests and woodlands occur.
Putting non-wood forest products in the centre of the picture prompts the question: What kind of forests and woodlands will be needed in the future, to take lasting advantage of these choices and benefits and to protect the interests of users who lack other opportunities?
Priorities
Sustainable development in general aims to create chains of mutual social, economic and environmental benefits at local, intermediate and global levels. Benefits of sustainable development at local level should include the provision of basic needs such as food, water, shelter and health.
The use of non-wood forest products can aid this quest by multiplying opportunities for entrepreneurship, new sources of income and new markets as well as aiding survival and self-sufficiency.
Ideally, poor communities in forest lands should rank foremost among the intended beneficiaries of non-wood forest product development. That does not, however, mean that the needs of these groups can be expected to overrule the play of market forces or the finite carrying capacity of natural ecosystems.
Consumers and traders in distant markets and urban centres may also hold a stake in the development of non wood forest products, as may national exchequers and transnational corporations. It is important, however, that a significant part of revenues from such products is re-invested in improving and renewing the products at their source, as well as in safeguarding the interests of local communities in whose custody forest lands and resources lie.
The NWFP horizon
Non-wood forest products can be classified by source (plant, animal and so on) or by uses, for instance as food, medicines or fibres. This overview symbolizes their great diversity. Vital services such as soil conservation, biodiversity, climate regulation, watershed protection, and so on, are also shown here, though not discussed in depth in this report.
Web of benefits
Main local goods and services that forest lands provide to rural households (based on Campbell et al., 1991).
Obstacles to developing non-wood products
... there is almost everywhere a lack of hard facts, figures and published science-based information about the extraction, use, profitability and potential of non-wood forest products. This makes it still harder to integrate their use into development schemes...
Flawed perceptions on the part of national authorities and forest resource managers regarding the value and potential of non-wood forest products, must count among the most serious obstacles to more and better use of these diverse resources. Even in international circles the attitude persists that their development is a matter of low priority that must wait until other, more 'serious' land use questions are settled.
The same attitude is often mirrored in international agencies or research and development institutes. Some technologists distrust the subject because it hinges on societal factors that can only be usefully discussed in non-technical terms. Some planners and developers have a prejudice against the very idea of 'wild' products because they do not all fit into conventional categories or formal markets, or because they seem to have a retrograde or archaic 'back-to-nature' aspect. On the trade side, major exporters of these products are often cautious about releasing data about quantities and revenue, which they regard as 'trade secrets'.
Partly because of these attitudes, there is almost everywhere a lack of hard facts, figures and published science-based information about the extraction, use, profitability and potential of non-wood forest products. This makes it still harder to integrate their use into development schemes at their outset. Project appraisal techniques exist which take proper account of these products and similar unconventional factors, by building on information provided by local user groups. But these techniques are not widely appreciated or applied by researchers, extension workers and their trainers.
Development can also falter for lack of experienced indigenous users, for example in forested resettlement areas or recently settled pert-urban 'green belts'. In such cases, the wisdom to benefit from NWFP is not inherent and must be acquired secondhand by would-be users.
As already noted, difficulties in securing steady supplies of non-wood forest products can also be impediments to growth in their market use alongside timber and other, more standardized wood products. Their highly local or seasonal occurrence can lead to difficulties in harvesting, storage and delivery. Droughts, frosts or floods may make supplies of the more climate-dependent types of product far harder to sustain than timber.
Commercial non-wood products may also be difficult or costly to transport to the point of sale. Transport costs can amount to as much as 40-50 percent of the overhead involved in trading in forest products, and non-wood products are no exception.
Access and ownership complications can be added to these practical problems. The right to non-wood forest resources and their benefits is rarely specified in detail in forestry concessions, permits or land deeds. Even on acknowledged common land, local traditions can complicate their use. Women, who in many cases and localities form the major user group, are often denied access to the forest because of government legislation which allows the collection of products for subsistence, but not for commercial purposes.
Transport to urban or distant marketplaces can exceed the prices of merchandises in local places. The product pictured here is wild fruit from Sagba senegalensis (Guinea Bissau).
On the demand side, rapid fluctuations in market requirements or consumer fashion can multiply the risks surrounding development of non-wood forest products. General lack of market research, marketing information systems and commercial know-how often mean that entrepreneurs get no early warning of new or changing market needs and trends. Products which may be ideally suited for trade may remain in obscurity while those which have provided steady rewards in the past may suddenly lose their market, leaving many who depended on their trade in ruin.
Like any other land use, the gathering and utilization of non-wood forest products can give rise to competition and conflict. There may be competition with foresters who wish to harvest timber, or between conservation and utilization interests for the wildlife resource. At communal level, conflicts may also arise between indigenous and migrant users or between groups seeking to use the resource in different ways.
The use of non-wood forest products can also have environmental drawbacks. In most instances, it can be justified as a relatively benign use of wild species and ecosystems, but overexploitation, degradation and even depletion of forests can result if extraction practices are not sustainable.
These drawbacks and obstacles to using and developing non-wood forest products are not, however, greatly different in degree from the problems that have confronted other land uses or commodity sectors in the past. The international community can do much to help countries and neighbourhoods conquer these impediments and realize the non-wood potential of their forests and forest lands.
<section>5</section>
Product file - Mainly for self-sufficiency
Forest farming and food products
Health and harvest - medicine and related products
Protein and prosperity - wildlife utilization
Lubricating development - fats and oilseeds
Children gathering the fruit of Santaloides afzelii for food (Guinea).
The examples that follow are divided into those products whose use is mainly or most significantly for subsistence and those that are sought-after mainly for trade use. In practice, most classes of non-wood forest products often serve both commercial and noncommercial uses. The pattern of use is, moreover, liable to change quite rapidly in response, for example, to changing market demand or seasonal fluctuations in supply.
Forest farming and food products
Foods derived from forests and trees may not be consumed in great quantities in comparison to main food staples but they add variety to diets, improve the palatability of staple foods and provide essential vitamins, protein and calories. They are also used extensively as snack foods eaten, for example, while working in the herds or herding livestock.
Forest foods can offer vital insurance against malnutrition or famine during times of seasonal food shortage or emergencies such as droughts, floods or wars. While forest gathering activities are not restricted to groups that are poor, landless or nomadic, these are the groups most likely to be affected by reductions in the availability of such foods as the forest resource is reduced, degraded or closed to access as a result of privatization or nationalization.
Forest foods also have substantial market potential. Some, such as the brazil nut, are collected virtually entirely in the wild. Others that are easier to take into cultivation may have a short-lived existence as emerging non-wood forest products before they are adopted as farm or plantation crops.
In some countries, fashion and tradition can still strongly influence consumer choice in favour of authentic fruits and other foods from the wild. Forest fruits that have come to new prominence in the world trade in recent decades (often as health or diet foods) include avocado pears, mangoes and guavas. Market forces have galvanized production of these fruits, formerly wild or semi-cultivated forest products, on plantation or orchard scale in their countries of origin and their introduction into the agriculture of other countries. Value continues to reside, however, in the varieties left behind in the wild, as they can form an important genetic resource for improving the cultivated stock.
Joint investigations piloted by IBPGR and IUCN in Kutai National Park, Kalimantan, Indonesia have confirmed that the area is an important centre of genetic variation for several important tropical fruit trees, including mango, breadfruit and durian. Of 16 species of mango in East Kalimantan Province, 13 are edible. Most of these edible species have been brought under semi-cultivation and these, together with their wild relatives, represent a unique gene-pool which is closely linked to traditional lifestyles in the area, particularly those of the local Dayak people, whose knowledge of the diversity and growing requirements of the mango stock is unsurpassed.
A scheme is now under way to conserve the genetic resource and guard the local knowledge of Dayak people from loss, as part of plans to manage a buffer zone around the park perimeter. Large numbers of migrant people have been resettled in Kalimantan from Java. Lacking intimate knowledge of local resources, their farming and fuelwood-gathering activities pose an inevitable threat to the forest's continuing scope to harbour useful genetic material.
Children gathering and eating the fruit of the Landolphia heudelotii liana (Guinea Conakry).
Transport of fodder for livestock ( Senegal).
Health and harvest - medicine and related products
Among the best-known of non-wood forest products are medicinal substances like the anti-malarial drug quinine or the oral contraceptive ethenyl oestradiol, both derived from rainforest plants. Though today's sophisticated pharmaceutical and bio-engineering industries have a ready capacity to synthesize most naturally occurring substances, including the aforementioned examples, it is widely recognized that modern medical science still has much to learn and gain from the forest and from the 'folk medicine' of forest-dwelling people.
Even today, the active ingredients in 25 percent of all prescription drugs come directly from medicinal plants (though not all of these grow in forest habitats) and the estimated global value of plant-based drugs is US$ 43 billion a year. The anti cancer drug vincristine contains naturally occurring alkaloids from the rosy periwinkle of Madagascar (Catharanthus roseus), which cannot be produced in the laboratory without supplies of the plant itself. Other plants and plant extracts are still being exported for drug manufacture in highly lucrative commercial quantities from Madagascar. The periwinkle is now widely cultivated and processed on its native island, as part of an overall attempt to add value to medical plant exports at source.
Another significant use of forest chemicals is in cosmetics and perfumery. Not all the substances that are used in these trades are plant-derived: for example, the sweet - smelling secretions of the anal gland of musk deer are important stock items of perfumery. Though the value of trade in forest-based substances for cosmetics and perfumery is undoubtedly high, these are among the most secretive of trades and very few hard facts are ever disclosed about the volume or value of the goods involved.
Though still a highly controversial issue, the notion of medically or commercially useful plant genes as 'intellectual property' to be protected by law is taking firm hold among many forest-owning countries. Costa Rica embarked in 1989 on a cooperative venture with a consortium of research foundations, development banks and commercial interests, to search the estimated 500000 or more species of plants, insects and micro-organisms harboured in the country's forests, for possible medical uses. The scheme, which forms part of a national scheme to classify and catalogue Costa Rica's entire fauna and flora, has built-in guarantees of appropriate royalty payments in return for the use of any plant drug that may be commercialized as a result of the venture.
Remedies for diseases that currently baffle the world's medical researchers, such as cancer or AIDS, are being actively sought by botanists and pharmacologists in woodlands, forests and other wild plant habitats around the world. The local knowledge of indigenous peoples, who are expert 'librarians' of the medicinal properties of the plant and other natural life that occurs in their neighbourhoods, has frequently provided vital clues to new 'breakthrough' drugs. There is no reason to suppose that this process will not continue as long as there are forests, forest lands and forest users.
There has been a surge of interest in recent decades in ethnobiology, ethnobotany and other interdisciplinary fields of research that take traditional knowledge and culture as starting-points in the search for new medicines. What is not generally realized, however, is that the reason why traditional medical knowledge is so extensive is that it exercises a virtual global monopoly over medical practice.
Folk medicine is the standard source of medical treatment for at least three-quarters of the world's people: some analysts set the figure as high as 90 percent. 'Western' or technological medicine is readily available only to one person in four or five, worldwide.
Systems of 'folk' or 'alternative' medicine take many different forms but nearly all are based largely on plant extracts. India has more than 2000 known medicinal plants, Malaysia around 1000, Brazil at least 3000. These numbers probably fall far short of the true totals because they refer only to remedies that feature in published records. Because they are not formally recognized or regulated by official or clinical standards, alternative medicines and treatments vary greatly in their effectiveness. Their most important feature, however, is their availability to billions of people who have no access to other systems of medicine.
Industrial transformation of Shea butter nuts (Butyrospernum parkii) into various cosmetic products (Burkina Faso).
Forests also provide important remedies for livestock diseases and thus help maintain livestock production and general nutrition. There are many other links between forestry, traditional medicine and nutrition. Foods from the forests often serve a dual purpose as vitamin sources or diarrhoea cures. Few studies of traditional medical systems focus on the impact of medicinal plants on community health care or nutritional well - being. Loss or overexploitation of NWFP resources can seriously affect both.
Protein and prosperity - wildlife utilization
Most investment in modern biotechnology has been in highly industrialized countries. Biotechnology offers new opportunities for global partnerships between these countries - rich in technological expertise and developing countries which are rich in biological resources. The traditional methods and knowledge of indigenous people and their communities should be protected and indigenous peoples should share in the economic and commercial benefits arising from biotechnology. Agenda 21, Chapter 16
Historically, most societies achieved stable coexistence with wildlife and attached implicit cultural value to other species, even to those animals which traditionally formed the hunter's quarry. In the past the commonest prey animals were 'small game' like deer, birds, monkeys or rodents. The same is still true today in most areas where traditional hunting for 'bush meat' and use of animal byproducts, such as hides or skins, persist as major means of subsistence and rural income.
In Africa, the centralizing of authority during the colonial era undermined customary laws governing use of wild resources, as well as the authority of the traditional leaders who enforced them. As colonial administrators failed to provide alternative means of wildlife conservation, there was a rush to exploit riches like elephant ivory and other 'big game' trophies for short-term gain, particularly as new international markets opened up at the same time.
Tropical rainforests are by no means the only habitats that abound in forest-based medicines. For instance, in the forests of the Pacific North-west of the USA, the bark of the Western Yew tree (Taxus brevifolia) is harvested in quantities exceeding 350 tonnes a year. It yields the drug taxol which is currently undergoing clinical trials as an ant-cancer agent. Formerly a throw away by-product in the eyes of local foresters, trade in the yew bark now provides an alternative livelihood for an army of local 'pickers', including many loggers thrown out of work by recent declining markets in timber and wood products. Non-wood forest products (often known to US foresters as Special Forest Products) in general are worth more than $130 million a year in industry revenues and employ at least 10 000 people full-tine in the USA.
After independence, most African countries retained the colonial structure of centralized game departments and systems of national parks and protected areas. Wildlife management in these areas has typically been based on punitive measures designed to maintain barriers between wildlife resources and local residents, drawing little or no distinction between traditional hunters specialized in small game subsistence hunting and organized criminal gangs poaching on a commercial scale for big game.
At the same time, the official practice of curing (or selectively slaughtering) over-large herds of protected game animals has become more and more widespread. Local people are often not sufficiently involved in the distributor of the meat and other benefits arising from culling. Other market benefits from protected areas, such as safari tourism revenues and visitors' fees, are not always fairly shared with the local community whose ancestral lands were, in many cases, set aside to form the reserves in the first place.
A number of community-based projects in different parts of Africa, notably Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, are inviting local participation in wildlife management and in the management of tourism facilities. Under these arrangements, local people assist in cuffing wildlife or in conducting safari hunting for foreign tour parties and thus gain income and employment. They also have official permission to consume or trade in a quota of the meat, hides and other by-products of cuffing or safari hunting.
Culling is a management technique that often attracts controversy and safari hunting is by no means everybody's idea of sport, but there is little doubt that, without schemes like these, illegal hunting and farming incursions into protected areas would be uncontrollable. Populations of rare or endangered animals are maintained at sustainable levels and (in the case of Zambia's ADMADE scheme), Community Development Accounts have been set up to hold wildlife revenue shares at the disposal of local development councils headed by recognized local leaders. In 1988 these shares totalled $230000 for ten ADMADE sites, and revenues have been invested in improved local infrastructure such as schools, health facilities and new roa