<title>Agricultural taxation under structural adjustment</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Agriculture is normally heavily taxed at early stages of development, as it is the largest economic sector. There are several theoretical arguments for turning the terms of trade against agriculture in order to generate economic "surplus", namely investible resources, and most late developing countries such as those of Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) have followed policies of "urban bias", by taxing agriculture in various forms. However, structural adjustment programs have invariably called for a decrease in taxation of the agricultural sector, and this appears to contradict the overall logic of development i.e. the transformation of mainly agrarian to mainly industrial economies. This provides the motivation for the present study.
The study reviews the arguments for and against agricultural taxation in a wider sense. From a strict public finance viewpoint, agricultural taxation must be viewed in a different light than when one is concerned with growth and the generation of investible resources. The first question posed is whether turning the terms of trade of agriculture is justified on development grounds. The second set of issues concerns the types of policies used for turning the terms of trade against agriculture. The study distinguishes between explicit and implicit forms of agricultural taxation and examines the consequences on GDP and worker welfare of agricultural nominal taxation under different patterns of economic adjustment. Finally the study investigates the response of developing economies to external shocks under different types of adjustment response.
The issues are examined both in an expository manner by reviewing and comparing the earlier literature, as well as more technically by the use of a stylized analytical model that permits the interaction of the overall economy and the agricultural sector. The analysis and discussion raises interesting questions concerning the types of policies that have been followed in the past as well as those that are being recommended in the context of structural adjustment programs. In particular, it tries to separate the issue of surplus generation via agricultural taxation from the issue of the (mis)appropriation of this surplus by the state, which seems to be the focus of most structural adjustment types of reforms.
T. Kelley White
Director
Policy Analysis Division
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Paper prepared for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Economic and Social Policy Department, Policy Analysis Division. The work outlined in this document was initiated and encouraged by Apostolos Condos of the Policy Analysis Division of FAO, whom I thank. I would also like to thank Kostas G. Stamoulis of the Policy Analysis Division of FAO for his constructive comments and suggestions. Responsibility of any errors and omissions remains with the author.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The transition of an economy from a primitive, largely agrarian state, to one with an important non-agricultural sector is invariably tied with the parallel growth of the public sector. This is because the growing complexity in a developing economy necessitates the increased provision of public goods, such as infrastructure, defense, education etc. Financing this growing role of the state must be done by some form of explicit or implicit taxation. Taxation of agriculture during an early stage of development is a necessity since during this stage most of income and employment are based on agriculture. While no one would argue that agricultural income should not bear its fair share of public revenues, it is a point of major controversy and debate in development economics whether agriculture should be taxed proportionally more or less than the rest of the economy.
Early debates, motivated by the Soviet industrialization phase of the mid-1920s (Preobrazhensky, 1965) suggested that agriculture should be taxed proportionally more via the suppression of the agricultural terms of trade, in order to extract surplus to be invested in non-agriculture. The debate gave rise to the so called "price scissors' problem".
In the last few decades several late developing countries, and especially those in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), in their effort to accelerate growth have followed, at least partly, the Soviet model and turned the terms of trade against agriculture, using a variety of direct and indirect policies. Such policies were strongly attacked in the early 1980s by many economists and multilateral lending institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as having been responsible for the crises that hit many developing countries in that period. Stabilization and structural adjustment lending to deal with the crises was then made conditional on, among other things, "getting the prices right", implying in most cases that the unfavourable internal terms of trade against agriculture had to be corrected. This usually implied a decline in both direct and indirect taxation of agriculture.
Diminishing direct taxation of agriculture, however, presents governments of adjusting countries with some painful choices. Given that agricultural taxation forms a sizeable part of public revenues, a loss of this income entails either or both a cut in public expenditures (current and/or development), and an increase in nonagricultural tax revenues. While there are many political reasons why governments might opt for either or both of the above policies under adjustment programs, an interesting set of questions concerns the economic rationale for diminishing or not agricultural taxation, and the form in which the change in taxation can be accommodated.
The purpose of this paper is to review the arguments for and against agricultural taxation (in the terms of trade sense) and place them in the context of contemporary macroeconomic adjustment efforts in developing countries.
Theoretically, it turns out that the argument for turning the terms of trade against agriculture at early stages of development is quite strong. We exhibit a simple theoretical model with the help of which we illustrate for several stylized economies, that to increase a developing economy's surplus, defined as private and public savings available for public consumption and investment, the internal terms of trade of agriculture must be lowered compared to the international ones.
This argument, however, is separate from the question of who appropriates this surplus, and it is this latter question which entails the division of the surplus between the public and the private sector. A discussion is presented on the ways by which the public sector has appropriated a large share of the economy's surplus in many countries, and has precipitated crises. Structural adjustment programs can then be seen as ways to change the division of the surplus between the public and the private sector, albeit in the process they tend to diminish the overall size of the surplus.
The following discussion will examine agricultural taxation from the wider perspective of the terms of trade and the generated surplus in the economy. More traditional analyses deal with Pareto-efficient changes in taxes of specific agricultural products for the purpose only of generating public revenues. There are good surveys of these techniques (e.g. the papers in Newberry and Stern, 1987), which will not be reviewed here in order to concentrate on the more general problem.
Chapter one below presents a summary discussion of the issues relevant to the terms of trade of agriculture in the context of development. Chapter 2 reviews the various means of taxing the agricultural sector. In Chapters 3 and 4 a simple stylized two-sector model of a developing economy is presented, and schematically analyzed in order to illustrate the impacts of various policies on effective taxation and the terms of trade of agriculture. Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8 exhibit the responses of the total surplus and other variables for a variety of stylized agrarian developing economies, under various policy regimes. Chapter 9 supplements these chapters with a discussion of the controllability of the tax base in a developing economy. In Chapter 10 some remaining issues of taxation in the context of adjustment are discussed, and in the final Chapter the conclusions are summarized.
<section>4</section>
Chapter one: The terms of trade of agriculture
The rationale for turning the terms of trade against agriculture is related to the pattern of transformation and development. As Timmer (1988) suggests there seem to be four distinct phases of agricultural transformation in the course of development. The first phase starts when agricultural productivity in terms of output (food) per unit area or worker rises. This creates a surplus of food, a surplus of labour, and a surplus of financial savings, that can be employed during the second phase in industry and other non-agricultural services. The third phase of development concerns the better integration of agriculture into the economy through infrastructure and markets, while in the fourth phase agriculture is not distinguishable from any other sector. One of the major issues in development economics is how to speed up this process of transformation.
During the second phase, which is the focus of our analysis here, and which is the situation facing most late developing countries today and certainly those in Sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture tends to be neglected as a source of growth, and industry is regarded as the sector providing the major economic stimulus. Agriculture has been regarded as a contributor to economic development in terms of surplus food, surplus labour, surplus savings, surplus foreign exchange, and surplus expenditure to buy the products of industry. All these surpluses would be forthcoming from an uncomplaining peasantry with the development of the cities and the sharing of the nationalistic pride in the growing power of the state. Agricultural growth was not regarded as an essential part of the development process.
The roots, however, of this mentality might be due to the pattern of western economic development. In many western societies the key initiating spark in development was an endogenous change in agricultural productivity through technical change. Such a pattern in a closed economy causes an initial rise in both output of food and incomes, which increases the demand for non-agricultural products. This in turn creates demand for capital and labour in non-agriculture, as well as demand for agricultural raw materials to produce the increased output. The increased capital in non-agriculture can be financed by "agricultural savings" which are the consequence of profits from the technological and productivity improvement, or "forced" through taxation. The increase in demand for agricultural raw materials, as well as the food to feed the increased non-agricultural working labour force induces further demand for agricultural output, inducing more innovation and productivity increases,
and releasing more labour to industry. A key ingredient of this second phase of development was the investment of some of the total savings of the economy back in agriculture, in the form of both agricultural infrastructure (roads, dams, etc.) as well as private productivity enhancing investments.
The two ingredients of this strategy that seem to be missing from the efforts of many late developing countries are the endogeneity of the agricultural productivity change, and the lack of re-investments in agriculture. The idea has been that agricultural productivity increases were not important, especially since the extra food needed for the urban sector could be obtained cheaply from abroad. Furthermore, the extraction of savings from agriculture could be done not by taxing increased incomes and profits, but instead by increased taxation of stagnant incomes. The idea has been that agriculture and output would not be seriously affected, and in any case it should be "forced" to supply food, labour, and investible resources to the state.
Implicit in much of this thinking was a philosophy of state monitored rapid growth, through massive investments in non-agricultural industry with readily available developed country technology. Taxing agriculture via lower terms of trade was regarded as appropriate for the following reasons (Newbery, 1987):
* Aggregate agricultural supply is fairly price inelastic, and hence agricultural output will not be greatly diminished by heavy taxation.
* Investment in industry provides higher rate of growth than investment in agriculture.
* If chief beneficiaries of higher agricultural prices are wealthy landowners, then agricultural taxation can be justified on equity grounds.
* Low food prices will benefit low-income urban and rural consumers.
The results of such strategies are by now well known. In countries of sub-Saharan Africa where such policies were tried on a large scale, they ended up leading to external crises, which gave rise to stabilization and structural adjustment programs (SAPs). Invariably these programs call for an improvement in the agricultural terms of trade via a decrease in the taxation of agriculture.
The first question that we ask is the following. Is there a logic behind a policy of taxation of agriculture in order to extract surplus, when no technical productivity change in agriculture is forthcoming? In other words can policies like the ones followed in the sixties by most African newly independent countries be justified?
Early justifications were based on the four reasons given above. This logic, however, has been challenged by several economists (e.g. Schultz, 1978). Concerning the inelastic response of total agricultural supply to terms of trade changes, by now the evidence seems to suggest that indeed this is the case. Aggregate agricultural supply price elasticities are usually estimated in the range of 0.1 to 0.25 in the short run and only slightly higher in the long run (Bond (1983), Binswanger (1989)). However, aggregate agricultural supply appears to be much more responsive in the medium run to infrastructure investments (Binswanger et al. 1985). What these results imply is that while agriculture can be taxed by depressing its relative price, it is also efficient to invest in it.
However, the second reason above for turning the terms of trade against agriculture is meant to dismiss this option by arguing that investments in industry provide higher growth rates than investments in agriculture. The evidence for this is based on the notion that agriculture does not provide the backward and forward production linkages necessary for setting up new activities. Hirschman in fact wrote in 1958. "Agriculture certainly stands convicted on the count of its lack of direct stimulus to the setting up of new activities through linkage effects - the superiority of manufacturing in this respect is crushing" (Hirschman (1958), pp. 109-110, quoted by Timmer (19881, p. 289).
This view has been challenged recently by Haggblade and Hazell (1989), and Hazell (1990), who argue that because of rural consumption linkages as opposed to production linkages, investments in agricultural tradeables have large spillover effects into rural non-tradeables, both agricultural and non-agricultural, and hence have the tendency to produce large income multipliers. The logic is that an expansion of production of agricultural tradeables will imply increased rural incomes, and hence increased demand for rural non-tradeables. Assuming that supply of these is relatively elastic, this implies an increase in production of these non-tradeables for a total income multiplier larger than one. In fact empirical evidence suggests values of these total multipliers between 1.2 and 1.8.
Hazell (1990), argues that these multipliers in many cases are also larger than those derived from industrial projects, and hence the taxation of agriculture in order to invest in industry is not justified. The history of the many failed state sponsored industrial projects in Africa and other countries in the last three-four decades certainly does not argue against this claim.
The equity reasons for agricultural taxation mentioned above depend quite strongly on the structure of agriculture. In land abundant Africa, for instance, it is well documented that the largest number of the poor are in agriculture. Hence, taxing agriculture is equivalent to taxing the poor, while subsidizing non-agriculture ends up supporting profits of well-off urban based residents. Of course, there are countries where land is in shortage, and where land rents largely accrue to wealthy landowners. In such a case taxing agricultural output is indeed equivalent to taxing land rents.
The final argument above concerning the benefit of low food prices to urban workers is also not necessarily correct. The productivity of urban workers seems to depend on their purchasing power. Hence keeping food prices low might just be a convenient way to keep nominal wages low, and increase profits of urban industrialists high.
Recently Sah and Stiglitz (1984, 1987) have provided a simple framework within which the consequences of manipulating the terms of trade of agriculture on the investible surplus are clarified. One of the major conclusions that they derive is that in order to increase the investible surplus of the economy, defined as the difference between the total production and consumption of the non-agricultural product, the terms of trade of agriculture, namely the price of agriculture, relatively to the price of non-agriculture must be suppressed.
The logic of the Sah and Stiglitz results is not complex. Assuming that agriculture or industrial labour do not produce much savings for investment, and that foreign savings are constrained, the major sources of domestic savings are private profits from non-agricultural production, and public tax revenues from exports or imports. Since the major part of non-agricultural production cost is labour, and since wages in a developing country seem to respond to the cost of food, non-agricultural profits can be raised by keeping the price of food and hence wages down. Also if most of exports are agricultural, while imports are nonagricultural, the government will increase public revenue by taxing exports and/or taxing imports. Both of these policies also imply a reduction in the relative price of agriculture.
The second conclusion of Sah and Stiglitz is that the increase in accumulation will be larger, the more price sensitive is the marketed agricultural surplus. This last conclusion seems rather odd and is at variance with the conclusions of others (e.g. Lipton ( 1977)) who claim that the surplus out of agriculture is larger, the more inelastic is the aggregate agricultural supply. The claim by Sah and Stiglitz has been clarified by Blomqvist (1986) and Carter (1986). It turns out that its logic rests on the specific assumption concerning the responsiveness of the urban wage. For a given decrease in agricultural prices, urban wages must decline more, in order to eliminate an excess demand for food, the greater is the supply responsiveness of agriculture.
Sah and Stiglitz in turn in answering to the comments, conclude as follows:
"Can a manipulation of the terms of trade squeeze the agricultural sector to provide funds for agricultural development? If the economy faces constraints on external trade and urban wages cannot adjust, the answer is no. If urban wages do adjust, the answer is yes, but only if the urban workers are made worse off". (Sah and Stiglitz (1986), p. 1198).
It thus appears that according to this thinking immizerising of both agricultural producers, as well as urban workers is necessary in order to generate savings, and increase the country's growth rate. Of course, Sah and Stiglitz only deal with the total domestic savings, and not with the types of investments that are undertaken. Thus their analysis is not in conflict with the claims of Mellor and Johnston (1984) and Hazell (1990) who base their arguments on the types of investments undertaken and not on how to increase the total amount of investment.
In their later work Sah and Stiglitz (19871 widen considerably the simple framework they considered in their first paper, but their major conclusion still holds. Suppressing the terms of trade of agriculture increases the domestic investible surplus of the economy, as long as the internal terms of trade are kept above some critical level, which, however, is below the international terms of trade. In other words, the agricultural sector must be taxed, or equivalently the non-agricultural sector subsidized vis-à-vis world prices, in order to raise domestic investment. In fact the critical internal agricultural terms of trade, maximizes the level of domestic surplus. Furthermore, the suppression of the agricultural terms of trade does not have to immizerize urban workers, as their earlier paper suggested. Similar results about the agricultural terms of trade were obtained in earlier papers dealing with growth in dual economies such as the ones by Hornby (1968) and Bardhan
(1970, chapter 9), under different assumptions.
Most of the assumptions of the Sah-Stiglitz model seem to be satisfied in practice by the late developing countries. Hence their theory would indeed suggest that the agricultural terms of trade should be suppressed, or that agriculture should be taxed at early development stages in order to accelerate growth. In other words, the overall direction of the policies that have been followed by many developing countries in the past has been correct. This, in turn, would imply that the crisis that have afflicted most of the developing countries in the last fifteen years must be attributed to factors other than the fundamental underlying principle of turning the terms of trade against agriculture in early stages of development. This, of course, raises the issue whether the recommendation of all structural adjustment programs that explicit and implicit taxation of agriculture should be lessened is correct. This point will be taken up later.
<section>5</section>
Chapter two: Means of agricultural taxation
There are two broad types of agricultural taxation in developing countries, namely explicit and implicit taxes. Explicit taxes involve charges on land, taxes on inputs such as water, fertilizer, etc., and taxes on output. Income taxes, which belong to the category of explicit taxes, are almost impossible to implement in the context of a country with undeveloped bureaucracy and information system and are rarely used. Implicit taxes involve taxes and/or subsidies of the non-agricultural sector, which change the terms of trade for agriculture.
Land taxes have always been considered efficient and equitable. Efficient in the sense that they do not distort relative output prices within agriculture, and do not diminish production incentives. They are equitable because those with larger pieces of land, and hence wealthier, pay more. In early stages of development, and in countries where land rights were well established or land quality was relatively homogeneous, they have been quite important as a source of public revenue. Thus in 1940 agricultural land taxation as a fraction of central government revenue in Egypt was 23 percent, in India 19 percent, and in Chile 5 percent (Bird, 1974). However, in the late eighties in none of these countries did land taxes account for more than 1 percent of central government revenue.
Land taxes in principle are relatively simple. In order to implement them one needs only four facts: the area of the property, its location, its classification, and the owner or the name of the person to whom to send the tax bill. This information, as Newbery (1987) suggests, might not be too costly to collect. A simple presumptive tax structure could be designed, based on some easily identified characteristics of the land, such as the availability of water, fertility, and proximity to a market.
One might argue that in countries where land ownership rights are not well formalized, such as in land-extensive countries of sub-Saharan Africa, land taxes might be difficult to implement. However, even there the ownership problem might be dealt with by levying land taxes on the communities, and let them apportion the tax among those with customary land tenure rights.
Despite all the advantages of land taxes, it is a fact that their importance as a source of fiscal revenue has declined substantially. The reasons for this have been recently explored by Hoff (1991) and Skinner (1991). Hoff makes the point that land taxes are riskier than output taxes, and hence in the absence of complete insurance against production risks, they will tend to be less favoured compared with output taxes. That land taxes are riskier than output taxes is easy to see. If production is uncertain, then a fixed land tax will make net producer income more variable than an equivalent output tax. However, as Newbery (1987) suggests, this problem could be taken care of by indexing the land tax to an index of regional output, and Hoff shows this to be formally correct.
Skinner (1991), however, shows that the risk aspects of the land tax are not as large as casual thinking first suggests. Through empirical simulations he finds that ''the degree of uncertainty about farm income must be very large, and (in general), the level of taxation low, before an export tax is preferred to a land tax" (op. cit. p. 130). Skinner suggests that the most crucial problem with land taxation is the problem of administration. In the absence of efficient land markets which will indicate land prices, there will be incentives to mar-assess the value of land. These problems, however, could be dealt with by using simple characteristics to assess a presumptive value of land.
The above arguments still do not explain why the tendency has been away from land taxes and toward output and implicit taxes. Skinner offers two suggestions. One is political, namely organized opposition by landowners. The second is that implicit taxes are easier to implement than explicit taxes such as land taxes.
Taxes on agricultural output could be levied on gross output or marketed surplus. While for cash crops the two are largely the same, for food crops this is not the case, especially in developing countries. Newbery (1987) shows that a tax on gross output is superior to a tax on marketed surplus because the former leaves both relative producer and relative consumer prices unchanged, while the latter changes relative consumer prices, albeit it leaves relative producer prices unchanged. This conclusion, however, is largely academic. In practice in developing countries it is impossible to tax gross output as one would have to get involved in household consumption decisions. Hence only marketed surplus can be feasibly taxed.
Taxing of marketed surplus, however, cannot easily be done for non-traded commodities such as staple food, because it implies that the government would have to monopolize all domestic marketing, to ensure that all marketed commodities are subjected to the tax. In cases where this was done on a large scale (e.g. Tanzania), experience shows that it failed because of sheer administrative complexity.
On the other hand taxing exportable or other traceable cash crops has had a long and successful history as a fiscal instrument in many countries. The key to the success of export taxation of agricultural commodities is the technological need to organize along monopolistic lines to exploit economies of scale involved in marketing of these commodities. Even in cases where the government has not been involved in monopolistic export marketing boards, producers have organized in cooperatives to exploit economies of scale in world marketing. This natural tendency towards centralized organization, of course, makes taxation quite easy from an administrative viewpoint. It is thus no coincidence that export taxation has been quite crucial as a source of revenue at early stages of development. Helleiner (1964) in fact concludes:
"The principal ground for heavy taxation of exports is its convenience. In a country where per capita income is very low, administrative personnel are scarce, modern accounting practices are non-existent and much of the population is self-employed or engaged in "traditional" (and therefore unrecorded) economic activity, recourse must be had to maximum revenue collection in the few sectors where it is possible. In that it must pass through only a very few ports, foreign trade is easily measured, controlled and taxed" (p. 599).
It is thus no coincidence that trade taxes (export and import) account for the bulk of fiscal revenue in the poorest developing countries. Tanzi (1987) shows that trade taxes account for an average of 39.3 percent of all tax revenue for the poorest developing countries, with export duties alone accounting for 8.4 percent. By contrast they accounted for only 15.4 percent in the richest among the 86 developing countries covered in his sample, with export taxes making up only 2.1 percent.
Taxes on purchased inputs are another possible form of explicit taxation of agriculture. It is easy to show (Newbery, 1987) that if all inputs except land are subsidized, and outputs are taxed at the same rate, then the effect is equivalent to a rent tax. However, labour input cannot easily be taxed or subsidized, and most fiscal interventions in agricultural inputs take the form of subsidies on "modern" purchased inputs such as seeds, fertilizer, tractors, chemicals etc.
Explicit taxation of agricultural commodities has taken the form of taxation of traded agricultural commodities and especially exportables. Krueger, Schiff and Valdes (1988) show that the direct nominal protection rate for the main exportable agricultural product in sixteen developing countries averaged -11 percent in 19751979 and -11 percent in 1980-1984. For the main agricultural importable in turn the average direct nominal protection was 20 percent in 1975-1979 and 21 percent in 1980-1984. This illustrates that the internal terms of trade in those countries through direct interventions were turned against the exportable products. Direct interventions in their methodology include explicit tariffs on non-agricultural products.
However, it turns out that indirect and implicit taxation through exchange rate overvaluation play a much more important role in agricultural taxation. Krueger, Schiff and Valdes indeed show that if the effects of overvaluation and trade protection of industry are taken into account, then the total nominal protection rate of agricultural exports declined to an average of -36 percent for 1975-1979, and -40 percent in 1980-1984, while for agricultural imports, the nominal protection rate from positive turned negative at -5 percent for 1975-1979, and -6 percent in 19801984.
Exchange rate overvaluation has played a substantial role as a source of invisible public revenue in many developing countries through the lower cost of government imports. It is only in the last few years that the detrimental role of this essentially macroeconomic distortion on microeconomic incentives has been analyzed. Structural adjustment programs by trying to correct these distortions at the macro as well as the micro level, have in essence tried to strip many governments of large sources of explicit and implicit fiscal revenue. This, of course, requires drastic cuts in government expenditures, and puts enormous pressures on governments for tax reform, and finding other ways to generate revenues.
<section>6</section>
Chapter three A macro model of the agricultural terms of trade and taxation
In this Chapter the discussion of the terms of trade of agriculture that began in Chapter 1 will be formalized and extended in order to understand the relation between taxation of agriculture and macroeconomic equilibrium and adjustment.
Influencing the prices of products received by agricultural producers, or the prices paid by agricultural consumers is a widespread practice in developing countries. These interferences, of course, have as a consequence changes in relative prices faced by producers and consumers, and hence changes in demands and supplies for various products. The question is how such policies impinge on macroeconomic balance and growth, and how they influence the pattern of adjustment under internal and external shocks. In this Chapter a simple t