<title>Nutmeg and derivatives</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This document consists of two related reports: (i) Nutmeg Processing and Marketing in Grenada prepared by Dr. Dilon Daniel and (ii) Nutmeg, Mace and their By-Products: A Market Overview prepared by the Trade Information Service of the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/GATT.
These reports form part of the several studies on Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP), commissioned by FAO. In the two reports, the authors have used different sources of relevant information. No attempt has been made to reconcile differences, if any, in the statistical information provided.
This document, along with other similar and related studies, will be used for preparing a substantial publication of wider coverage on NWFP.
Comments on the document (along with supporting materials as relevant) may kindly be sent to:
C. Chandrasekharan
Chief, Non-Wood Products and Energy Branch
Forest Products Division
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
<section>2</section>
Report No. 1: Nutmeg processing and marketing in Grenada
List of abbreviations
Executive summary
1. Background information and trends relating to the growing, management, production, and trade of nutmeg/nutmeg products in Grenada
2. Relative importance of nutmeg in providing income, employment and export earnings
3. Constraints/problems faced by Grenada in nutmeg production and trade, and proposed solutions
4. Definition of terms
5. Description of components of nutmeg
6. Conclusion from chemical composition analysis of nutmeg
7. The present market status of the vegetable fats and oleochemical industries
8. Market analysis for trimyristin and myristic acid
9. Recommendations
Endnotes
Appendix 1: Structure and physical properties of nutmeg oil components
Appendix 2: Manufacturers and suppliers of myristic acid and myristyl alcohol
Appendix 3: Price quote for a gas chromatograph machine
Appendix 4: Companies presently selling trimyristin as a laboratory reagent
Appendix 5: Companies selling oils and fats extraction equipment
Appendix 6: An estimate for a pilot study to be conducted at Texas A and M university and price quotation for equipments necessary for the production of trimyristin on a commercial scale. from crown iron works
prepared by
Dilon Daniel
List of abbreviations
AAI%
Average Annual Percent Increase
FELDA
Malaysian Federal Land Development Authority
g
gram
GCNA
Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association
GC
Gas Chromatography
Inform
International News on Fats and Oils and Related Materials
kg
Kilogramme
MT
Metric Ton
Dollars
US
United States
USDA
US Department of Agriculture
Executive summary
Questions Addressed
The feasibility of extracting individual components from nutmeg and marketing these components is reported in this document. Within this context, an analysis was conducted of the trend in nutmeg production and trade in Grenada along with the importance of this crop as a source of income to the populace. A thorough scientific investigation of the individual compounds found in nutmeg and the viability of extracting these compounds was also covered. Finally, an economic evaluation is discussed in terms of cost of production, marketing and revenue outlook of extracting these components, and recommendations are made based on the findings.
Summary of Findings
Nutmeg production continues to play a pivotal role as a source of income, employment and revenue for Grenada. However, the recent decline in the nutmeg trading price on the international market has seriously affected the economy of the country.
Upon examination of diversifying the uses of nutmeg, one of its components, trimyristin, was seen as a potential marketable product. Trimyristin is a fat, and it comprises approximately 40% by weight of the nutmeg seed. A by-product of trimyristin is myristic acid, and this carboxylic acid is used commercially in the soap and cosmetic industry.
Another possible marketable product is nutmeg oil. Nutmeg oil, which is the essential or volatile oil of nutmeg, is approximately 12% by weight of the nutmeg seed. A steam distillation plant is under construction in Grenada to obtain the nutmeg oil. However, once the nutmeg oil is removed by the steam distillation, if nothing is done with the remaining components of the nutmeg, then 88% of the nutmeg seed is discarded. Most importantly, the trimyristin which is a potentially marketable product, will be lost. Trimyristin can be sold as any other fat or oil to be used as a source for making fatty acids, fatty alcohols, or glycerol which are used for the soap, cosmetic and oleochemical industries. Moreover, the equipment used to extract trimyristin from nutmeg can also be used to extract other products such as coconut oil from copra. Thus, the marketing potential of trimyristin demands that a pilot study be conducted on its extraction from nutmeg to evaluate the possible
commercial production of this fat.
1. Background information and trends relating to the growing, management, production, and trade of nutmeg/nutmeg products in Grenada
Most of Grenada's nutmeg is grown inland in areas of higher altitude, greater than 100 meters above sea level. About three to five years after planting the nutmeg, the nutmeg tree (Myristica fragrans) begins to bear fruits which turn yellow in colour upon ripening. The yellow fruits split open to expose a shining dark brown nut that is surrounded by a bright red lace-like covering called mace. Inside of the dark brown nut is the light brown nutmeg seed.
Grenada produces over 23% of the world's nutmeg, which is second to Indonesia which produces 73% of the world's nutmeg. Nutmeg in Grenada is grown by both large and small farmers. Over the years, 1951-1993, 29% of the growers in Grenada had annual average deliveries of less than 100 pounds (or 45.41 kg). The seventy-six largest producers which comprise 0.5% of the nutmeg fanning population contributed, on an annual average, deliveries in excess of 10,000 pounds (or 4,541 kg). As a group, they have been responsible for approximately 20% of Grenada's annual production in terms of volume. The structure of the industry as it relates to farm size, over time, has not changed in any significant manner.
Both nutmeg and mace are traded regionally and extra-regionally. Mace is removed from the nutmeg, washed and sun-dried for a few days until it becomes brittle. The mace is then sold to the receiving station for grading and packing. Nutmeg are dried, graded and bagged at the processing stations. Once the products have been packaged, they are ready for export.
Table 1^1: Grenada's Nutmeg and Mace Production 1986-1993 (tons)
Year
Nutmeg
Mace
Historically, the major markets for Grenada's nutmeg have been Holland, West Germany, United Kingdom, Belgium, Canada, Poland, Spain and Argentina. Although Holland provides Grenada with its largest single market of nutmeg exports, a significant amount of nutmeg reaching Holland is re-exported.
2. Relative importance of nutmeg in providing income, employment and export earnings
The nutmeg industry is important as a provider of employment and income in Grenada. According to the Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association, about 7,000 to 10,000 small farmers are directly involved in the production of the crop. Conservative estimates claim that not less than 35,000 persons in the farm household, or about one-third of Grenada's total population, depend directly on the nutmeg dollar. A further 500 persons find employment at the processing stations.
As seen in the tables below, over the last six financial years the export earnings derived from nutmeg have been on the decline. Export earnings have fallen from US $15,761,107 in 1988 to US $2,660,595 in 1993. During that same period farm income has declined both in absolute terms and as a share of export earnings. The Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association claims that whereas farm income was 83% of the 1988 export earnings, by the 1993 financial year the share had declined to 58%.
Some of the more important reasons for the decline in the performance of the industry are: decline in the world demand for raw nutmeg; the dismantling of the Grenada - Indonesia marketing arrangement; and, to a lesser extent, production expansion. Given the trends in the trade of nutmeg, the revival of the nutmeg industry would depend on the extent to which Grenada diversifies both the industry and the market.
Table 2²: Export Quantities of Nutmeg and Mace and Total Earnings for the Period 1986-1993
Year
Nutmeg (tons)
Mace (tons)
Total Export(US$)
Table 3³: Prices Received by Grenada for its Nutmeg and Mace for the Period 1988-1993 (US$)
Nutmeg/kg
No. 1 Mace/kg
No. 2 Mace/kg
<section>3</section>
3. Constraints/problems faced by Grenada in nutmeg production and trade, and proposed solutions
Although Grenada continued to receive declining prices for its nutmeg and mace during the last five years, production of nutmeg during that period remained relatively constant. Therefore, the problem that the nutmeg industry faces lies in the nutmeg trade and not in its production.
The following information shows the market conditions for nutmeg and nutmeg products in the U.S. and European markets:
Table 4^4: US Imports of Nutmeg for Consumption
Country
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
December 1992
January-December 1992
World Total
Canada
Grenada
India
Indonesia
Italy
Madagascar
Netherlands
Singapore
St. Vincent and Grenadines
Table 5^5: US Imports of Mace for Consumption
Country
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
December 1992
January-December 1992
World Total
Egypt
France
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Netherlands
Peru
Singapore
Table 6^6: US Imports of Nutmeg Oil for Consumption
Country
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
Quantity (kg)
Value (thousand US$)
December 1992
January-December 1992
World Total
France
India
Indonesia
Mexico
Spain
United Kingdom
Table 7^7: EEC Imports of Nutmeg for Manufacture of Nutmeg Oil
Country
Quantity (kg)
Quantity (kg)
January-December 1991
January-December 1992
World Total
Indonesia
Grenada
India
Sri Lanka
Intra-EEC
Note: Germany imported the largest quantity, 79% and 45% of EEC nutmeg imports for essential oil manufacture in 1991 and 1992, respectively. The second largest importer in 1991 was Ireland, 12%, and in 1992, the second largest importer was France, 24%.
The statistics in the tables above reveal that the US market is potentially the largest consumer market for nutmeg and related products, in particular nutmeg oil. Moreover, Grenada in 1992 exported to the US only 3% of the total 1.7 million kg of nutmeg exported to the US for consumption during this period while Indonesia exported 71.2%. In addition, of the 191,952 kg of nutmeg oil exported during 1992 to the US, Indonesia exported 92.8% while Grenada exported zero. This disparity of Grenada's portion in the US market becomes shockingly visible when taking into consideration that Grenada produces about 23% of the world's nutmeg.^8
In 1991, Grenada's Junior Agriculture Minister, Denis Noel reported that the prices of Grenada's nutmeg plummeted by more than 50% between 1990 and 1991. In 1992, Grenada's Agriculture Minister George Brizan said that the value of nutmeg and mace exports had slumped sharply from US $30 million total for both 1987 and 1988 to only US $8.5 million total for both 1991 and 1992. He also said that the price of nutmeg fell because of the end of the Indonesia-Grenada marketing agreement which had limited production to keep the nutmeg prices higher. Once the agreement ended in 1990, there was an oversupply of nutmeg and the prices drastically fell.^9 It was hinted that the excess stocks of nutmeg in Grenada were to be burned if additional markets were not found.^10
Because of the pathetic situation with the sales of nutmeg, the Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association (GCNA) was forced to sign an agreement in 1992 with J.H.B. International of Belgium to arrange through J.H.B.'s bankers, a financial package to make it possible for GCNA to continue operations of nutmeg, pay for the current nutmeg crop and increase its sale.^11
From the above information, it is evident that Grenada faces a serious problem in marketing its nutmeg. It is conceivable that a more aggressive marketing strategy will give Grenada a bigger share, for example, of the US market. Recommendations to achieve this will be discussed under the recommendations section.
Although an increase in the market size of nutmeg would aid Grenada's present situation, it is doubtful that this alone would solve the problem completely since the prices of nutmeg have fallen to an all time low. One possible solution would be to diversify the uses of nutmeg. If there is concurrently an increase in the supply of nutmeg by-products and a decrease in the supply of nutmeg, the price of nutmeg would have an elevating effect. Moreover, this would be a more profitable solution than simply burning the excess stocks of nutmeg.
The distillation plant to be constructed in Grenada to produce nutmeg oil is in line with finding alternative uses of nutmeg,, in addition to only selling unprocessed nutmeg. This plant is estimated to cost EC $3 million (or US $1.11 million), and the expected capacity of production is approximately 32,000 kilograms of nutmeg oil. Since the estimated yield of this plant is 10% of the nutmeg, this steam distillation plant will consume 320,000 kilograms (or 315 tons) of nutmeg.^12,13
The production of nutmeg oil will aid in finding outlets for the excess nutmeg, which was created because of the depressed market. However, this will only consume a small percentage of Grenada's potential output of nutmeg.
The remainder of this document will explore the possibility of obtaining other components of nutmeg that may be marketable, and thus, reduce Grenada's dependence on selling only unprocessed nutmeg.
4. Definition of terms
To aid in the understanding of the chemistry in this report, the following terms are defined:
Organic compounds - in general are compounds which contain carbon and hydrogen as the major elements
Carboxylic acids - are organic compounds which contain the functional group - COOH (Carboxy group)
Fatty acids - are long straight chain carboxylic acids which can be obtained from fats
Alcohols - are organic compounds that contain the functional group - OH (hydroxy group)
Esters - are derivatives of carboxylic acids and alcohols and contain the functional group- COOR
Fats - are naturally occurring esters of fatty acids and the alcohol glycerol (1,2,3-propanetriol). They are sometimes referred to as triglycerides
Oils - are fats that exist naturally as a liquid at or below room temperature
Essential Oils - are the water insoluble fractions obtained from plants or flowers via steam distillation. This fraction usually possess the characteristic odours identified with the plant or flower.
<section>4</section>
5. Description of components of nutmeg
The nutmeg seed is one of four c components of the fruit obtained from the nutmeg tree, Myristica frangans Houtt (Myristicaceae) About 30-55% of the seed consists of oils and 45-60% consists of solid matter including cellulose materials. There are two types of oils: (1) The "essential oil of nutmeg" also called the "volatile oil" accounts for 5-15% of the nutmeg seed and (2) the "fixed oil of nutmeg" sometimes called "nutmeg butter" or expressed oil of nutmeg accounts for 24-40% of the nutmeg seed.^14 The relative percentages of the different components will vary depending on the geographical origin of the nutmeg. From this point on, "essential oil", "volatile oil", and "nutmeg oil" will be used interchangeably.
Essential Oil
Although the essential oil is present in lesser amounts than the fixed oil, the essential oil has received most of the investigative research efforts especially during the last twenty years. This is in accord with the fact that the essential oil contains the greater number of individual compounds or components, most of which are valuable in industries. Furthermore, the psychotropic effects of nutmeg as well as most of its other pharmacological properties have been attributed to the compounds found in the essential oil.
The essential oil is obtained from the nutmeg by steam distillation. It is a colourless or pale yellow liquid with a taste and odour of nutmeg.^15 This oil is soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water and has a density, at 25°C of 0.859-0.924. Since it is light and air sensitive, it must be kept cool in a tightly closed container and protected from light.^16
Components of the Essential Oil
The first major successful analytical works to determine the constituents of nutmeg was performed by Frederick Power and Arthur Henry Salway from 1907 to 1908.^17,18 They isolated and identified numerous compounds found in nutmeg. Around the 1960's, more compounds were identified by using modern techniques like gas-liquid chromatography.^19
The early articles on the chemistry of nutmeg, including the Merck Index, reported camphene and pinene as the major constituents of the essential oil. More recent articles show sabinene to be the major constituent of the essential oil.^20,21 It is still questionable whether sabinene constitutes most of the essential oil because the latest Merck Index still shows camphene and pinene to be the major constituents of the essential oil.
From these analyses, a listing of the major components of the essential oil and their relative percentages is provided below. Note that either sabinene or camphene comprise about 50% of the essential oil:
1. Sabinene
or
2. Camphene
3. d-Pinene
4. Dipentene
5. d-Linalool
6. d-Borneol
7. i-Terpineol
8. Geraniol
9. Myristcin
10. Safrole
11. Eugenol
12. iso Eugenol
In addition, a thorough listing of all the components that have been observed in the essential oil along with their classification based on type is given below:
Aromatic ethers
Methyl Eugenol
Eugenol
Methyl Iso-Eugenol
Myristicin
Methoxy Eugenol
Elemicin
Safrole
Iso-Eugenol
Iso-Elemicin
Terpenes
Alpha-Terpinene
Myrcene
Gamma-Terpinene
Terpinolene
Alpha-Pinene
Camphene
Beta-Pinene
Uinonene (Dipentene)
Alpha-Phellandrene
Sabinene
Beta-Phellandrene
Delta^3-Carene
Alpha-Thujene
Monoterpene Alcohol
Geraniol
4-Terpineol
Alpha-Terpineol
Beta-Terpineol
Citronellol
Linalool
Sesquiterpene
Caryophyllene
Terpinic Esters
Geranyl Acetate
Linalyl Acetate
Bornyl acetate
Acids
Formic
Octanoic
Butyric
Acetic
Aromatic hydrocarbons
P-Cymene
Toluene
The following compounds were identified only on the basis of retention times observed from gas chromatography.
Cumene
Cyclamen Aldehyde
Camphor
Menthone
Menthyl Isovalerate
The structures and physical properties of the major compounds in the essential oil is given in Appendix 1.
Uses of the Essential Oil
Because of its aroma, the essential oil has been used as a natural flavouring extract and as a perfume in the cosmetic industries.^22 In particular, the oil has been used as a flavouring agent, replacing ground nutmeg in order to avoid leaving particles in foods and beverages. For example, it has been used to flavour baked goods, beverages, candies, meats and syrups.
The essential oil has found widespread use in the cosmetic industry when a spicy odour is required. For example, it has been employed as a flavour in dental creams in combination with peppermint, methyl salicylate and cloves.^23
In addition to its use in cosmetic industries, nutmeg oil is prominently used in the pharmaceutical industry. Historically, nutmeg has been used as a form of medicine to treat many illnesses ranging from those affecting the nervous system to the digestive system.^24 Presently, the nutmeg oil is used by many pharmaceutical companies in their formulations of products to treat different illnesses. In 1992, Procter and Gamble launched a non-drowsy and alcohol-free Vicks cough syrup and the essential oil of nutmeg is a major ingredient.^25 Robinson-Health Care in Britain in 1991 also marketed an impregnated tissue called Easy Breather Tissue which helps to clear congestion, and the essential oil of nutmeg was also an active ingredient.^26 In that same year, Ramedica International Corp. marketed in the USA, a pain relieving ointment called Ramedica Herbal Wonder Balm, and nutmeg oil was again one of the active ingredients. This shows that the essential oil of nutmeg continues its
historical importance as a major pharmaceutical ingredient.^27
Discussion on Some of the Major Components of the Essential Oil
Most of the following information on components of the essential oil including the physical properties in Appendix I was taken from Merck Index, 11th edition and the CRC handbook of Physics and Chemistry.
(i) Sabinene - no information was available on the uses of sabinene
(ii) Camphene and its derivatives are widely used in numerous industrial processes and manufactures. A striking illustration of camphene's industrial importance is shown in the scheme below: Camphene can be easily converted to these other compounds.^28
Discussion on Some of the Major Components of the Essential Oil
Thus, camphene is used in the manufacture of camphor and its related compounds. Camphene and its chloro-derivative have strong antibacterial, antifungal, and insecticidal properties.^29,30,31 Many of camphene derivatives are known pharmaceutical drugs, and camphene itself has been shown to prevent atheromatosis of the aorta in some animals.^32
(iii) d-Pinene accounts for 8-20% of the essential oil of nutmeg. This compound is used widely in industry. It is used in the manufacture of camphor (3/4 of US camphor is made from d-pinene), solvents, plasticizers, perfume bases and synthetic pine oil.
(iv) Dipentene is the dl-form of limonene or the inactive limonene. This terpene is used as a solvent and also a wetting and dispersing agent. It is also used in the manufacture of resins.
(v) d-Linalool is also called coriandrol and is used in perfumery substituting for bergamot oil or french.
(vi) d-Borneol exists mostly as an acetate ester in nutmeg rather than the free alcohol. The acetate ester and other ester derivatives of borneol are used in the manufacturing industries. In addition, some free borneol, ie, the alcohol, is used in perfumery and incense making.
(vii) i- Terpineol is used as an antiseptic. It is also used in the making of perfumes and in soap manufacturing.
(viii) Geraniol is used mainly in perfumery because of its sweet rose aroma. Some of its esters such as butyrate is used for making artificial atter of rose.
(ix) Myristicin is the most studied individual compound found in nutmeg, especially its pharmacological properties. This compound is thought to be responsible for the hallucinogenic effect of nutmeg oil.^33 However, the evidence is not very clear as to whether other compounds are involved since natural myristicin is more potent than synthetic myristicin.^34
(x) Safrole is used industrially in perfumery, and in the manufacturing of heliotropin and in the denaturing of fats in soap manufacture. Medically, it is used as an antiseptic.
(xi) Eugenol is used in the manufacture of vanillin, and in perfumery, instead of oil of cloves.
Eugenol is also used as a dental analgesic.
(xii) iso-eugenol, like eugenol, is used in the manufacture of vanillin.
Fixed Oil of Nutmeg
Depending upon the method used to obtain the fixed oil of nutmeg from the seed, varying amounts of essential oil will be present in the fixed oil. There are two general ways in which the fixed oil of nutmeg is extracted from nutmeg. In the first process, the ground nutmeg is subjected to intense hydraulic pressure and heat. The other method employs a solvent, for example, diethyl ether. In this process, the ground nutmeg is reflux with diethyl ether, and after filtering off the solid residue, the diethyl ether is distilled off from the filtrate to leave behind the crude fixed oil. These two processes will result in the crude fixed oil containing substantial quantities of essential oil. The quantities of essential oil vary between 10-12%. If the essential oil is removed by steam distillation prior to extracting the crude fixed oil, then the fixed oil of nutmeg will contain only trace amounts of essential oil.
Unlike the liquid essential oil, the fixed oil is a semi-solid, reddish brown material with both the smell and taste of nutmeg. It melts at 45-51°C and has a density of 0.990-0.995. Like most oils, it is completely soluble in hot alcohol, however, sparingly soluble in cold alcohol. The fixed oil is freely soluble in ether and chloroform.
The fixed oil of nutmeg has not been subjected to as much investigative research as the essential oil. One possible reason is because of the small number of compounds that are present in the fixed oil.
Components of the Fixed Oil
Power and Salway's of the fixed oil which was obtained from nutmeg without prior removal of the essential oil gave the following components and their relative abundance in the fixed oil.
Trimyristin
Essential oil
Unsaponifiable constituents
Oleic acid (as glyceride)
Resinous materials
Linolenic acid (as glyceride)
Formic, acetate and cerotic acids
(very small amounts)
In this extraction procedure, the essential oil was not removed prior to extracting the fixed oil and thus, the essential oil appears as a component in the fixed oil. If the fixed oil was obtained after initial removal of the essential oil, the relative component ratios would be as shown below:
Trimyristin
Unsaponifiable constituents
Oleic acid (as glyceride)
Resinous material
Linolenic acid (as glyceride)
Formic, acetic and cerotic acids
(very small amounts)
Uses of the Fixed Oil
The fixed oils that contain a substantial amount of essential oil have the same odour as nutmeg. Therefore, these fixed oils have been used in perfumes.^35 In medicine, the fixed oil has been used externally for sprains and rheumatism.^36 As a whole, the fixed oil finds very little commercial use; however, components of the fixed oils and derivatives of some of those compounds find extensive commercial uses.
Discussion on the Individual Components of the Fixed Oil
Essential Oil:
Since the essential oil was already dealt with under its own topic heading, no further discussion of essential oil will be covered under this section.
Trimyristin:
Trimyristin accounts for over three quarters of the fixed oil of nutmeg. Because the essential oil was considered as a component of the fixed oil, trimyristin is about 75% of the total oil (fixed and volatile) extracted from nutmeg. This implies that nutmeg is made up of approximately 40% trimyristin.
Other names used for trimyristin are (i) glycerol trimyristate and (ii) glycerol tritetradecanoate. It is a white to yellowish grey solid with a melting point between 56-57 °C. The molecular formula of trimyristin is C[45]H[86]O[6] and it has a molecular weight of 723.14. This fat is soluble in alcohols, benzene, chloroform and diethyl but insoluble in water.
Structure of Trimyristin:
This structure shows that trimyristin is a fat or ester of glycerol and tetradecanoic acid (myristic acid).
The other major naturally occurring sources of trimyristin are coconut oil, palm kernel oil and babassu oil.
A comparison of these sources are shown in the table below and nutmeg has the highest percentage of trimyristin.^37
Table 8: Sources of Trimyristin
Source
Percentage of trimyristin
Nutmeg fat
Babassu oil
Coconut oil
Palm kernel oil
Soybean oil
Beef tallow
Palm oil
The Major Uses of Trimyristin:
Trimyristin is used in situ industrially as a raw material for myristic acid. In most cases, for example from coconut oil, trimyristin is not isolated as an individual component before it is used to produce myristic acid. The oil with all its components is subjected to an ester hydrolysis process, and the different fatty acids are distilled off. In this process, glycerol is also produced and thus trimyristin can. be considered also as a source of glycerol.
As a saturated fat, trimyristin has been studied intensely in research and development.^38,39,40 It has been looked at as a possible substitute for cocoa-butter.^41 It has been blended with cottonseed oil and palm oil to produce an edible fat compound and has been shown to be used as a tablet lubricant.^42
Laboratory Isolation of Trimyristin from Nutmeg
Equipment: Two 500 ml round bottom flask, one reflux condenser, one condenser, still head, heat source (steam bath or electric heater or heating mantle), two erlenmeyer flasks 250 ml, 1 short stem funnel, 1 buchner funnel, 2 filter paper, 1 filter flask.
Procedure: Place 60 g of ground nutmeg into a 500 ml round bottom flask with 225 ml ether. Attach a reflux and allow the mixture to reflex for 1 hour with heating source. After allowing the mixture to cool to room temperature, the ether insoluble material is then removed via gravity filtration. The filtrate is then placed into a 500 ml round bottom and the system is further adopted to perform a simple distillation. The solvent is removed by simple distillation and the crude yellow trimyristin is collected and placed into an erlenmeyer flask.
Note: The ether reclaimed can be used in future extractions. Purification of the impure trimyristin is accomplished by dissolving it in 60 ml acetone with gentle heating. This warm mixture is then poured into a beaker and allowed to cool to room temperature. After initial crystallization has occurred slowly, the mixture can be cooled in an ice bath to produce more crystals.
After all precipitation tends to cease, the white crystals are then collected on a buchner funnel by suction filtration. The trimyristin can be air dried on a filter paper or watch glass.
The purity can be checked either by taking the melting point or performing a gas- chromatography analysis.^43 44
Hydrolysis or Splitting of Trimyristin to Obtain Myristic Acid
In general, any fat can be broken down to its two major components - a fatty acid component, and a glycerol as the alcohol component. The process is known as hydrolysis or splitting, and the overall reaction involves the addition of water to the fat in order to produce the fatty acid and glycerol (glycerine). There are two methods by which the hydrolysis process can be accomplished: (1) saponification and (2) direct splitting.
With saponification, the fat is heated in a solution of a hydroxide base, for example, sodium or potassium hydroxide, and this produces the metal salt of the carboxylic acid (soap) and glycerol. Acidification of the metal salt or soap with a mineral acid liberates the carboxylic acid and a mineral salt. The process is shown by the reactions below using trimyristin as the fat:
Saponification is usually the method of choice in the laboratory for preparing a carboxylic acid from fat. Saponification is also sometimes used industrially.^45
In the direct hydrolysis process, the fat is treated with water in the presence of a catalyst to yield directly the carboxylic acid and glycerol. Very high temperatures and pressures are necessary to accomplish this splitting procedure. A mineral acid like sulphuric acid is usually the catalyst used, and at times an alkaline catalyst like zinc oxide, calcium hydroxide or magnesium hydroxide can be used.^46
Because of the high pressure and. temperature required, this hydrolysis technique is used predominantly in industry.
A Laboratory Preparation of Myristic Acid from Trimyristin
Equipment: One 500 ml round bottom flask; a mechanical stirrer or magnetic stirrer; a steam bath or heating mantel; one 500 ml erlenmeyer flask; steam -jacketed funnel; a graduated cylinder
Procedure: Pure trimyristin (25g, 0.935 mole) is placed into a 500 ml round bottom flask followed by the addition of 50 ml of a 2.5 M solution of sodium hydroxide. This mixture is heated at 100 °C with the heat source for 2 hours with constant stirring. At this time, the solution should appear clear indicating that saponification is completed. The solution is then poured into a 500 ml erlenmeyer flask containing 150 ml solution of 20% hydrochloric acid. The crude myristic acid should form a separate phase and appear clear. If this layer is not clear, the mixture is heated until the oily layer is transparent. This mixture is then allowed to cool and the crude myristic acid solidifies. The myristic acid can be collected by filtering through a steam-jacketed funnel.
6. Conclusion from chemical composition analysis of nutmeg
(No in-depth review of the essential oil as a potential marketable commodity will be further discussed since a construction project of a steam distillation plant is in progress in Grenada.)
As seen from the discussion on the che