<title>The effects of HIV/AIDS on farming systems in eastern Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This publication has been produced by the Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP), Agricultural Services Division, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy. It was financed by UNDP as a TSSI programme. The publication is based on the contributions of two main authors, namely:
Tony Barnett, School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia, UK, who coordinated the programme and wrote the associated report cited below.
Martina Haslwimmer, Farm Management and Production Economics Service, FAO, who administered the project and carried out the study of the Nakambala Sugar Estate in Zambia.
However, the final text is derived from six earlier reports which provide the foundation for the present publication. These are:
* Drinkwater, M. with Fiona Samuels, The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Zambia, Vol. 1, Vol.2, Mpongwe Field Report and Vol.3, Teta Field Report, Zambia, 1993.
* Mitti, G.A., The Major Farming Systems, a summary of information on the main agricultural zones and systems based on analysis of socio-economic studies and provincial reports, Adaptive Research Planning Team, Zambia, 1993.
* Haslwimmer, M., The Social and Economic Impact on Nakambala Sugar Estate, Zambia, 1994.
* Tumushabe, J., Bantebya, G., and Ssebuliba, R., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems and Rural Livelihood Systems in Eastern Africa, Uganda, 1993.
* Kapinga, A., Kissawike, K., Ndelike, M. and Ngasongwa, J., Report on the Study of Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Tanzania, Institute of Development Studies, Sokoine Agricultural University, Morogoro, Tanzania, 1993.
* Barnett, T., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Farming Systems and Rural Livelihoods in Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia,1994.
Extensive comments on earlier drafts of this publication were provided by Daphne Topouzis and Günter Hemrich.
Alison Small was in charge of drafting and editing the text.
This publication does not constitute an exhaustive analysis of the very large amounts of material collected in the course of the project. Rather, it is an attempt to bring to the attention of a wider audience some of the major ways in which serious and fatal epidemic illnesses are currently affecting rural populations in parts of Africa and may in the near future affect other regions both in Africa and other parts of the world.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1 The purpose of this study
1.2 About the disease
1.3 Global and African epidemics
1.4 The nature of the impact
1.5 A diversity of results
1.6 HIV/AIDS and rural livelihoods in Africa
1.7 Who is vulnerable?
1.1 The purpose of this study
Much has been written about the medical and clinical aspects of HIV/AIDS. There is also an increasing body of work on the impact of the disease on social and economic systems, but relatively little is understood about the effects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on farming systems and therefore on rural livelihoods.
The purpose of this study is to examine, using information collected from three countries in Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, in which relatively high incidences of the disease have been found among their populations, the ways in which morbidity and mortality associated with HIV/AIDS are affecting farming systems and rural livelihoods.
The focus of the present study is not the disease itself but its impact, both actual and potential, on rural populations, their livelihoods and their farming systems. In order to increase understanding of this problem, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) commissioned with the financial support of United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) a series of studies in each of the three countries where the disease is seen at different stages of its evolution.
Following several months of preparation, predominantly involving studies of secondary sources, three national teams, supported by an international consultant and FAO staff, carried out field work in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. In each case the fieldwork period was about one to two months. The results of this research are presented in the following chapters.
1.2 About the disease
HIV/AIDS is a viral disease currently without cure or vaccine which is mainly sexually transmitted, although there are other infection paths, perinatal, contaminated syringes, and contaminated blood donations. The disease has a long period of latency during which people who are HIV+ (seropositive) are infectious. The virus affects the body's ability to resist infections. This results in progressive morbidity as people fall prey to a variety of infections in their environment to which they would normally be resistant.
As far as is known HIV/AIDS is always fatal. Depending on a number of factors including the general health status of the population, and the level of infectious agents in the environment, progression from infection to manifestation of symptoms may take anything from a few months to many years. Progression from initial illness to death also varies from a few months to several years.
In healthy well-fed populations in areas of the world where there are fewer opportunistic infections a person who has contracted HIV/AIDS may remain well for several years. In other parts of the world where people are poor and malnourished and where opportunistic infections are more common, the onset of illness will be more rapid. A recent study by the United Kingdom Medical Research Council in Uganda observed 11000 individuals over three years in rural areas. An important finding of this research was that among HIV+ adults there was a mortality rate of 11.6% a year.
Even when no symptoms of the disease are apparent, a person is infectious. This means that by the time that significant numbers of people begin to exhibit illness there are likely to be many more who are infected. For this reason, it may be appropriate to describe the HIV/AIDS epidemic as a "long wave" disaster. By the time that its presence in a population is obvious, it is already widely spread in that population.
HIV/AIDS affects the health of individuals. Development of measures which will cure or protect individuals through vaccination is the business of medical scientists and clinicians. However, as with all serious illness, the effects on the individual have serious implications for others - at the household, community and ultimately the national level.
1.3 Global and African epidemics
With the exception of the epidemic in the United States of America, the disease has reached epidemic proportions earliest in Africa. However, it is important to recognise that Africa is not unique and that much of the attention that it has received stems from a number of causes. These include the fact that Africa was one of the areas where the epidemic was reported first, and this may in part have been due to the readiness of some African governments to make research results available.
Figure 1: Global incidence of HIV/AIDS (number of infected people)
Figure 2: Minimum and maximum HIV prevalence among antenatal attendees in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia 1992
Figure 2 shows the minimum and maximum infection rates observed among women attending ante-natal clinics in different parts of Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.
However, it must be clear that HIV/AIDS is not a disease which is restricted to the world's poorest countries. Rather the problem is that in these countries production is often heavily dependent upon human labour power and because of their strained economic circumstances, it is these countries which are least able to confront the long-term economic and social impact of the epidemic. In the world's richest countries, the epidemic is very severe. In the United States, it has been identified as the second largest cause of deaths among young men.
There are indications that HIV/AIDS will rapidly increase in Asia. Data from India suggest that at least 500000 people are currently infected, while in Thailand seroprevalence was estimated at 450000 in a population of 60 million in 1992.
1.4 The nature of the impact
In order to understand the importance of the preceding observations it is necessary to look more closely at the issue of the social and economic impacts of this epidemic as they are manifested in the world's poorer societies.
The key feature of the HIV/AIDS epidemic which makes its social and economic impact so important is that it is mainly a sexually transmitted disease. If we assume that in most societies the years between 15 and 50 are those in which people are most sexually active, then we may also assume that it is this age group which will be most vulnerable to infection. These people also constitute the main body of the labour force in any society. In poor countries as compared to rich countries this fact is of greater significance given that:
- work, particularly farm work, is more labour intensive;
- highly trained and educated individuals are rarer and their training, loss and replacement all result in greater proportional costs.
Accordingly, the epidemic affects both the quantity and quality of labour supply in the economy. This affects output and Gross National Product (GNP). In practice this means that there may be fewer teachers, fewer skilled artisans, and fewer farmers. The situation is in fact worse than the preceding statement might suggest as the economic idea of GNP conventionally used in national accounting (the value of output resulting from the use of resources - land, labour, capital - owned by national members of a society) takes no account of the unpaid labour contributed by family members. In particular this excludes both the domestic work of women in maintaining households as well as their agricultural work producing non-marketed, usually staple, crops.
A more subtle but equally serious consequence of the epidemic on the effective labour supply is that rising adult mortality adversely affects the transmission of acquired skills and knowledge both within an age cohort and from generation to generation.
However, perhaps the most important finding of this work is that the main costs to a society are not the direct costs of medical care and prevention. Rather they are other costs resulting from the loss of output plus the more complex and less easily estimated social as well as economic costs associated with the burden of looking after orphans, care of the elderly, and costs of increasing social disorder associated with the disruption of the socialisation and education of the young.
Between consideration of the micro-level impact as in the preceding example and the macro impacts predicted by econometric modelling, there lies the complexity of the links between the local and national levels of analysis. There are many ways in which the epidemic impact on the individual, local community and nation, link together to confront politicians, administrators and ordinary people with major development problems, most of them issues of social and economic policy but some inevitably with environmental implications.
1.5 A diversity of results
As will be discussed in Chapter 2 which deals with the method used to carry out these studies, the results have proved to be quite diverse, not only between countries but between different agricultural systems in the same country. For example, in studying the farming systems in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, account had to be taken of the dynamic endogenous impact of HIV/AIDS. There are always many variables at work within a system and the effects of changes in these variables - cropping patterns, consumption preferences, availability and prices of inputs, rainfall levels, market demand - are often difficult to distinguish from the exogenous impact of HIV/AIDS. This problem has to be borne in mind when considering the detailed data reported below.
The very diversity of the results which were obtained in this study illustrate how difficult it is to understand the impact of a disaster such as an epidemic on farming systems. Nonetheless, this complexity is itself of use in increasing our understanding of the complex inter-relations which make up a "farming system". The effects which were observed are significant enough, be they on the small farm economy, or rural households, especially on those headed by women, to be taken into account in future research on the subject, and in development work generally in countries where HIV/AIDS is present or threatening.
1.6 HIV/AIDS and rural livelihoods in Africa
Since the mid-1980s, rural communities in East and Central Africa have been increasingly affected by HIV/AIDS. At the national level, where the economies of the countries concerned are substantially or largely dependent on labour intensive agriculture for subsistence and cash crop production, this effect is becoming progressively more pronounced. Table l shows that of the three countries discussed in this study, both Tanzania and Uganda are heavily dependent upon agriculture. While Zambia appears to be an exception to this rule, agriculture still remains of great importance. Because of the role of minerals in the Zambian economy, cheap locally-produced grain is important in supporting urban purchasing power. Thus, there is a link between rural production, urban wage rates, urban purchasing power, mineral production and urban social order particularly in the mining regions.
Table 1: Agriculture as a percentage of GDP and exports (1991)
Agriculture as % of GDP Agriculture as % of Exports
Tanzania 61 84
Uganda 51 95
Zambia 16 1
Source: The World Bank, 1993
African subsistence agriculture is labour intensive and, in most cases, is heavily dependent upon women's work. Farms are small and use limited quantities of inputs such as mineral fertilisers, pesticides, herbicides and mechanisation. Table 2 indicates that the majority of the population in the selected countries (except Zambia) live in rural areas and derive their livelihoods from these activities. While population growth was long seen as the problem in Africa, in some rural communities HIV/AIDS is now resulting in labour shortages for both farm and domestic work. Seasonal labour constraints are not new. There are many reasons why this is so: farm incomes are low and adults have often spent part of the year away from the farm in search of cash incomes; in some regions rainfall distribution means . that labour has to be mobilised intensively in brief periods; and daily life requires substantial amounts of labour for non-farm work associated with maintaining the household.
Water and fuel collection may occupy as much as eight hours a day - tasks usually done by women and young girls.
Table 2: Percentage of the population living in rural areas (1991)
Total population (millions) Percentage population living in rural areas
Tanzania 25.5 66
Uganda 16.9 89
Zambia 8.3 49
Source: Op. Cit., 1993
1.7 Who is vulnerable?
Within a systems' hierarchy, AIDS is first seen at the farm household level, because it is affecting human beings . The effects of AIDS are spreading to the subordinate level, the crop/livestock system as well as on superior levels up to the national system. However, this study will concentrate on the effects on the farming system, the farm-household system and the crop/livestock system.
At the farming systems level, the study observed features relating to different kinds of farming systems which appeared to make some more or less vulnerable than others. Variables include location and climate of the system, types of crop and or livestock produced, presence of sufficient labour, etc. A system with plentiful and well distributed rainfall, fertile soil and a wide range of crops will be less sensitive to labour loss than one having limited rainfall, poor soils and a small range of crops.
Despite the appearance of excess population, subsistence agriculture often operates on the margin-labour may be in short supply at certain times and for specific tasks. This margin is rapidly disturbed when communities are affected by HIV/AIDS. The precise effect of the epidemic depends upon the particular combination of climate, soils, crops, and involvement in labour migration. Thus it is possible to describe different farming systems and their associated communities as more or less sensitive to the loss of labour.
At the farm household level in an existing farming system, the study also observed certain factors which make households - be they wealthy or poor - more or less susceptible to the effects of the disease. For example, a relatively wealthy household whose members are more mobile and who have more contact with, in particular urban centres, was sometimes found to be particularly susceptible to exposure and to contracting HIV/AIDS. As household members become ill and die, the family's resources are progressively strained and it may experience a severe fall in the standard of living. Similarly, a household which is already at or near subsistence level, is also vulnerable given that it has fewer resources to fall back on.
The loss of labour, the loss of household members to care for the very young and the elderly, increased numbers of dependent children, restriction of the range of crops grown, continue the downward spiral in living standards. In the households' efforts to cope, children may eat less well, receive less care, be withdrawn from school particularly in the case of young women who can fetch water and firewood, care for the younger children or the sick as well as work on the farm.
Figure 3: AIDS in the systems' hierarchy
Nowhere is this more so than in the case of women who are widowed. When a man dies, the ownership or cultivation rights to his land may be disputed by the wider family, leaving his widow and children landless and having to move away from the area. In a continent where few cultures accord women independent rights to land, their social and economic insecurity may be exacerbated by the impact of the epidemic.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 Methodology
2.1 Step I: vulnerability mapping of farming systems
2.2 Step II: selection of research areas
2.3 Step III: selection of national consultants and capacity building
2.4 Step IV: fieldwork
2.5 Step V: data analysis and report writing
This chapter describes the sequence and the method of the work. The procedure adopted is explained in a way that should enable similar studies to be repeated in any other country or area. Figure 4 shows the workplan of the whole exercise.
2.1 Step I: vulnerability mapping of farming systems
To examine the impact of HIV/AIDS on different farming systems the approach of Barnett & Blaikie (1992) was used. The underlying hypothesis is that not every farming system is equally vulnerable to the loss of labour. The degree to which a farming system is vulnerable to the HIV/AIDS pandemic depends upon a number of characteristics; most of these are linked to adaptations to the loss of labour. Farming areas with favourable agro-ecological conditions, which permit the growing of a wide range of crops and the keeping of livestock are less vulnerable than farming systems in marginal agro-ecological areas, where the range of crops grown is limited and which are already protein and energy deficient. Other factors of vulnerability are the seasonality of labour demand and the division of labour by gender and age. In addition, a significant degree of out-migration and the importance of soil conservation works, such as terracing, may also have an effect because such work is often
labour demanding.
Figure 4: Workplan of the study
Barnett and Blaikie developed an algorithm to classify the farming systems of Uganda as "not vulnerable, "moderately vulnerable", "most vulnerable" and "very vulnerable" on the basis of protein/ energy deficiency, labour supply and substitution of crops with less labour demanding crops. As a next step, a map of HIV incidence was laid over the map of farming systems. Accordingly, areas of both high labour vulnerability and a high HIV seroprevalence could then be identified.
For Zambia, the major farming systems have been described and classified in approximately the same way as was done in Uganda on the basis of labour and drought problems and on existing coping mechanisms (e.g. the use of less labour intensive crops, spreading labour peak demand periods, etc.). This farming systems map has not yet been overlaid with a Zambian seroprevalence map, because the latter is largely incomplete.
In Tanzania, regions, whose status in terms of relative food and energy availability had already been classified in the Comprehensive Food Security Study (1992), were mapped with the national sero-data. However, in this case labour peaks or the substitution of less labour intensive crops were not taken into account.
The quality of the vulnerability mapping is only as good as the available data. Comprehensive farming systems data covering the whole country is often not available or incomplete. Farming systems can also change rapidly over time due to population pressure, agricultural policy, changes in agro-ecological conditions and other factors. For the method to be effective, it is desirable that sero-data should cover the whole country, preferably disaggregated by district.
In practice, in most of the cases such data are incomplete or outdated or contain certain types of bias. For example, they may over-represent urban areas - such areas being easier to survey than rural areas. It should also be borne in mind that the seroprevalence maps do not reflect the current impact of the disease. Due to the long incubation period of the epidemic, high HIV rates in a given area provide only very limited indications of current morbidity or mortality. Tanzania is a case in point, where high levels or seroprevalence, are - with the exception of parts of Bukoba - accompanied by relatively low current rates of morbidity. One way of avoiding this problem would be to map the farming systems data with actual AIDS cases. In reality the statistics on AIDS cases are even more unreliable than on HIV rates due to underreporting. Therefore present vulnerability mapping can only give a first orientation and a rough guide to the selection of research areas. This must be
supplemented by ground-checking.
2.2 Step II: selection of research areas
The rationale for selecting the research communities was the identification of very vulnerable farming systems in combination with high HIV incidence. Apart from previous work undertaken in a specific area, security reasons, budgetary and logistic reasons were also taken into account. The farming systems of the selected areas in all three countries are briefly described below.
Maps showing the selected research areas can be found in Annex 1.
Uganda
Three communities were selected:
- Gwanda village in Rakai District
Classification: " not vulnerable "
Farming system description: located near Lake Victoria; 1140 mm annual rainfall; staples are bananas, cassava, sweet potatoes; beans and groundnuts are used as sauces or stews; coffee used to be an important cash crop, but has been neglected due ton decline in coffee prices; limited livestock keeping (poultry, and some goats and pigs); fishing activities; soils are mostly loams and clay loams with medium productivity.
The community was selected due to its very high seroprevalence rate and because Barnett & Blaikie had carried out a similar study in 1989 in the same community.
- Nakyerira community in northern Mubende District
Classification: "very vulnerable"
Farming system description: 1297 mm annual rainfall; vulnerable on both labour and protein criteria; the soils are acidic and infertile; sweet potatoes, cassava and maize are the predominant staples, livestock keeping is an important activity (cattle, pigs, goats and poultry); coffee was a dominant cash crop until 1980, today it is almost nonexistent; Irish potatoes are important cash and food crops.
- Ndaiga community in southern Iganga District
Classification: "very vulnerable"
Farming system description: located near Lake Victoria; 1200 mm annual rainfall; vulnerable on both protein and energy criteria; soils are young and fertile, the area has only been populated since the late 1960s; maize is a major food and cash crop; cassava is an additional major staple; fishing is limited as is the keeping of livestock; there is only a limited range of crops grown.
Tanzania
The rationale for the selection of the study areas in Tanzania was as follows. Farming systems in Tanzania are conventionally classified into six broad categories: coffee-banana, maize surplus, pastoralist, sorghum/millet-livestock, rice farming, and cassava. Mbeya and Tanga regions are two of the most heavily HIV-affected areas of the country apart from Kagera. Kagera was specifically omitted from the present study because both the World Bank and UNDP were either planning or executing similar studies in these areas. Within the selected regions, together with Rukwa, it was possible to find representative areas for most of the major farming systems, and including the estate and horticultural sectors. On this basis the following farming systems were selected:
Region Farming System
Rukwa: Main production systems: maize/legume/pulses; apart from maize which is generally in surplus, rice farming is also undertaken. Some 90 percent of the region's economically active population is engaged in subsistence agriculture. Limited cash crops are grown notably tobacco, some coffee, sunflower and cocoa (these later recently introduced as part of an effort to diversify crop production base).
Mbeya: The region has 13 agro-ecological zones mainly as a result of which a large variety of crops are grown and intercropping is widely practiced. Several communities within the region like Kyela, Rungwe, and Mbozi have high population densities and face land shortages. The production systems are characterised by pastoralism, smallholder paddy production and estate production. There is a high level of mobility partially as a result of the colonial period when parts of the Western, Southern and Southern highlands were designated as labour reserves for the plantation sector, the most dominant tribe in the region, the Nyakyusa continue to be highly mobile, thus the potential for the spread of HIV/AIDS is considerable.
Tanga: The region comprises four agro-ecological zones; the coastal plains, the inland plains, the highlands and plateau land. The research focused on the horticulture and cassava production systems but other crops are also grown like sisal, cashew nuts, coffee and tea. Ninety percent of the population work in the agricultural sector but only a relatively small amount of the total available land for crop and livestock development has been cultivated (some 17 percent). The region's population structure is characterised by a high ratio of men to women (while nationally there is a surplus of women to men).
Zambia
Two communities were selected. These were expected to have middle to high seroprevalence rates. The study was based on previous farming systems work carried out by the Adaptive Research Planning Team (ARPT). The communities were:
- Teta in Serenje District
Classification: "moderately vulnerable".
Farming system description: 1100 mm annual rainfall; hand hoe cultivation supplemented by oxen hire; finger millet as a chief staple; maize, sweet potatoes and cassava often supplement finger millet, maize meal is often purchased; chicken, beef and fish are purchased on occasion; maize is a main cash source, supplemented by beans and millet beer, Citemene is being replaced by hand-hoe ploughing.
The system, being based upon finger millet cultivation using the citemene system and thus being quite labour demanding would be affected by labour losses, however, cassava could be developed as a major staple. Hence the system was classified as being moderately vulnerable.
- Mpongwe in Ndola Rural District
Classification: "vulnerable"
Farming system description: 1300 mm annual rainfall; hand hoe cultivation supplemented by oxen and tractor hire; maize is the dominant starch crop with some sorghum which is also used for brewing beer; relish crops are grown together with maize, namely groundnuts and beans; cash sources are varied but include beer and fish, supplemented by maize, vegetables and chicken. The system is vulnerable to the effects of labour loss due to the insufficiency of draught power and the heavy labour inputs required to grow maize, the major staple. Large areas of land are required for maize sufficiency under this system.
2.3 Step III: selection of national consultants and capacity building
From the inception of this project, it was envisaged that national consultants and institutions from different disciplines would carry out the field studies. Full involvement of national consultants and institutions contributed to the success of the study in several ways. Although it was not the objective of the project to train nationals, in fact the research activities have contributed to a national capacity-building. As the link between HIV/AIDS and agriculture is a very new field of policy concern in all three countries, the national consultants who participated in the study are now among the first people in their countries with expertise and first-hand field experience of studying this problem. In addition to the background expertise which was gained, most of them (with the exception of the Zambian team which had considerable experience with the method) were using the Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) methods for the first time and thus extended their research capability.
Some of the national consultants are working as lecturers at universities where they have a forum to disseminate their knowledge to a wider audience.
2.4 Step IV: fieldwork
Various forms of the RRA method were used in all three countries. Although this is a qualitative method, efforts were made to collect some comparative quantitative information on production activities. Some of the methods used were participatory, but the exercise was essentially extractive rather than facilitative in nature, aiming at 'learning from outsiders' rather than the 'empowerment of local people' (Chambers, 1992).
The composition of the three teams varied considerably, from three people in Uganda and four in Tanzania to 25 in Zambia. But in each case, the team came from different disciplines, mostly agricultural, sociological and health fields. Apart from the Zambian team, the national researchers received a briefing in the conduct of RRA and the use of RRA tools.
During their fieldwork, the three teams used different techniques depending on the composition of the teams and their familiarity with RRA. The most common tools were:
- village walk and map
- the community transect
- farming calendar
- focus group discussions
- key informant interviews
- detailed case studies
In addition, the Ugandan team produced village demographic profiles and conducted social ranking exercises. The Zambian team elaborated a health time chart with the farmers. The amount of time taken for data collection ranged from 19 days in the case of the Zambian team to 40 days for the Tanzanian team.
While the approach used by each team is explained in more detail below, special attention is drawn to that used by the Zambian team because the ARPT has had more experience of RRA than the other two teams and has developed the RRA in some novel and effective ways.
The approach adopted by the Zambian team conforms with an intensive RRA approach which ARPT has been using in its analytical studies in the Central and Copperbelt Provinces. In all the farming systems work that ARPT has carried out in the last few years, the concept of cluster has formed the basis of the analyses undertaken. The reason for this is that rarely have households been found to exist as discrete social and economic units. Single households are usually connected to others in overlapping relationships which, if one is to make sense of them, require another analytical unit. This unit, the cluster, has been defined as:
"A group of producers between which there are multiple resource exchanges, usually based on the factors of kinship, labour and food exchange, and or common access to draught power." (Drinkwater, 1992)
Different terms are used to refer to different types of producer within a cluster. The primary producer household is that producer (and household) which produces the most food within the cluster and is primarily responsible for the food security of all the members. Secondary p