<section>e</section>
Acknowledgment
Acknowledgment
I am grateful to Dr. T. E. Contado, Chief, ESHE, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, and Chairman of my Advisory Committee, for his valuable guidance, constant encouragement, constructive criticism and untiring help in finalisation of this report.
I express my sincere gratitude to Dr. M. Randriamamonjy, Senior Officer, ESHW, and Dr. R. Adhikarya, Extension Education and Training Methodology Specialist, ESHE, FAO, Rome, for acting as members of the Advisory Committee and for providing useful suggestions for the design and analysis of the data of this research study.
I am grateful to the Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, for offering me this André Mayer research fellowship, giving me the opportunity to undertake this research and study this important subject, to work with people from different countries, and to learn how to use the computer during the study period.
I gratefully acknowledge the constant help and encouragement rendered by Dr. Pote Boonruang, Head, Rural Studies Centre, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand, Dr. Earl E. Timothy, Head & Director, Department of Agricultural Extension, University of the West Indies, the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago; Dr. Carol E. Williams, Professor and Head, Department of Agricultural Extension Services, University of Ibadan, Nigeria, and Mr. Rajab Ali, Director, Department of Agricultural Extension, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Syria, during the course of this investigation. I also acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Singthong, former Dean, K. U. Bangkok, Thailand, Dr. Sree Prasad, Professor, U. W. I, and Mrs. Meryl James Bryan, Director, Caribbean Net Work for Integrated Rural Development, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago; Dr. J. E. Olawoye, Assistant Professor, University of Ibadan, and Mrs. C. Nnonyely, Programme Leader Extension, VIA, Nigeria, Miss Rowyada Hasbani,
Chief, Rural Home Economics Division and Mrs. Bachira Taouakalna, Director of Women's Union, Syria, for their immense help, suggestions and encouragement during the course of this study.
I also express my gratitude to Mr. R. A. Maine, Fishery Industries Officer, Ms. Martina Haslwimmer, APO, AGSP, Mr Günter Hemrich, APO, ESHE, Mr. Stefan Schlingloff, APO, ESHA, and Mrs. R. Lobb Maltsoglou, Training Programmes Assistant, ESHE, FAO, for immense encouragement and inspiration during the course of study.
I honour the full co-operation, assistance and inspiration of Mr. Jean-Marc Meyour, Senior Officer, Fellowships Group, FAO, during the entire period of this investigation .
I would like to thank the Vice Chancellor of the Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam, India, for releasing me to take up the fellowship.
With deep sense of gratitude I must specially thank my husband, Dr. Bubul Das, for his understanding and my family members for their constant encouragement during the entire period of this investigation and preparation of this report.
Finally, I wish to thank all the people who have kindly responded to my queries. There are many officers both at FAO Headquarters and in different countries who have offered valuable suggestions. They are too numerous to list here, but will recognize their contributions to this study. Their help is very much appreciated.
Manju Dutta Das
An André Mayer Research Fellow
<title>Improving the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities for women farmers - An AndrÃ© Mayer research study</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
Since WCARRD, held in 1979, there has been greater emphasis on the reduction of poverty and improved nutrition and on increased self-reliance in rural areas, particularly at the household level. To achieve this, there have been efforts to improve the awareness of decision-makers and planners of the role played by women in agricultural production, marketing and rural development, and to better identify and respond to women's needs for training and access to inputs and services for food production and associated activities.
Mrs. Manju Dutta Das started working for the Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam, India as an Assistant Professor. Along with her colleagues and students she conducted a few short-term extension projects in areas such as kitchen gardening, fishery, poultry and duck rearing, sericulture, food processing, adult education, and energy conservation based on priority need areas of women farmers in the University adopted villages. However, the nature and extent of women farmer's participation in agricultural extension activities in different countries were not clear.
Because of her high qualifications and relevant experience, Mrs. Dutta Das was awarded an FAO André Mayer Research Fellowship by FAO and, for sixteen months starting from March 1993, explored some of the important factors for improving the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities in reaching the women farmers of Thai/and, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria. Selection of these four countries was based on the knowledge that they have a long history of general agricultural extension services to farming communities.
In connection Wit/? this study, Mrs. Dutta Das had discussions with related informed persons at various levels - ministries, research institutes and universities - of these four countries. The administrators at different levels of the extension departments in the ministries of agriculture provided current information on the various problems and constraints of agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers.
The FAO library in Rome and in different related institutes of the study countries (IITA, NISER and University of lbadan, Nigeria, Department of Sociology and Department of Extension Education, Kasetsart University, Thailand, CARDI, CNIRD, University of West Indies and the Information and Training Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Trinidad, and ICARDA in Syria) were also consulted for the collection of secondary information.
Due to a limited time period in each country (two months in each) and language constraints in three of the countries (excluding Trinidad), Mrs. Das designed her research instrument very carefully for primary data collection. The study has had limitations. But efforts were made to include the main problems that might affect the agricultural extension system in reaching women farmers who really need urgent attention.
The findings of this study confirm that women farmers are not a homogeneous group. They represent different situations which need to be considered as a useful factor in planning extension strategies. The nature and extent of their involvement in agriculture no doubt varies greatly from region to region. But regardless of these variations, the most important activities mainly performed by women farmers are planting, transplanting, weeding, harvesting, storage and food processing. Apart from Syria, most of the women farmers of three of the study countries engaged in the marketing of their farm produce. Decision-making patterns in farm activities seem to be changing and women have increasingly become an important partner for their husbands, except in one country. Despite their valuable contribution in agricultural production, women do not have easy access to agricultural resources, such as the required amount of cultivable land, tit/e of land ownership, improved farm
implements, improved seeds, fertilizers, chemicals, marketing outlets and credit. It was also observed that real problems and needs for agricultural advice are not considered on a gender basis when planning and preparing extension packages in the agricultural services, and a comparatively lower percentage of women farmers in Thailand and Trinidad participated in the programs than in Nigeria and Syria. Lack of address of women farmers explicitly as an important clientele group in respective extension programmed activities, lack of women us contact framers, lack of appropriate technology suitable for women farmers, the required amount of demonstration materials and equipment for the extension service, lack of appropriate training of field extension agents in extension methodology to serve women farmers, poor monitoring and evaluation systems and inadequate extension/research linkages are the most important factors which need to be improved to make agricultural extension
activities effective in reaching women farmers.
Throughout the study, Mrs. Das met with her advisory committee which consisted of Dr. Marie Randriamamonjy, Senior Officer in the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service, Dr. Ronny Adhikarya, Agricultural Extension, Education and Training Methodology Specialist, and myself as Chairman, who were able to assist her with problems in dealings with such a complex subject.
T. E. Contado, Chairman
André Mayer Research Fellow Advisory Committee and Chief; Agricultural Education and Extension Service
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
1. Statement of the problem
2. Need and justification for the study:
3. Objectives of the study:
I. Introduction
The crucial importance of women's contribution to food security in developing countries is widely recognized. In most developing countries, rural women are the mainstay of small-scale agriculture, the farm labour force and day-to-day family subsistence. Yet rural women are faced with a number of constraints. They have more difficulties than men in gaining access to land, credit and extension services. Development interventions to improve the economic roles of women have also so far had limited success. Up recently, the overriding concern of such interventions for rural women remained one of welfare and home economics programmes, mainly through women-specific projects or women's components in multi-purpose projects. In many cases, however, development projects have not taken adequate account of women's responsibilities, participation and priorities in their specific local conditions, constraining the achievement of the objectives of the programmes, or leading to negative
effects on women and families.
In recent years there has been an increasing recognition of the need to integrate women into mainstream development efforts. The economic rationale behind this approach is that the full use of productive potential of human resources (male and female) cannot be realized if women, who make substantial contributions to food output, do not have adequate access to resources, productivity enhancing inputs and services. This approach focuses on gender differences (gender = socially and culturally determined differences between men and women) primarily in division of labour in production, or income-earning activities, and access to and control over resources and assets. Gender analysis also involves the desegregation of women's roles and responsibilities by socioeconomic class, agro-ecological environment and farming system, culture and ethnic group and, for each of these categories, by age and marital status. This shift to a gender approach has been primarily due to the overriding
attention of governments to the need for socioeconomic policies to take into account the role of and the impact on women. Many governments are increasingly recognizing, for instance, that policies such as price incentives cannot be fully successful in stimulating agricultural production if the institutional arrangements prevent women producers from getting the benefits. The gender approach to integrate women into mainstream development has also been stimulated in part by the impetus created by and new directions given at the Nairobi World Conference (1985) to review and appraise the achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women.
Many studies show that in the efforts to generate household food supply and income, a substantial burden falls on women. Almost everywhere, women are responsible for processing, storing and preparing family food. Rural women also fetch water and firewood for the family. Above all, women are engaged as family labour in agriculture as well as wage labour and in other income-earning activities, and generate a substantial proportion and sometimes even all of the basic daily food for the family. They are usually responsible for small livestock, often for small ruminants and sometimes for large animals that are not on free range. In many countries women play an important role in fishing in shallow waters and in coastal lagoons.
It is also observed from many studies that, although there is a wide diversity in household production patterns, women in all regions play a predominant role in household food security through agricultural and food production. It is estimated that a significant proportion of women in developing countries spend up to two-thirds of their time in traditional agriculture and marketing. Their working hours tend to exceed those of men. Women in rural areas grow at least 50 % of the world's food. They work in all aspects of cultivation, including planting, thinning, weeding, applying fertilizer and harvesting. Women are also active in post-harvest activities and in livestock production.
In Africa, it is estimated that women represent from 30% to 80% of the agricultural labour depending on area and socio-economic class. In most parts of this region, women have been traditionally responsible for food crops and men for non-food cash crops. This division of labour between food crops and cash crops, however, is never clear cut. Often women help their men-folk in cash crop production.
The contribution of women to agricultural production and household food security in the Near East varies widely from country to country, but in many of the countries their contribution is substantial. Where permanent drought has forced men to migrate, women's participation in agricultural tasks that were traditionally done by men has increased. In some countries women perform laborious and repetitive tasks all the year round, whereas men work during ploughing and threshing periods only. In several other countries, irrigation, pest control and to a large extent fertilizer application are the exclusive tasks of men, while threshing and marketing are the exclusive tasks of women. In the region as a whole women are heavily involved in livestock, particularly small animal and dairy production (FAO, 1990).
In Asia, in nearly all rice-growing areas men traditionally perform such activities as preparation, ploughing, irrigation and leveling of the fields. However, sowing, transplanting and weeding are usually women's work. Harvesting and threshing and transporting of grain from fields to home is done by both men and women, while drying, cleaning and processing of the rice are done by women. A number of studies show that the contribution of women to agricultural production in terms of number of operations performed and number of hours worked is in most cases greater than that of men (FAO, 1990).
Women in Latin America also are heavily engaged in food production, but to a lesser degree than in Africa and Asia. Surveys in parts of Colombia and Peru show that female participation rates in agricultural field tasks range from 25% to 45%. Some studies show that, while in the more commercialized agricultural regions almost all households have at least one woman who participates in field work, female participation in the regions characterized by traditional agriculture is more in processing activities than in direct field work. Women in these regions have, however, a high participation rate in animal husbandry, which in some areas contributes as much as 30% of the household income (FAO, 1990).
In a paper prepared for the Seventh Session of the FAO Committee on Agriculture (COAG), Rome, Italy, 21-30 March 1983, it was shown that women made up an average of 42% of the agricultural labour force in 82 developing nations. In 24 of the countries surveyed, women made up over 50% of the agricultural work force and over 40% of the work force in 52 of the countries. Furthermore, the COAG (1983) paper also goes on to suggest that due to migration, the percentage of women involved in farming may even be increasing.
Women form a large segment of the agricultural work force. As such they deserve increased attention of agricultural extension services in every developing nation. There is a need for an action-oriented plan to reach the millions of women in agriculture who fill the bread baskets of the third world and contribute to their exports.
1. Statement of the problem
The 1983 COAG paper contains a great deal of data which clearly show that nearly half of the officially enumerated agricultural labour force in many developing countries are women. Studies also show that a significant proportion of women spend up to two-thirds of their time in traditional agriculture and in marketing. Their working hours tend to exceed those of men. In some countries women are the principal labour force on small farms and perform the major share of hoeing weeding transporting storing processing and marketing. Their share in cash crop farming is also significant. Yet agricultural extension networks often by-pass women producers. This means for women that they are disadvantaged and implies for governments that resources made available for extension work are not rationally used.
These facts were largely unrecognized by the international community prior to the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) held in 1979 which declared: "Rural development based on growth with equity will require full integration of women including equitable access to land water and other natural resources. inputs and services and equal opportunities to develop and employ their skills. There is also an urgent need to expand knowledge and statistical data on all aspects of women's roles in rural activities".
Following WCARRD there has been greater emphasis on the reduction of poverty and improved nutrition and on increased self-reliance in rural areas particularly at the household level. To this end there have been efforts to increase awareness among decision-makers and planners of the role played by women in agricultural production marketing and rural development and to better identity and respond to women's needs for training and access to inputs and services for food production and associated activities.
It is now fully recognised that agricultural extension services suffer from a number of weaknesses in their programmes for rural women. These include: (a) a focus on efficiency objectives and few 'progressive' farmers to the relative neglect of resource-poor term households women as heads of rural households and ladles households; (b) misperceptions and prejudices about women's actual and ideal roles with the result that they are often excluded from the target group of extension in areas in which they play major roles; (c) attempts by separate women's units staffed by people without agricultural backgrounds to implement technical agricultural projects; (d) a gender bias among extension workers; and (e) inappropriate extension methodology for reaching rural women (quoted from FAO 1987).
Historically scientific knowledge and technical skills of any given population or society spread significantly through formal and non-formal (including agricultural extension) education systems. However this does not consistently happen among rural women. In agricultural countries complex socio-economic socio-cultural and religious factors need to be analyzed and understood for developing effective extension and training programmes to reach women farmers. What is the actual situation and what are the problems and solutions related to improving the effectiveness of agricultural extension programmes for the benefit of women in agricultural countries? What strategies and lines of action can be recommended to governments and external development agencies so that present and future generations of rural women in agricultural countries apply scientific knowledge and use improved agricultural techniques and skills in their farm work? These are questions that need to be answered
through this proposed research.
2. Need and justification for the study:
There is some evidence to support the contention that small farmers in general, and women farmers in particular, are not being well served by the existing extension systems in developing countries . A recent FAO study of extension services in Asia and Africa concurs with this observation, concluding that: "in very few countries has an adequate organizational solution been found for advising rural women who not only work at home, but also in the fields" (von Blackenburg, 1984). The failure to reach women farmers is part of an overall problem related to a lack of support and resources. In looking at women farmers as a neglected segment of the farming community, the realities of life in many less developed nations must be realistically addressed. With some extension workers being assigned to work with as many as 1000 farm families, the need for policy review is obvious. Just as obvious is the need to remember that each country has its own specific problems. Generalizations
offer much food for thought, but little basis for action. Specific situations need to be reviewed and perspective action on a country-by-country basis needs to be taken. The important contribution made by women in agriculture justifies the necessity to make the system more equitable. The above background, therefore, provides the necessary basis and justification for this research study.
3. Objectives of the study:
The following are the specific objectives of the present study:
i) to develop a concrete understanding of women farmers as clientele of the agricultural extension system;
ii) to determine the capacity of the agricultural extension service to provide advisory services to women farmers;
iii) to make an analysis of the agricultural extension programmes and the extent of women farmers' participation;
iv) to determine the constraints of the agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers;
v) to make some suggestions to improve the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities in reaching women farmers.
<section>3</section>
II. Review of literature
1. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Sub-Saharan Africa
2. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Asia
3. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Latin America
4. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in the Near East
II. Review of literature
Women's productive role in agriculture and their access to agricultural extension services in different regions of the developing world have been evident from various reports of international organizations and agencies, literature and research studies. An attempt is made in this section to critically discuss the reviews in order to highlight the research gaps. Hence, they are categorized into four groups in order to obtain a geographic overview of women farmers in farm activities.
1. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Sub-Saharan Africa
Technical Centre for Agriculture and Rural Cooperation (CTA, 1993) reported that women in Africa make up more than one-third of the work force. They account for 70% of agricultural workers, 80% of food producers, 100% of those who process basic foodstuffs and they undertake from 60% to 90% of the marketing.
Further, they come up against all sorts of difficulties in their attempts to be seen as agents for development in their own right. First and foremost, they have no land ownership rights. In some communities, they have only annual rights of use of individual fields given to them by the head of the household. Studies have shown that the majority of rural women obtained their farm land from their husbands or his family. Often this land is "given" to the women for a short period, perhaps just one growing season (Ishola, 1987; Aidoo, 1988; Eghugara, 1989; Olawoye 1989 and Modupe, 1990). In general, they cannot make any long-term improvements to the land, such as planting perennial fruit crops, arranging irrigation facilities, etc. In 84% of water and land conservation schemes through which land has been reclaimed, only six per cent of women have been able to acquire official ownership.
It was also stated that women do not usually attract the attention of credit brokers since the loans they request are often small and are costly to administer. Often credit systems use existing village cooperatives of which usually only the male heads of households are members, even though there is no formal bar to female membership. The final obstacle to obtaining credit for women is that illiterate women cannot complete the necessary bank loan forms. Although these days African primary schools have as many female pupils as male, the rate of illiteracy among women is still above 90% in 28 African countries, according to UNESCO figures (CTA, 1993).
All the project training tends to be oriented towards crops traditionally grown by men. Timetables take no account of women's chores such as looking after children, cooking, cutting wood and fetching water. In many countries cultural or religious factors play an important part in preventing women from receiving training. Trainers and agricultural extension agents are usually male and thus may not speak to, or get close to women. This is especially true in Muslim countries (CTA, 1993).
The international Labour organization (ILO) estimates that 78% of women in SSA and only 64% of men are economically active in agriculture (Buvinic and Lycette, 1988). Food production there has long been recognised as primarily a woman's activity, but women also participate increasingly in other agricultural activities such as processing, cash cropping, animal husbandry and marketing.
Women in West Africa play a pivotal role in agriculture, providing most farm labour and making the key decisions for many agricultural activities which can be documented from different studies conducted in various states of Nigeria (Gbolagade, 1987 and Folasade, 1991). Ohuegbe (1989) observed that women farmers contribute more to food production and family labour than men. It was estimated that over 95% of rural women are small-scale farmers who produce most of the food and bear the burden of day-to-day family subsistence. According to diagnostic surveys of the agricultural extension zones, women perform almost all the cultural operations in food production. Such operations as bush clearing and burning, ridge/mount making, planting, fertilization, weeding, harvesting, storage, processing and marketing are carried out by women. Women also have sole responsibility for cultivating compound farms (or gardens) where continuous cropping is done with household refuse.
Adekanye (1984) reported, from the time use study of men and women in rural areas, that women spent 30% of their time performing prescribed "prime" activities, such as child care and other housekeeping chores. Moreover, these women managed to spend almost an equal amount of time (about 8 hours compared to the men's 8.1 hours) on income-generating activities of farming, food processing and trading. Women's leisure time was an estimated 1.4 hours, or much less than half of the 3.4 hours which men devoted to leisure.
A time allocation study in one Gambian village reported that women performed 53% of the agricultural and 73% of domestic work, compared with 33% and 6% respectively for men (Baston 1987). Available data in Kenya indicate that women spend one-third of their working hours on food preparation and child care, which stretches their working day to 13-14 hours. Most of them are reported to spend 3 hours a day fetching water (World Bank, 1989a). Ishola (1987), Adewara (1988) ( I % in Bauci State) and Folasade (1991) identified a much lower percentage of women farmers than Oyo (24%), Kwara (23%) and Ondo (15.7%) as having membership in cooperative organizations.
Ishola (1987) further reported that knowledge about improved technologies was the main constraint in agricultural production, while lack of separate land and inadequate contact with extension agents were the main problems reported by Folasade, 1991.
Olawoye (1993) reported that lack of mobility, shortage of qualified female extension staff, lack of coordination between the Unified Extension System and Parallel Extension Services, inappropriate extension packages, lack of flexibility in extension strategies were the main constraints in extension services to women farmers.
Akinbode (1991) indicated that tasks that women performed on the family farm were different in some states from those they did on their personal farm. For instance, in Ogun, Gongola and Cross River states women performed production and marketing related roles both on family as well as on personal farms. On the other hand, the women in Kano and Niger States did not work on the family farm except for processing. More than 70% of the women farmers in Ogun Niger and Cross River State and 60% in Gongola State engaged actively in planting, weeding, harvesting, cleaning, application of fertilizers and transportation. He also reported that in Kano State very few Muslim purdah women (20%) engaged in production related roles. The study also revealed that the majority of women farmers of Ogun and Cross River States made their own decisions. In Gongola, Kano and Niger States, women farmers depended on their husbands. And a similar finding was also reported by Adeniji (1991) in Oyo
state. Furthermore, Akinbode (1991) indicated that the male agents reached more women farmers than their female counterparts. The proportion of contact of extension services with individual farmers was 61.5% in Ogun State, 45% in Gongola State, 23% in Cross River State, 79% in Kano State and Niger State. Attendance at training sessions and meetings was limited, except in Ogun State. It was also revealed that the extension agents required intensive and comprehensive training in fisheries, agro-forestry, and gender specific nonagricultural technologies.
Staudt (1978) revealed that female-managed farms are significantly less well served by extension services than are jointly-managed farms. Further he indicated that women's participation in farmer training was low due to lack of awareness of the availability of training and lack of transportation facilities to the training centre.
Chale (1991) identified some problems of women farmers in Nigeria in participating in agricultural development programmes. These were as follows: lack of demonstration equipment and teaching aids; insufficient and ineffective extension services to farm women; lack of training on gender specific tasks such as processing, preservation and storage; lack of basic infrastructure; inadequate training of extension agents; lack of appropriate technological and development information; inadequate use of existing women farmers' groups; inadequate coordination between national and international agencies; urban-directed flow of information; lack of access to credit; inadequate agricultural inputs; inadequate interaction between extensionists and technology generating centres; mobility problems and few women extensionists. Further, she revealed from her survey conducted in five pilot states of Nigeria that decision-making in agricultural activities in Niger state was fairly shared among
the family members while in Kano, Cross River and Gongola it was between husbands and wives. In Ogun state a large number of women farmers expressed their dominance in decision-making in most household and farm activities.
2. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Asia
In Asia, women provide much of the labour for the staple crop, rice. An in-depth study from Nepal (Acharya and Bennett, 1983) gives an unusually detailed picture of the labour contribution by sex for rice and other staples. It reports that women perform 66% of the labour involved in planting, 75% in weeding, and all of the cleaning and storage of rice. In the production of wheat, they contribute 66% of the work; for maize, 94%; for oil seeds, 85%; for millet, 94%. In addition, they make 42% of the agricultural production decisions and are most influential about seed selection and fertilizer use.
In Thailand, the number of women engaged in agriculture was 6.65 million. They are the major source of labour in subsistence agriculture (100%) and are engaged in various aspec