<title>Fruit and vegetable processing</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This bulletin offers practical information to persons interested in the processing of fruits and vegetables. It replaces AGS Bulletin No. 13 "Fruit Juice Processing", which was published in 1972. The new bulletin provides a much wider information base.
The publication starts with describing the general properties of fruits and vegetables, their chemical composition and nutritional values. Following a presentation of the factors that affect the deterioration of fruits and vegetables, various methods, traditional as well as modern for preservation of foods are presented. Auxiliary materials used in the preparation of fruit and vegetable products as well as adequate packaging materials are discussed.
Two major chapters are dedicated to the specific preservation technologies used for fruits and vegetables. These chapters contain the description of the processes to be used, machinery, processing time, temperatures, etc. They will provide technical personnel with useful and helpful information.
FAO will be delighted to receive your comments and provide you with any additional information that you may require. Address your enquiry to:
The Chief
Food and Agricultural Industries Service
Agricultural Services Division
FAO of the U.N.
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
<section>2</section>
Chapter I Introduction
1.1 General introduction
In developing countries agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. As such, it should be no surprise that agricultural industries and related activities can account for a considerable proportion of their output. Of the various types of activities that can be termed as agriculturally based, fruit and vegetable processing are among the most important.
Both established and planned fruit and vegetable processing projects aim at solving a very clearly identified development problem. This is that due to insufficient demand, weak infrastructure, poor transportation and perishable nature of the crops, the grower sustains substantial losses. During the post-harvest glut, the loss is considerable and often some of the produce has to be fed to animals or allowed to rot.
Even established fruit and vegetable canning factories or small/medium scale processing centres suffer huge loss due to erratic supplies. The grower may like to sell his produce in the open market directly to the consumer, or the produce may not be of high enough quality to process even though it might be good enough for the table. This means that processing capacities will be seriously underexploited.
The main objective of fruit and vegetable processing is to supply wholesome, safe, nutritious and acceptable food to consumers throughout the year.
Fruit and vegetable processing projects also aim to replace imported products like squash, yams, tomato sauces, pickles, etc., besides earning foreign exchange by exporting finished or semi-processed products.
The fruit and vegetable processing activities have been set up, or have to be established in developing countries for one or other of the following reasons:
* diversification of the economy, in order to reduce present dependence on one export commodity;
* government industrialisation policy;
* reduction of imports and meeting export demands;
* stimulate agricultural production by obtaining marketable products;
* generate both rural and urban employment;
* reduce fruit and vegetable losses;
* improve farmers' nutrition by allowing them to consume their own processed fruit and vegetables during the off-season;
* generate new sources of income for farmers/artisans;
* develop new value-added products.
<section>3</section>
1.2 Importance of fruit and vegetables in world agriculture
Fruit and vegetables represent an important part of world agriculture production; some figures are seen in Table 1.1.
TABLE 1.1 Fruit and Vegetable World Production, 1991
Crop (Fruit) Production, 1000 T
Total World Dev.ping all
Appies 39404 14847
Apricots 2224 1147
Avocados 2036 1757
Bananas 47660 46753
Citrus fruits NES 1622 1231
Cantaloupes and other melons 12182 8733
Dates 3192 3146
Grapes 57188 14257
Grapefruit and pomelo 4655 2073
Lemons and limes 6786 4457
Mangoes 16127 16075
Oranges 55308 40325
Peaches and nectarines 8682 2684
Pears 9359 4431
Papayas 4265 4205
Plantains 26847 26847
Plums 5651 1806
Pineapples 10076 9183
Raisins 1041 470
Tangerines, mandarines, clementines 8951 4379
Watermelons 28943 19038
Currants 536009 
Raspberries 369087 
Strawberries 2469117 342009
Beans, green 3213 1702
Cabbages 36649 15569
Cauliflower 5258 2269
Carrots 13511 4545
Chilies + peppers, green 9145 6440
Cucumbers and gherkins 13619 7931
Eggplants 5797 4608
Garlic 3102 2446
Onions, dry 27977 17128
Peas, green 4856 1038
Pumpkins, squash, gourds 7933 6245
(Dev.ping = Developing countries) Source: FAO Yearbook, 1991, FAO Production Yearbook, 1992
<section>4</section>
1.3 What fruit and vegetables can be processed?
Practically any fruit and vegetable can be processed, but some important factors which determine whether it is worthwhile are:
a. the demand for a particular fruit or vegetable in the processed form;
b. the quality of the raw material, i.e. whether it can withstand processing;
c. regular supplies of the raw material.
For example, a particular variety of fruit which may be excellent to eat fresh is not necessarily good for processing. Processing requires frequent handling, high temperature and pressure.
Many of the ordinary table varieties of tomatoes, for instance, are not suitable for making paste or other processed products. A particular mango or pineapple may be very tasty eaten fresh, but when it goes to the processing centre it may fail to stand up to the processing requirements due to variations in its quality, size, maturity, variety and so on.
Even when a variety can be processed, it is not suitable unless large and regular supplies are made available. An important processing centre or a factory cannot be planned just to rely on seasonal gluts; although it can take care of the gluts it will not run economically unless regular supplies are guaranteed.
To operate a fruit and vegetable processing centre efficiently it is of utmost importance to pre-organise growth, collection and transport of suitable raw material, either on the nucleus farm basis or using outgrowers.
1.4 Processing planning
The secret of a well planned fruit and vegetable processing centre is that it must be designed to operate for as many months of the year as possible. This means the facilities, the buildings, the material handling and the equipment itself must be inter-linked and coordinated properly to allow as many products as possible to be handled at the same time, and yet the equipment must be versatile enough to be able to handle many products without major alterations.
A typical processing centre or factory should process four or five types of fruits harvested at different times of the year and two or three vegetables. This processing unit must also be capable of handling dried/dehydrated finished products, juices, pickles, tomato juice, ketchup and paste, jams, jellies and marmalades, semi-processed fruit products.
Advanced planning is necessary to process a large range of products in varied weather and temperature conditions, each requiring a special set of manufacturing and packaging formulae. The end result of the efforts should be a well-managed processing unit with lower initial investment.
A unit which is sensibly laid out and where one requirement co-relates to another, with a sound costing analysis, leads to an integrated operation.
Instead of over-sophisticated machinery, a sensible simple processing unit may be required when planned production is not very large and is geared mainly to meet the demand of the domestic market.
1.5 Location
The basic objective is to choose the location which minimises the average production cost, including transport and handling.
It is an advantage, all other things being equal, to locate a processing unit near the fresh raw material supply. It is a necessity for proper handling of the perishable raw materials, it allows the processing unit to allow the product to reach its best stage of maturation and lessens injury from handling and deterioration from changes during long transportation after harvesting.
An adequate supply of good water, availability of manpower, proximity to rail or road transport facilities and adequate markets are other important requirements.
1.6 Processing systems
a. Small-Scale Processing. This is done by small-scale farmers for personal subsistence or for sale in nearby markets. In this system, processing requires little investment: however, it is time consuming and tedious. Until recently, small-scale processing satisfied the needs of rural and urban populations. However, with the rising rates of population and urbanisation growth and their more diversified food demands, there is need for more processed and diversified types of food.
b. Intermediate-Scale Processing. In this scale of processing, a group of small-scale processors pool their resources. This can also be done by individuals. Processing is based on the technology used by small-scale processors with differences in the type and capacity of equipment used. The raw materials are usually grown by the processors themselves or are purchased on contract from other farmers. These operations are usually located on the production site of in order to assure raw materials availability and reduce cost of transport. This system of processing can provide quantities of processed products to urban areas.
c. Large-Scale Processing. Processing in this system is highly mechanised and requires a substantial supply of raw materials for economical operation. This system requires a large capital investment and high technical and managerial skills. Because of the high demand for foods in recent years many large-scale factories were established in developing countries. Some succeeded, but the majority failed, especially in West Africa. Most of the failures were related to high labour inputs and relatively high cost, lack of managerial skills, high cost and supply instability of raw materials and changing governmental policies. Perhaps the most important reason for failure was lack of adequate quantity and regularity of raw material supply to factories. Despite the failure of these commercial operations, they should be able to succeed with better planning and management, along with the undertaking of more in-depth feasibility studies.
It can be concluded that all three types of processing systems have a place in developing countries to complement crop production to meet food demand. Historically, however, small and intermediate scale processing proved to be more successful than large-scale processing in developing countries.
1.7 Choice of processing technologies for developing countries
FAO maintains (in FAO, 1992c), that the basis for choosing a processing technology for developing countries ought to be to combine labour, material resources and capital so that not only the type and quantity of goods and services produced are taken into account, but also the distribution of their benefits and the prospects of overall growth. These should include:
a. increasing farmer/artisan income by the full utilisation of available indigenous raw material and local manufacturing of part or all processing equipment;
b. cutting production costs by better utilisation of local natural resources (solar energy) and reducing transport costs;
c. generating and distributing income by decentralising processing activities and involving different beneficiaries in processing activities (investors, newly employed, farmers and small-scale industry);
d. maximising national output by reducing capital expenditure and royalty payments, more effectively developing balance-of-payments deficits through minimising imports (equipment, packing material, additives), and maximising export-oriented production;
e. maximising availability of consumer goods by maximisation of high-quality, standard processed produce for internal and export markets, reducing post-harvest losses, giving added value to indigenous crops and increasing the volume and quality of agricultural output.
Knowledge and control of the means of production, local manufacturing of processing equipment and development of appropriate/new technologies and more suitable raw material for processing must all be better researched.
Decentralisation of activities must be maintained and coordinated. The introduction of more sophisticated processing equipment and packaging material must be subordinated to internal and export marketing references.
Choosing a technology solely to maximise profits can actually work against true development. Choice should also be based on a solid, long-term market opportunity to ensure viability.
The internal market should be given greater consideration, safeguarded and supported.
Training courses, at all levels, in processing and preservation of indigenous crops, must be expanded.
1.8 Fruit and vegetables - global marketing view
Fruit and vegetables - global marketing view
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2 General properties of fruit and vegetables; chemical composition and nutritional aspects; structural features
2.1 General properties
Fruit and vegetables have many similarities with respect to their compositions, methods of cultivation and harvesting, storage properties and processing. In fact, many vegetables may be considered fruit in the true botanical sense. Botanically, fruits are those portions of the plant which house seeds. Therefore such items as tomatoes, cucumbers, eggplant, peppers, and others would be classified as fruits on this basis.
However, the important distinction between fruit and vegetables has come to be made on an usage basis. Those plant items that are generally eaten with the main course of a meal are considered to be vegetables. Those that are commonly eaten as dessert are considered fruits. That is the distinction made by the food processor, certain marketing laws and the consuming public, and this distinction will be followed in this document.
Vegetables are derived from various parts of plants and it is sometimes useful to associate different vegetables with the parts of the plant they represent since this provides clues to some of the characteristics we may expect in these items. A classification of vegetables based on morphological features is seen in Table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1 Classification of Vegetables*
Category Examples
Earth vegetables roots sweet potatoes, carrots
modified stems tubers potatoes
modified buds bulbs onions, garlic
Herbage vegetables 
leaves cabbage, spinach, lettuce
petioles (leaf stalk) celery, rhubarb
flower buds cauliflower, artichokes
sprouts, shoots (young stems) asparagus, bamboo shoots
Fruit vegetables 
legumes peas, green beans
cereals sweet corn
vine fruits squash, cucumber
berry fruits tomato, egg plant
tree fruits avocado, breadfruit
Source: Feinberg (1973)
Fruit as a dessert item, is the mature ovaries of plants with their seeds. The edible portion of most fruit is the fleshy part of the pericarp or vessel surrounding the seeds. Fruit in general is acidic and sugary. They commonly are grouped into several major divisions, depending principally upon botanical structure, chemical composition and climatic requirements.
Berries are fruit which are generally small and quite fragile. Grapes are also physically fragile and grow in clusters. Melons, on the other hand, are large and have a tough outer rind. Drupes (stone fruit) contain single pits and include such items as apricots, cherries, peaches and plums. Pomes contain many pits, and are represented by apples, quince and pears.
Citrus fruit like oranges, grapefruit and lemons are high in citric acid. Tropical and subtropical fruits include bananas, dates, figs, pineapples, mangoes, and others which require warm climates, but exclude the separate group of citrus fruits.
The compositions of representative vegetables and fruits in comparison with a few of the cereal grains are seen in Table 2.2.
TABLE 2.2 Typical percentage composition of foods from plant origin Percentage Composition- Edible Portion
Food Carbo-hydrate Protein Fat Ash Water
Cereals
wheat flour, white 73.9 10.5 1.9 1.7 12
rice, milled, white 78.9 6.7 0.7 0.7 13
maize, whole grain 72.9 9.5 4.3 1.3 12
Earth vegetables
potatoes, white 18.9 2.0 0.1 1.0 78
sweet potatoes 27.3 1.3 0.4 1.0 70
Vegetables 
carrots 9.1 1.1 0.2 1.0 88.6
radishes 4.2 1.1 0.1 0.9 93.7
asparagus 4.1 2.1 0.2 0.7 92.9
beans, snap, green 7.6 2.4 0.2 0.7 89.1
peas, fresh 17.0 6.7 0.4 0.9 75.0
lettuce 2.8 1.3 0.2 0.9 94.8
Fruit
banana 24.0 1.3 0.4 0.8 73.5
orange 11.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 87.1
apple 15.0 0.3 0.4 0.3 84.0
strawberries 8.3 0.8 0.5 0.5 89.9
Source: Anon. (196O)
Compositions of vegetables and fruit not only vary for a given kind in according to botanical variety, cultivation practices, and weather, but change with the degree of maturity prior to harvest, and the condition of ripeness, which is progressive after harvest and is further influenced by storage conditions. Nevertheless, some generalisations can be made.
Most fresh vegetables and fruit are high in water content, low in protein, and low in fat. In these cases water contents will generally be greater than 70% and frequently greater than 85%.
Commonly protein content will not be greater than 3.5% or fat content greater than 0.5 %. Exceptions exist in the case of dates and raisins which are substantially lower in moisture but cannot be considered fresh in the same sense as other fruit. Legumes such as peas and certain beans are higher in protein; a few vegetables such as sweet corn which are slightly higher in fat and avocados which are substantially higher in fat.
Vegetables and fruit are important sources of both digestible and indigestible carbohydrates. The digestible carbohydrates are present largely in the form of sugars and starches while indigestible cellulose provides roughage which is important to normal digestion.
Fruit and vegetables are also important sources of minerals and certain vitamins, especially vitamins A and C. The precursors of vitamin A, including beta-carotene and certain other carotenoids, are to be found particularly in the yellow-orange fruit and vegetables and in the green leafy vegetables.
Citrus fruit are excellent sources of vitamin C, as are green leafy vegetables and tomatoes. Potatoes also provide an important source of vitamin C for the diets of many countries. This is not so much due to the level of vitamin C in potatoes which is not especially high but rather to the large quantities of potatoes consumed.
<section>6</section>
2.2 Chemical composition
2.2.1 Water
Vegetal cells contain important quantities of water. Water plays a vital role in the evolution and reproduction cycle and in physiological processes. It has effects on the storage period length and on the consumption of tissue reserve substances.
In vegetal cells, water is present in following forms:
* bound water or dilution water which is present in the cell and forms true solutions with mineral or organic substances;
* colloidal bound water which is present in the membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus and acts as a swelling agent for these colloidal structure substances; it is very difficult to remove during drying/dehydration processes;
* constitution water, directly bound on the chemical component molecules and which is also removed with difficulty.
Vegetables contain generally 90-96% water while for fruit normal water content is between 80 and 90%.
2.2.2 Mineral substances
Mineral substances are present as salts of organic or inorganic acids or as complex organic combinations (chlorophyll, lecithin, etc.); they are in many cases dissolved in cellular juice.
Vegetables are more rich in mineral substances as compared with fruits. The mineral substance content is normally between 0.60 and 1.80% and more than 60 elements are present; the major elements are: K, Na, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Al, P. Cl, S.
Among the vegetables which are especially rich in mineral substances are: spinach, carrots, cabbage and tomatoes. Mineral rich fruit includes: strawberries, cherries, peaches and raspberries. Important quantities of potassium (K) and absence of sodium chloride (NaCl) give a high dietetic value to fruit and to their processed products. Phosphorus is supplied mainly by vegetables.
Vegetables usually contain more calcium than fruit; green beans, cabbage, onions and beans contain more than 0.1% calcium. The calcium/phosphorus or Ca/P ratio is essential for calcium fixation in the human body; this value is considered normal at 0.7 for adults and at 1.0 for children. Some fruit are important for their Ca/P ratio above 1.0: pears, lemons, oranges and some temperate climate mountain fruits and wild berries.
Even if its content in the human body is very low, iron (Fe) has an important role as a constituent of haemoglobin. Main iron sources are apples and spinach.
Salts from fruit have a basic reaction; for this reason fruit consumption facilitates the neutralisation of noxious uric acid reactions and contributes to the acid-basic equilibrium in the blood.
2.2.3 Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are the main component of fruit and vegetables and represent more than 90% of their dry matter. From an energy point of view carbohydrates represent the most valuable of the food components; daily adult intake should contain about 500 g carbohydrates.
Carbohydrates play a major role in biological systems and in foods. They are produced by the process of photosynthesis in green plants. They may serve as structural components as in the case of cellulose; they may be stored as energy reserves as in the case of starch in plants; they may function as essential components of nucleic acids as in the case of ribose; and as components of vitamins such as ribose and riboflavin.
Carbohydrates can be oxidised to furnish energy, and glucose in the blood is a ready source of energy for the human body. Fermentation of carbohydrates by yeast and other microorganisms can yield carbon dioxide, alcohol, organic acids and other compounds.
Some properties of sugars. Sugars such as glucose, fructose, maltose and sucrose all share the following characteristics in varying degrees, related to fruit and vegetable technology:
* they supply energy for nutrition;
* they are readily fermented by micro-organisms;
* in high concentrations they prevent the growth of micro-organisms, so they may be used as a preservative;
* on heating they darken in colour or caramelise;
* some of them combine with proteins to give dark colours known as the browning reaction.
Some properties of starches:
* They provide a reserve energy source in plants and supply energy in nutrition;
* they occur in seeds and tubers as characteristic starch granules.
Some properties of celluloses and hemicelluloses:
* They are abundant in the plant kingdom and act primarily as supporting structures in the plant tissues;
* they are insoluble in cold and hot water;
* they are not digested by man and so do not yield energy for nutrition;
* the fibre in food which produces necessary roughage is largely cellulose.
Some properties of pectins and carbohydrate gums.
* Pectins are common in fruits and vegetables and are gum-like (they are found in and between cell walls) and help hold the plant cells together;
* pectins in colloidal solution contribute to viscosity of the tomato paste;
* pectins in solution form gels when sugar and acid are added; this is the basis of jelly manufacture.
2.2.4 Fats
Generally fruit and vegetables contain very low level of fats, below 0.5%. However, significant quantities are found in nuts (55%), apricot kernel (40%), grapes seeds (16%), apple seeds (20%) and tomato seeds (18%).
2.2.5 Organic acids
Fruit contains natural acids, such as citric acid in oranges and lemons, malic acid of apples, and tartaric acid of grapes. These acids give the fruits tartness and slow down bacterial spoilage.
We deliberately ferment some foods with desirable bacteria to produce acids and this give the food flavour and keeping quality. Examples are fermentation of cabbage to produce lactic acid and yield sauerkraut and fermentation of apple juice to produce first alcohol and then acetic acid to obtain vinegar.
Organic acids influence the colour of foods since many plant pigments are natural pH indicators.
With respect to bacterial spoilage, a most important contribution of organic acids is in lowering a food's pH. Under anaerobic conditions and slightly above a pH of 4.6, Clostridium botulinum can grow and produce lethal toxins. This hazard is absent from foods high in organic acids resulting in a pH of 4.6 and less.
Acidity and sugars are two main elements which determine the taste of fruit. The sugar/acid ratio is very often used in order to give a technological characterisation of fruits and of some vegetables.
2.2.6 Nitrogen-containing substances
These substances are found in plants as different combinations: proteins, amino acids, amides, amines, nitrates, etc. Vegetables contain between 1.0 and 5.5 % while in fruit nitrogen-containing substances are less than 1% in most cases.
Among nitrogen containing substances the most important are proteins; they have a colloidal structure and, by heating, their water solution above 50°C an one-way reaction makes them insoluble. This behaviour has to be taken into account in heat processing of fruits and vegetables.
From a biological point of view vegetal proteins are less valuable then animal ones because in their composition all essential amino-acids are not present.
2.2.7 Vitamins
Vitamins are defined as organic materials which must be supplied to the human body in small amounts apart from the essential amino-acids or fatty acids.
Vitamins function as enzyme systems which facilitate the metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates and fats but there is growing evidence that their roles in maintaining health may extend yet further.
The vitamins are conveniently divided into two major groups, those that are fat-soluble and those that are water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins are A, D, E and K. Their absorption by the body depends upon the normal absorption of fat from the diet. Water-soluble vitamins include vitamin C and several members of the vitamin B complex.
Vitamin A or Retinol.
This vitamin is found as such only in animal materials - meat, milk, eggs and the like. Plants contain no vitamin A but contain its precursor, beta-carotene. Man needs either vitamin A or beta-carotene which he can easily convert to vitamin A. Beta-carotene is found in the orange and yellow vegetables as well as the green leafy vegetables, mainly carrots, squash, sweet potatoes, spinach and kale.
A deficiency of vitamin A leads to night blindness, failure of normal bone and tooth development in the young and diseases of epithelial cells and membrane of the nose, throat and eyes which decrease the body's resistance to infection.
Vitamin C.
Vitamin C is the anti-scurvy vitamin. Lack of it causes fragile capillary walls, easy bleeding of the gums, loosening of teeth and bone joint diseases. It is necessary for the normal formation of the protein collagen, which is an important constituent of skin and connective tissue. Like vitamin E, vitamin C favours the absorption of iron.
Vitamin C, also known as ascorbic acid, is easily destroyed by oxidation especially at high temperatures and is the vitamin most easily lost during processing, storage and cooking.
Excellent sources of vitamin C are citrus fruits, tomatoes, cabbage and green peppers. Potatoes also are a fair source (although the content of vitamin C is relatively low) because we consume large quantities of potatoes.
2.2.8 Enzymes
Enzymes are biological catalysts that promote most of the biochemical reactions which occur in vegetable cells.
Some properties of enzymes important in fruit and vegetable technology are the following:
* in living fruit and vegetables enzymes control the reactions associated with ripening;
* after harvest, unless destroyed by heat, chemicals or some other means, enzymes continue the ripening process, in many cases to the point of spoilage - such as soft melons or overripe bananas;
* because enzymes enter into a vast number of biochemical reactions in fruits and vegetable, they may be responsible for changes in flavour, colour, texture and nutritional properties;
* the heating processes in fruit and vegetables manufacturing/processing are designed not only to destroy micro-organisms but also to deactivate enzymes and so improve the fruit and vegetables' storage stability.
Enzymes have an optimal temperature - around +50°C where their activity is at maximum. Heating beyond this optimal temperature deactivates the enzyme. Activity of each enzyme is also characterised by an optimal pH.
In fruit and vegetable storage and processing the most important roles are played by the enzymes classes of hydrolases (lipase, invertase, tannase, chlorophylase, amylase, cellulase) and oxidoreductases (peroxidase, tyrosinase, catalase, ascorbinase, polyphenoloxidase).
2.2.9 Turgidity and texture
The range of textures that are encountered in fresh and cooked vegetables and fruit is indeed great, and to a large extent can be explained in terms of changes in specific cellular components. Since plants tissues generally contain more than two-thirds water, the relationships between these components and water further determine textural differences.
Cell Turgidity. - Quite apart from other contributing factors, the state of turgidity, determined by osmotic forces, plays a paramount role in the texture of fruit and vegetables. The cell walls of plant tissues have varying degrees of elasticity and are largely permeable to water and ions as well as to small molecules.
The membranes of the living protoplast are semi-permeable, that is they allow passage of water but are selective with respect to transfer of dissolved and suspended materials.
The cell vacuoles contain most of the water in plant cells and sugars, acids, salts, amino acids, some water-soluble pigments and vitamins, and other low molecular weight constituents are dissolved in this water.
In the living plant, water taken up by the roots passes through the cell walls and membranes into the cytoplasm of the protoplasts and into the vacuoles to establish a state of osmotic equilibrium within the cells.
The osmotic pressure within the cell vacuoles and within the protoplasts pushes the protoplasts against the cell walls and causes them to stretch slightly in accordance with their elastic properties. This is the situation in the growing plant and the harvested live fruit or vegetable which is responsible for desired plumpness, succulence, and much of the crispness.
When plant tissues are damaged or killed by storage, freezing, cooking, or other causes, an important major change that results is denaturation of the proteins of cell membranes resulting in the loss of perm-selectivity. Without perm-selectivity the state of osmotic pressure in cell vacuoles and protoplasts cannot exist, and water and dissolved substances are free to diffuse out of the cells and leave the remaining tissue in a soft and wilted condition.
Other Factors Affecting Texture. The existence of a high degree of turgidity in live fruit and vegetables or whether a relative state of flabbiness develops from loss of osmotic pressure as well as final texture depends on several cell constituents.
Cellulose, Hemicellulose, and Lignin. Cell walls in young plants are very thin and are composed largely of cellulose. As the plant ages cell walls tend to thicken and become higher in hemicellulose and in lignin. These materials are fibrous and tough and are not significantly softened by cooking.
Pectic Substances. The complex polymers of sugar acid derivatives include pectin and closely related substances. The cement-like substance found especially in the middle lamella which helps hold plant cells to one another is a water-insoluble pectic substance.
On mild hydrolysis it yields water-soluble pectin which can form gels or viscous colloidal suspensions with sugar and acid. Certain water-soluble pectic substances also react with metal ions, particularly calcium, to form water-insoluble salts such as calcium pectates. The various pectic substances may influence texture of vegetables and fruits in several ways.
When vegetables or fruit are cooked, some of the water-insoluble pectic substance is hydrolysed into water-soluble pectin. This results in a degree of cell separ