<title>ESTUDIO MONOGRAFICO DE EXPLOTACION FORESTAL 3. Use of construction crane for wood extraction on mountainous terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
This study is one in a series of case studies being un-dertaken by the FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch as part of its efforts to promote environmentally sound and sustainable forest practices in both natural and plantation forests. The main objective of these case studies is to document successful operations which have the potential to improve forest utilization, reduce wood waste in the forests, and minimize environmental impacts associated with harvesting operations.
This report documents a study on the use of construction crane for wood extraction in mountainous terrain in Austria, providing information on the advantages and limitations of this type of low impact harvesting system.
The aim of this study is to draw attention to forest harvesting specialists in countries where an abundance of building cranes exist which could be favourably employed for forest operations in areas with good road development standards and where special silvicultural prescriptions have to be applied such as those safeguarding advanced forest regeneration and extracting single tree stems in selective cuts from old growth forests. The study proposed that extracting tree length stems or whole trees proved technically feasible with little or no damage to the younger trees of the remaining stand as well as to the soil.
The use of building cranes in wood harvesting in hilly to steep terrain offers a further means of extracting wood in an environmentally sound manner in order to promote sustainable forest practice and management.
The study also provides indicative figures on productivity and costs, along with suggestions for possible use in combination with wood processors.
On the back cover page of this publication is a list of case studies which have been published to date in the series of FAO Forest Harvesting Case Studies.
We would like to thank the staff of the Department of Forest Engineering of the University of Agriculture, Vienna, for their research in this innovative type of forest operation which could be applied in numerous countries with underutilized machinery in the building industry; such machinery could be put to good use in forest operations.
Rudolf Heinrich
Chief
FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch
<section>2</section>
SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
kg = kilogram
km = kilometre
kN = kilonewton
kW = kilowatt
l = litre
m = metre
m^3 = cubic metre
min = minute
mm = millimetre
t = metric ton
Abbreviations
DBH = diameter at breast height
Exchange rate applied (as of March 1994)
US$ 1 = AS 12.00 (Austrian schilling)
APPENDIX 1. Slides 34
APPENDIX 2. Glossary 38
<section>3</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Austria is a mountainous country rich in forests: 46% of the land area is covered with forests dominated by coniferous trees; only 36% are broad-leafed and mixed forests. The annual increment in timber is estimated by the forest inventory at about 19 million m^3, while the annual harvesting is only approximately 12 million m^3 due to the absence of thinning in forest properties which are not managed by expert forest staffs. Another reason for the deficiency is the increase in production forests under irregular management and in protection forests which are sometimes badly opened up by forest roads, so that harvesting cannot be executed at reasonable costs.
According to the size of forest enterprises one can find different harvesting systems in Austria. On the one hand, especially in farmer-owned forest areas, trees are felled and cross-cut by chain-saws and transported by agricultural tractors more or less well adapted for wood extraction; on the other hand, highly and fully mechanized harvesting systems are also used.
Since air pollution and other man-made impacts affect the forest ecosystems - in addition to damages caused by abiotic and biotic factors - changes in silviculture and harvesting techniques became obligatory.
The purpose of this case study is to assess the productivity and costs of a wood harvesting system appropriate to silvicultural systems that provide natural regeneration.
The study was carried out by the Department of Forest Engineering whose head is Univ. Prof. Dipl.-Ing. Anton Trzesniowski, University of Agriculture - Vienna, Austria. The field work was carried out by a team consisting of Dr. Norbert Winkler and Dipl.-Ing. Karl Stampfer in cooperation with Dipl.-Ing. Christoph Habsburg - Lothringen on his private forest enterprise. Dr. Norbert Winkler prepared the report.
<section>4</section>
2. LOCATION OF THE CASE STUDY
The study was carried out in a private forest enterprise in Carinthia, the southernmost federal state of Austria. The forest estate amounts to approximately 2 500 ha; the stands - between 400 m and 1 450 m in altitude - are stocking on different types of soil developed from granitic rock. The harvesting operations observed were regeneration fellings, chosen to stimulate existing natural regeneration, which were part of planned harvest cuts.
Forest accessibility is provided by approximately 55 m of road per ha with a formation width of 6 m, carriageway width of 4 m, and types of construction corresponding to the usual forest road standard in Austria. Considering the utilization of forest roads by construction cranes it should be mentioned that the axle loads and gross vehicle weights of cranes appropriate for logging operations should not be higher than those of loaded timber trucks. The bearing capacities of forest roads might be exceeded by the high axle loads of such vehicles during wet seasons, and therefore this has to be considered when planning logging and hauling operations.
The two study areas where regeneration felling took place were located between 470 m and 480 m in altitude and the terrain varied from 15% on the one area to between 20% and 30% slope gradients on the other. But it is important to emphasize that flat terrain is not a precondition for the use of construction cranes. Just the opposite is true: their use will be recommended for harvest cut areas where natural regeneration has to be preserved; the slope gradient or rocks and other obstacles require that felled trees or logs be transport "lifted" to the forest road where they will be handled by the wood processor or manually delimbed and bucked by means of chain-saws.
In this enterprise, articulated four-wheeled skidders were usually used for logging up to a slope gradient of about 20% uphill and 40% downhill. Above these slope gradients cable systems were used.
When the construction crane was first set up, in study area A, only assortments were transported according to the weight and height of the trees; otherwise the permissible load weight would have been exceeded and the young trees forming the natural regeneration - with an average age of 15 years and 4 to 10 m in height - might have been badly damaged because of the limited hook height of the crane (see Photo 1).
Photo 1. Stand before harvesting.
At the second study area, B, the natural regeneration was much smaller (about 2 m) so whole trees could be transported by the crane, except that there was the danger of exceeding the permissible load weight which would have caused delays during the logging phase; this would have made it necessary to cross-cut the trees once. In this case the fellers cross-cut the trees at a height of about 12 to 16 m depending on the lowest branches so that no delimbing with the chain-saw was necessary at the felling site.
Table 1 gives the stand characteristics for the study areas before harvesting.
Table 1. Stand characteristics of the study areas.
Average
Study
area
Stand
(age, years)
Volume
m^3/ha
Trees/ha
Volume m3
DBH cm
Height m
A
Picea abies (105)
+ some Pinus silvestris
B
Picea abies (75)
+ some Abies alba
(Values per hectare apply to full stocking.)
Table 2 shows the different conditions for logging at both study areas.
Table 2. Logging conditions.
Study
Set-
Load volume [m^3]
Length of load [m]
Logging distance [m]
Number
area
up No.
mean (min/max)
mean (min/max)
mean (min/max)
of loads
A
B
Total
At study area A only assortments, mainly long logs, were extracted; at study area B trees, tree tops and long logs were transported by the construction crane.
<section>5</section>
3. EQUIPMENT
The equipment for the harvesting system, described in the following pages, consists of chain-saws for felling, a construction crane for logging and a wood processor for processing, which includes delimbing and bucking the trees and their piling.
3.1. Construction crane
The construction crane FAUN RTF 40-3 was used for logging during this study because of its weight, lifting capacity, high manoeuvrability and suitable dimensions (see Photo 2). This construction crane is also suitable for the worker because it meets ergonomic principles and requirements. Its design and safety features assure convenient and safe operation, which are prerequisites for the operator's sustained performance.
Photo 2. The FAUN RTF 40-3 is a 3 axle all-terrain crane with a telescoping boom.
The FAUN RTF 40-3 is a 3 axle all-terrain crane with a telescoping boom. Due to its width, turning radius and high manoeuvrability this crane can certainly be used, during dry seasons or when the ground is frozen, on all forest roads meeting the usual standards (see Photo 3). Problems concerning the road-bearing capacities might occur during wet seasons, but as mentioned above, this is not a specific problem for the crane vehicle.
Photo 3. Usual forest road standard (formation width of 6 m, carriageway width of 4 m).
Once the driver has reached the area where the crane is to be set up, he must manoeuvre the vehicle so that it stands at a right angle to the road center line; this will provide maximum machine stability during the supported operation. The front of the vehicle should be pointing opposite to the work area since over-front lifting might damage the driver's cab if the lifted load begins to swing.
When the vehicle is in the correct position, the outriggers must be extended so as to support the operation, thereby providing maximum lifting capacities. The outriggers must be set up on firm level ground; square-sawn timber between outriggers and ground provides a level surface and helps to distribute the pressure evenly so that ground damage or shearing failure might not occur (see Photo 4).
Photo 4. Extended outriggers for supported operation.
If the carriageway width is not adequate (distance between 1st and 3rd axle = 4.15m) the outriggers next to the driver's cab must be set up on forest ground which might have to be prepared so as to be level (about 1 square meter for each outrigger).
After joining the hoisting equipment to the hook-block of the stabilized machine the telescoping boom will be extended (maximum boom length 30 m and maximum radius of action 28 m (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Radius from center of rotation and hook height above ground.
Specifications given by the manufacturer of the all-terrain crane FAUN RTF 40-3 with optional all-wheel drive:
width of vehicle
2.50 m
width of vehicle with extended outriggers
6.28 m
length of vehicle
8.45 m
length of vehicle with lowered boom
11.21 m
height of vehicle with lowered boom
3.35 m
distance between 1st and 2nd axle
1.70 m
distance between 1st and 3rd axle
4.15 m
Axle loads with complete counterweight (metric tons):
1st axle
10.65 t
3rd axle
11.50 t
2nd axle
10.65 t
Gross vehicle weight
32.80 t
Max. speed
70 km/h
Gradability
Hoisting rope (diam-eter)
16 mm
Ultimate strength
170 kN
Max. rope pulling power
45 kN
Hoisting rope (length) 160 m
Main hoisting line speed (4th layer)
0 - 60 m/min
High speed
0 - 120 m/min
Auxiliary hoisting line speed
Hook-block
Hoisting equipment
0 - 80 m/min
75 kg
~ 13 kg
Different steering possibilities assure high manoeuvrability and permit different turning radii of the vehicle (see Figure 2).
Figure 2. Steering possibilities (schematic); turning radius for vehicle (A) 10.6 m; (B) 8.6 m; (C) cannot be turned because all wheels point in one direction.
Some examples of lifting capacities of the telescoping boom (with complete counterweight of 6.6 t, slewing range of 360_, with outriggers), stated by the manufacturer, are given in Table 3. This shows that the lifting capacity depends on the telescoping condition, which is determined by the immediate boom length, so in case a log or tree exceeds the permissible weight it can first be pulled with "raised head" and then with decreasing distance the whole tree can be lifted since lifting capacity is therefore increased.
Table 3. Lifting capacities (85%) for the FAUN RTF 40-3 in metric tons.
Radius
Boom lengths
(m)
9.30 m
16.20 m
23.10 m
28.60 m
30.00 m
telesc. 1
telesc. 2
telesc. 3
telescoping conditions (%)
"Lifting capacities of 85%" means that these lifting capacities do not exceed 85% of the tipping load,
but it must be mentioned that wind and dynamic interferences decrease the lifting capacities.
The hoisting equipment used consisted of two 6 m long ropes with log tongs of different sizes on the one end and were connected with a loop on the other end to a 6 m long synthetic sling which was joined to the hook-block. The hook-block hangs on a rope about 5 m from the top of the boom, thereby increasing the effective radius of action to approximate-ly 45 m, depending on the slope of the terrain.
If the trees are felled to point toward the location where the construction crane is set up, the distance which the crane can cover consists of the extraction distance plus the length of the felled trees, so in our first case, study area A, where the sites for setting up the crane were on the forest road, the extraction distance amounted to 70 m. Provided the terrain is accessible as in study area B, the crane can be situated a whole boom length from the road so that the extraction distance increases to about 90 - 100 m (see Photo 5).
Photo 5. The construction crane can be set up at the felling site, provided the terrain is accessible and the ground is frozen.
The extraction distance mentioned above is limited by the weight of the hook-block and hoisting equipment, which cannot be manoeuvred easily by one assistant alone, and, considering labour costs, a second worker employed to pull out this equipment cannot be recommended in a country like Austria where labour costs are high.
The alternative to using a lighter hook-block is limited because the block needs a minimum weight so that the rope can be extracted. The only way was to reduce the weight of the hoisting equipment by the use of a synthetic sling and two ropes instead of iron chains which were used when the first attempts at logging with construction cranes took place, but not dealt with in this study. It should be noted that a heavier than necessary hook-block should not be used. This would diminish the optimum load weight since lifting capacity = actual load + hook-block + hoisting equipment.
A significant advantage of the FAUN RTF 40-3 and other comparable types of construction cranes is the fully automatic overload protection device. In case the tension exceeds the permissible boom tension, all functions will be shut off automatically so that the safety hazard is reduced to a minimum. The boom has to be retracted thereafter or aligned once more in order to decrease the boom stress.
3.2. Wood processor
During previous operations of a construction crane which was used in combination with a wood processor, the crane processor STEYR KP 40 was mounted on a wheeled excavator.
The STEYR KP 40 is a one-grip crane processor which can be mounted on different carrier vehicles such as trucks, skidders or excavators. The manufacturer recommends the use of a carrier vehicle with 88- to 100-kW engine power (see Figure 3).
agricultural
tractor forwarder
skidder excavator
Figure 3. One-grip crane processor mounted on different carrier vehicles.
In contrast to smaller processors for thinning operations the STEYR KP 40 is a machine designed for continuous operation and can be used in combination with other machines. The optimal range of use which provides acceptable production is between 14 and 35 cm DBH but the stability of the used structural members should make permanent operation feasible with trees up to a 40 cm butt-diameter without risk of premature abrasion.
Specifications given by the manufacturer of the STEYR KP 40 :
Weight
810 kg
Maximum delimbing diameter
40 cm
Maximum bucking diameter
35 cm
Log feed rate
90 m/min
Log measuring accuracy
Required pump capacity
- Constant delivery
160 l/min 200 bar
- Load sensing
75 l/min 140 bar
Recommended crane
- Lifting capacity
1300 kg 6.5 m
- Engine power
88 - 100 kW
The STEYR KP 40 consits of two units: the processing head, which is suspended, rotating and swivelling, from a hydraulic loading crane; and the controller.
The processing head includes a circular saw with a stated maximum cutting depth of 35 cm; grip-arms; delimbing knives and a drive track. The operator positions the process-ing head over the felled tree which will be encircled and tightly held against the drive-track by the grip-arms. The drive-track - consisting of segments with teeth - moves the tree towards the circular saw; however, just before reaching the saw, the tree passes the delimbing knives which cut the limbs. The tree can also be moved in reverse, when a large limb fails to be cut off the first time, therefore necessitating a second attempt (see Photo 6).
All functions are hydraulically driven and electrically controlled. Log lengths are measured with a light barrier and an encoding mechanism built into the drive-track. This continuous diameter measurement during the processing of the tree allows the operator to cut the tree into the desired length according to diameter criteria so that the resulting assortments will provide lengths which will bring the highest market value.
A volume measurement separated into assortments, by mid-diameter and length, opens up new ways of production planning and control.
Although the STEYR KP 40 has a maximum design capacity for trees up to a 40 cm butt-diameter, the processing of trees up to 60 cm in butt-diameter was also reported. However, trees in diameter classes over 40 cm might cause difficulties for the STEYR KP 40 in hoisting and gripping during the processing operation because of their weight. These trees are processed by running the processor over them to a point where they can be lifted. But this method has a high potential for machine damage and renders it difficult to guide the tree in a desired direction toward the outfeed pile.
Photo 6. One-grip crane processor STEYR KP 40 mounted on a skidder.
The original drive-tracks which had seven 20-mm-long teeth per segment initially often had problems with traction and had "spinouts" when the processor encountered obstacles such as a large limb or a severe crook, but these difficulties were eliminated by using, in-stead, similiar drive-tracks with five 35-mm-long teeth per segment. The drive teeth leave two rows of marks on each log but this does not lead to decreased log-quality, either when caused by drive teeth or by the delimbing equipment.
The controller consists of three modules which are all mounted in the cab of the carrier vehicle: the control unit, the display unit and the computer. The control unit enables the operator to select log lengths from the computer memory, oil the drive track, shut off the computer and engage the saw manually. The display unit shows log lengths while they are processed.
The third module, the computer, can be programmed to measure and automati-cally cut seven different log lengths, but if desired by the operator the computer can be overridden and the processing functions, as mentioned above, can be controlled manually.
The processor is set up on the forest road next to the piled trees logged by the construction crane (see Photo 7). If the bearing capacity and the width of the road are sufficient for the construction crane, then it would also be sufficient for the carrier vehicle, where the one-grip processor is mounted.
At previously described combined operations of construction crane and processor, the STEYR KP 40 one-grip processor mounted on a wheeled excavator was hired by the forest enterprise.
One of the advantages of setting up the processor on the forest road is that a high cost all-terrain carrier is not needed. Sometimes the one-grip processor is mounted on second-hand carrier vehicles, so the costs of processor operation can be decreased. By way of contrast, two-grip processors are usually mounted on all-terrain carriers which require higher investment, thereby resulting in higher production costs per unit.
Photo 7. Piled trees logged by the construction crane. A sufficient supply of trees for processing has to be assured in order to fully utilize the wood processor.
<section>6</section>
4. HARVESTING SYSTEM
The harvesting system applied when a construction crane operation is used in combination with a wood processor is a highly mechanized timber harvesting system. The work phases are as follows:
· Felling
· Logging
· Processing (delimbing, cross-cutting, storage)
The harvesting method of this particular harvesting system (felling by means of chain-saws, logging by construction crane and processing by wood processor) is the whole-tree method.
Emphasis was given to the construction crane operation because the use of construction cranes for logging was previously not known and therefore data such as productivity rates were unavailable.
The felling phase was not included in these studies because it had already been done when the logging and processing phases started. In order to perform all work phases simultaneously a high range of planning and organization is required; furthermore felling might be disrupted by the logging operations and vice versa. But the felling operation must be carried out very carefully if natural regeneration is to be preserved. Directional felling cannot be done in a hurry and might be hindered by the assistant hooking the assortments. In the second case when the logging process is disrupted by felling trees, the logging operation might result in higher costs, and logging with cranes becomes unprofitable.
Another reason why the felling process was not observed is that the fellers worked on a private contract basis which means their performance per hour is of no importance to the enterprise because they are paid a certain amount per unit - in this case cubic metre of timber - after finishing the job.
After the felling phase, logging by the construction crane begins. At study area A the all-terrain crane was set up at two locations on the forest road; at study area B the crane was set up, as mentioned above, about one boom length from the road, into the felling site.
One assistant hooks the trees or assortments with log tongs and after their transport to the forest road by the crane a second assistant unhooks the load. All trees or assortments are piled on the forest road or next to it, so a wood processor or a timber truck with a loading crane can pick them up.
If the whole-tree method is applied, a processor is usually used after the logging phase is done by the construction crane. There are different types of processors available but so far only one-grip processors were used in combination with a construction crane for logging.
The major advantage of the one-grip crane processor is that after lifting the trees further processing is done by the same unit which has a rotating unit suspended from a hydraulic loading crane. This rotating and swivelling unit permits the operator to pick up the trees from almost any position, to process them in any position and to place them around the machine so that different assortments can be stored in separate piles (see Photo 8). Another advantage of one-grip processors compared with two-grip processors is that handling the trees is much easier and consequently there is less mental strain on the operator.
On the other hand, a disadvantage of one-grip processors is their net weight which requires both a higher weight of the carrier vehicle and higher stability of the crane. Despite the disadvantages of two-grip processors, compared to one-grip processors, their use is conceivable because of reasonable costs.
Photo 8. Site after processing operation. The different assortments and the debris are piled separately.
<section>7</section>
5. STUDY METHODOLOGY
In logging by construction crane, time studies have been carried out by observing the crane operator and the assistant hooking the load. The study methodology used was the progress-time method where time and work phases are recorded at the end of each work situation. The duration of each phase is obtained by subtracting it from the total of the recorded times. According to the chronological and complete registration of the time needed by the work phases the sequence of operations can be made evident for further analysis; this is a great advantage compared to the zero-point stopwatch and multi-moment method. However, a disadvantage sometimes in using the progress-time method is that only one person or machine can be observed.
The equipment used to carry out the time studies was a LATSCHBACHER EG 20 computer. This hand-held computer has buttons representing the different work phases previously fed into the computer. The person responsible for the time study has to select the correct button and to press it at the end of each work phase. The moment the button is pressed the last work phase is defined and recorded together with the appropriate time involved. Subtraction, in order to get the work phase duration, is done automatically by the computer. In addition, information such as load size, method of transportation (vertical, horizontal or rehooking), type of load (long log, tree top, tree) and logging distance are recorded with the hand-held computer.
To assess the performance of logging by the construction crane it would be sufficient to observe the crane driver. However, in order to improve the sequence of operations, the work of the assistant hooking the load has to be studied, as well, particularly if the observer next to the crane is not able to see neither the trees or assortments nor the assistant at the felling site due to the height of young trees forming the natural regeneration; therefore the observer is not able to classify the causes of delays and interruptions. The recorded data are transmitted by connecting the hand-held computer to a personal computer whereby the data could be prepared to run different statistical procedures thereafter.
Production figures in logging are based on the measurement of the mid-diameter and the length of transported assortments or trees immediately after their logging by construction crane. Consequently, every calculated load volume should be related to the corresponding cycle time in order to assess logging performance.
The site characteristics are based on the measurements of the last forest taxation.
<section>8</section>
6. PRODUCTION
6.1. Felling operation
As explained above, the felling phase was not included in these time studies because felling had already been completed before logging by construction crane began.
But according to the stand characteristics, given in Table 1, the following productivity rate could be estimated:
Team: Chain-saw operator
· Estimated production at study area A: 3.6 m^3/h
· Estimated production at study area B: 3.5 m^3/h
These production figures for felling have to be considered as standards and are calculated according to value tables of coniferous timber felling by means of chain-saws. These tables should enable the forester to predict felling productivity under particular site and stand conditions in order to make arrangements with the fellers.
Stated productivity rate for study area A includes felling, delimbing and cutting the trees into assortments, mainly long logs. At study area B the trees were felled and in case the feller estimated that the weight of a tree would exceed the permissible load weight of the crane the tree was cross-cut once. For this reason the productivity rates, stated above, are quite similar although the mean tree volume at study area B amounted to roughly half the tree volume at study area A.
6.2. Logging operation
The production during the crane operation was recorded for the three installations (2 settings on study area A and 1 setting on study area B) totalling 178.12 m^3 of timber. The crew was the same during the whole logging operation.
Team: Crane operator and two assistants
· Production: 178.12 m^3 : 14.29 h = 12.46 m^3/h
The time distribution between the different work phases of the crane operator based on the studies at the three construction crane settings was as follows:
Work phases Total
Crane movement unloaded 18.60 % 17.86 %
Lowering the hoisting equipment 12.08 % 11.59 %
Hooking the load 7.91 % 7.59 %
Crane movement loaded 56.41 % 54.15 %
Unhooking the load 4.73 % 4.54 %
Cross-cutting 0.27 % 0.26 %
Total work phases 100.00 % 95.99 %
Delays
Sequence of operation delays 44.14 % 1.77 %
Personal delays 34.52 % 1.38 %
Delays due to getting new order 9.13 % 0.37 %
Equipment delays 12.21 % 0.49 %
Total delays 100.00 % 4.01 %
Grand total 100.00 %
Equipment delays
There were no major delays resulting from a defect of the construction crane or the hoisting equipment. But three short delays between five and ten min occurred because the rope jerked out of the pulley attached to the end of the boom. This happened when the boom was not aligned to the load. The adjustment to the load is not only important in preventing delays but it also is a very important safety measure in the operation because lateral pulling of the load might cause the crane vehicle to be overturned.
The following work phases were not included in the calculation of the productivity rate:
· Setting up the construction crane
The average time consumption for setting up the construction crane was 27.8 min with a range from 11.2 to 44.2 min. The longest time involved for setting up was that which was necessary to discuss the job order and operation method, in general, prior to setting up the crane.
· Dismantling The average time consumption for the three dismantling operations was 14.98 min with a range from 12.8 to 18.7 min.
6.3. Processing operation
The production data for the processing operation have been obtained from other time studies of wood processor operations where the one-grip crane processor STEYR KP 40 was mounted on a skidder. All settings where time studies were carried out were on the road so that conditions for comparisons are given. According to the results of these studies, productivity depends on the diameter of the trees and the required assortments which call for different amounts of cross-cuts.
Figure 4 shows the performance of the STEYR KP 40 which can be expected according to the mid-diameter.
Production [m^3/h]
- - -- Assortment method - short --- Assortment method - long
Figure 4. Performance of the STEYR KP 40 wood processor (FPP 1991).
FPP (Kooperationsabkommen Forst - Platte - Papier) (1991): HARVESTER / PROZESSOREN,
Maschinen in der Durchforstung, Einsatzmöglichkeiten - Verfahren, Leistung - Kosten; Wien; p. 32
<section>9</section>
7. COSTS
7.1. Felling costs
As mentioned previously, felling had been done by private contractors before the other phases of the harvesting study began. The contractors were paid US$ 6.67/m^3 of produced assortments or felled trees, respectively, on study areas A and B, based on the estimated production which was quite similar for both study areas. The payment includes the costs for the chain-saws owned by the contractors.
· Costs of produced assortments at study area A: US$ 6.67/m^3
· Costs of felled trees at study area B: US$ 6.67/m^3
7.2. Logging costs
The construction crane and the crane operator were hired by the forest enterprise from a private company for a rental fee of US$ 87.50 per hour. A lower rental cost might be possible if a company with an underutilized fleet could be found but this benefit might be consumed by travel expenses to and from a distant operation area. The two assistants were paid US$ 8.33 per hour on a private contract basis.
Operating (area A + area B) 14.5 h
Setting up (three times) 1.5 h
Dismantling (three times) 1 h
Others (rest periods of the operator) 2 h
Journey to and from the operation area 2 h
Total construction crane hours: 21 h
· Equipment costs (construct