<title>FAO Training Series. Construction and maintenance of artisanal fishing harbours and village landings</title>
<section>1</section>
CHAPTER 1
WHAT CONSTITUTES AN IDEAL SITE?
An ideal site should basically offer the following:
1) Total or partial protection from prevailing sea storms;
2) Water depth in the range 1.50 to 3.0 metres within easy access from the shoreline;
3) Good access from the land side for either pedestrian or car traffic.
Preferably, the site should also offer the following:
4) A small tide-level variation;
5) Good beaching facilities in the vicinity(sandy beach);
6) Absence of seaweed.
However, as often happens, this ideal site, say a protected sandy inlet, does not always coincide with the wishes of the local fishermen because the would-be shelter does
not lie within a reasonable walking distance from the village. In such cases, the best use has to be made of the locally existing environmental conditions. When examining a site, however, the first three conditions will usually decide the eventual cost of the shelter. If the site is not protected against the prevailing storm directions, then more money goes into protecting the shelter by building a bigger and stronger breakwater; on the other hand, if the site is fairly well protected, a finger-jetty landing may be more suitable. If the water is too deep, then all the structures will have to be bigger and hence more costly, whilst if the area is too shallow, routine dredging will be needed to keep the shelter open for passage.
Needless to say, the area must also be accessible from the shore side. Sometimes a footpath may suffice, but more usually some sort of road access is necessary for light trucks in both wet and dry seasons.
v5270e01.jpg (47910 byte)
Figure 1. Open beach landing jetty
The optimum structure on a beach is the open or piled jetty; a solid structure would seriously compromise the adjacent beach, including natural vegetation.
v5270e02.jpg (51338 byte)
Figure 2. Make the best use of naturally occurring coastal features
A natural rock outcrop along the coastline offers a good solid base for a small landing without compromising the beach.
TYPICAL SITUATIONS
The scenario for typical situations is vast given that no two locations are identical. The following are just a few simplified examples which should be used only as a guide to selecting an appropriate site for a landing quay or jetty.
OPEN BEACH :
The long open beach (one kilometre and over) facing the ocean is typical of many fishing communities (Figure1). This scenario provides the easiest choice of site since the only suitable landing is a beach landing, or, if the incident waves are not too large - as in the presence of offshore shoals - a simple jetty on piles placed anywhere along the beach closest to the village.
The most important thing to observe is the area where the incoming waves break. The jetty should terminate beyond this region to avoid waves breaking against the jetty and damaging any boats tied up to it. If the waves are big, say over 2 metres high, the jetty has to be very strong to resist the wave action. No attempt should be made at building anything solid on a sandy beach
(such as a breakwater) as this interferes with the free movement of sand and may even lead to the beach disappearing over a few years. If a breakwater is deemed necessary, then expert advice should be sought prior to construction.
SANDY BAYS:
Figure 2 shows a small sandy bay flanked by two headlands. These heads of rock provide both a good foundation on which to build a small quay and a shelter against a prevailing wave direction. Two quays, one on either side of the head, would provide an all weather facility, with either the north side or the south side in use depending on the prevailing wave conditions. Any solid structure sticking out on to the sandy beach should be avoided.
REEFS:
Offshore reefs are a very common feature along some coastlines and on coral islands. As a general rule, a stone breakwater should not be built on the reef but behind it; big incoming waves may wash the breakwater off the reef, Figures 3a & 3b. Besides demolishing the breakwater, the waves also dump the stones over a wide area turning them into a hazard to navigation.
v5270e03.jpg (33307 byte)
Figure 3. Use of natural reefs
v5270e04.jpg (24737 byte)
Figure 4 . Optimum sites for a landing place on a meandering river
A stone breakwater should be built inshore of the reef, as shown in Figure 3d where the reef itself acts as a protection to the breakwater. If the area inshore of the reef does not allow a safety margin of say 30 to 50 metres, then a concrete wall anchored to the reef could be considered, Figure 3c. However, if the reef consists of living coral, then every attempt should be made to preserve it in its natural state as the living coral is a primary source of the material (sand) that makes up the very coastline behind it and an alternative site should be found elsewhere along the coastline. A dead coral reef is of little use as a protection because wave action will eventually break it down into sand and expose the whole coastline to wave attack.
Live coral, on the other hand, constantly re-builds itself.
RIVER BANKS:
Figure 4 shows the proper site for a landing on a meandering (curving) river. Rivers in general carry along tons of silt and sand in suspension (the murkiness seen especially during floods) which they deposit in places where the water flow slows down. When a river flows around a bend, the water on the inside of
the curve flows much slower than the water on the outside of the curve; this phenomenon causes the silt to fall out of suspension and deposit itself on the inner reaches of the curve in the river. On the opposite side, however, the high velocity of the flow ensures that the bank is always under erosion and free from silty deposits. Although the stronger current at the outer bank makes it more difficult to navigate, the lower maintenance costs in dredging may mean the difference between a serviceable landing, open all the year round, and one that has to be dredged permanently at great cost.
RIVER MOUTHS:
River mouths in general offer good protection against bad weather. However, river mouths also tend to shift position, especially in low lying areas where monsoons are active. In such cases, special care should be exercised when deciding on the type of structure and its position in relation to the existing coastline. Any kind of vegetation present along the proposed coastline (especially mangroves) should be preserved as this is the only natural means of controlling the shape of the coastline.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 2
WHAT IS A SITE SURVEY?
A site survey is an exercise in "FREEZING" the landscape in the form of a map, much like a camera does with a photograph. Unlike a photograph however, the survey provides much more data than would be seen by the naked eye.
WHY IS A SITE SURVEY NECESSARY?
In the past, many artisanal shelters were built at convenient locations with no particular attention being paid to such environmental factors as wave heights, uncharted reefs, currents, seaweeds, sand drift, etc.
However, many of the then minor problems arising from these factors have now developed into major problems, with some shelters, for example, fouling up with seaweed (shelter mouth facing the wrong direction) or silting up (shelter placed directly on a beach) or just being inaccessible in rough weather (reefs too close to entrance channel) and so on.
Therefore a good site survey is a must if the shelter or landing is to be functional and free of maintenance headaches under general operating conditions.
WHAT DOES THE SITE SURVEY CONSIST OF?
A good site survey should produce the following items:
a) TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP - a map showing all the relevant land details in the vicinity of the proposed shelter, like the village, pathways, roads, wells, electricity supply, beach, rocky outcrops, vegetation, etc;
b) CONTOUR MAP - a map showing the sea bottom depths in and around the proposed shelter, either in grid form or contours;
c) TIDE SURVEY - a table showing the maximum and the minimum tide levels at the proposed location;
d) TIDAL STREAM SURVEY - a map showing presence, location, direction and strength of tidal streams;
e) WAVE HEIGHT SURVEY - a table showing direction, frequency and intensity or heights of waves for the area proposed.
WHAT KIND OF INSTRUMENTS ARE REQUIRED FOR A SURVEY?
Several kinds of instruments are required for a proper survey. These instruments have been divided into two groups, Group A and Group B.
The instruments in Group A are very expensive and should be hired or borrowed from the local Public Works office or contractor, preferably with an operator or surveyor from the same office as it is not the intention here to teach the basics of surveying.
The items in Group B are relatively cheap and some may even be assembled on site from inexpensive materials.
Prices of the items vary considerably depending on the country of origin, brand name, etc.
v5270e05.jpg (29761 byte)
Figure 5. Theodolite (Group A)
The theodolite is the basic instrument for setting out lines and angles over wide distances. The original theodolite was a purely optical instrument; nowadays, however, most theodolites come with an electronic distance-measuring attachment. For the present purposes, the purely optical instrument will suffice.
v5270e06.jpg (30873 byte)
Figure 6. Level (Group A)
The level is the surveyor's second most important instrument. It is used to measure the difference in level of two different points placed far apart.
v5270e07.jpg (12149 byte)
Figure 7. Tripod (Group A)
The tripod is used solely for setting up the theodolite or the level. One tripod is usually used for both items.
When borrowing a theodolite or level from an office, make sure that the tripod anchor bolt fits both instruments as some brands are not interchangeable, i.e, it may fit the theodolite but not the level. In this case a separate tripod is required for each instrument.
v5270e08.jpg (18929 byte)
Figure 8. Staff (Group A)
The staff is to be used exclusively with the level. If the level is new, the accompanying staff will be numbered the right way up; if the level is old (20 years and over) the staff may be numbered upside down. Again, new staffs are made of metal and old ones of timber. Check graduations on staff; they should be in metres.
v5270e09.jpg (20957 byte)
Figure 9. Echosounder (Group A)
The echosounder in question is not the type of echosounder used on fishing boats to locate fish.
This echosounder is a precision instrument and is used solely for the accurate measurement of the water depth.
The Hydrographic Office, the Public Works Department, or the Port Authorities usually own this type of echosounder which they use to monitor the silting up of approach channels to major ports. A portable instrument of this kind should come with a pair of special battery cables, a separate transducer head, one or two rolls of thermal paper and a spare stylus. A fully charged 12 Volt car battery is required to operate it.
v5270e10.jpg (11364 byte)
Figure 10. Optical square (Group B)
The optical square is the first of a number of items which may be purchased by the community.
It is used for giving right-angle offsets to a straight line drawn on the ground.
v5270e11.jpg (12934 byte)
Figure 11. Measuring tape (Group B)
A fibre or plastic tape measure should also be purchased. Typically, these come in 20, 30, 50 or 100 metre lengths and here prices vary considerably. A steel tape, although more precise, requires more maintenance and is much more expensive. For normal setting- out work, however, a plastic tape is sufficient.
v5270e12.jpg (38251 byte)
Figure 12. Compass (Group B)
A small hand-held oil-encased compass should be purchased as well. The compass is required for taking bearings or headings from permanent structure (a hill, point of an island, etc.) when observing natural phenomena, like wind, waves and currents.
v5270e13.jpg (21374 byte)
Figure 13. Ranging rods (Group B)
Ranging rods are simply coloured poles used in tracing out lines on the ground.
They should either be purchased outright or made from pieces of straight pipe, roughly 1.50 metres long, with red and white bands (150 millimetres wide) painted as shown above.
v5270e14.jpg (19552 byte)
Figure 14. Float line (Group B)
A float line consists of a 6 millimetre diameter polypropylene rope with small red coloured cork floats at 5.0 metre intervals and different coloured floats every 10, 20 or 50 metre intervals. It is used to measure distance at sea from a fixed point on the shore line. Ideally, the float line should be about 200 metres long and either stored on a revolving drum or in a round fishing basket.
v5270e15.jpg (18772 byte)
Figure 15. Sounding chain (or lead line)(Group B)
A sounding chain (or lead line) is a normal light chain with a 1 kilogram weight attached to the end. The chain should be graduated at 100 millimetre intervals. A sounding chain is used to measure the depth of water.
It is very easy to assemble from normal metal chain, plastic tags and some wire. The weight should ideally be a lead weight.
v5270e16.jpg (28264 byte)
Figure 16. Other items (Group B)
These are the general items required to complete the list.
The pegs are needed for laying important marks on the ground
Red or white paint may be needed to paint marks in places where the pegs cannot be used, like, for example, on a stone wall or on a tree. The floats and sinkers are required for marking points out at sea.
v5270e17.jpg (23330 byte)
Figure 17. The survey boat (Group B)
Last but not least is the boat itself, required for taking depth readings out in the open sea. The boat should preferably be a timber boat and slightly heavy to counteract light cross-winds. Fibreglass boats tend to be carried off-course very easily.
When using a hand held chain then a pair of oars are necessary. Three people should man the vessel: (1) the pilot, (2) the chain man, and (3) the assistant who records the readings on paper.
GETTING STARTED
As already pointed out, this booklet assumes that if a theodolite, a level or an echosounder have been borrowed or hired from an office, then someone from that office has been made available to operate the instrument.
A - TOPOGRAPHIC MAP
As it is not the intention here to teach basic surveying, the topographic survey will not be discussed.
B - CONTOUR OR GRID MAP
A contour map is a plan of the depth of the sea-bed. Each contour of equal depth is indicated by a line on which the depth, in metres, is clearly marked.
The survey carried out to obtain the contour map is called the HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEY.
In a hydrographic survey, the actual measurement of the depth is the easy part. The main problem is knowing how far the boat is from the coastline when the depth is recorded.
Boat A in Figure 18 for example, has no point of reference in relation to the coast. Boat B on the other hand, is using a calibrated float line (Figure 14) to obtain a "FIX" or position with respect to the coastline, in this case 20 metres away on the straight line between the peg and the buoy.
SETTING UP THE FLOAT LINE:
The float line should be set up or floated out between two points: the driven peg on the coastline and the floating buoy offshore as shown in Figure 18. The peg driven into the ground is simple to set out and should tie into the topographical map of the shore around the proposed shelter.
Two simple methods for setting out the position of the buoy to which the float line must be attached are the Ray method and the Parallel line method.
THE RAY METHOD
The ray method is considered to be the simplest and is ideally suited for confined work, like, for example, when working off a
v5270e18.jpg (34373 byte)
Figure 18. Using a float line to "fix" the position of each sounding (boat B).
solitary offshore rock or a headland. The instruments required are a theodolite together with about 20 buoys.
This method involves setting up the theodolite on a vantage point which may be easily tied in to the topographic survey. At equal angular intervals, say 5 or 10 degrees, a buoy should be dropped in place roughly 200 metres from the theodolite, thus producing a fan in plan form. One end of the float line should then be anchored to the peg under the theodolite and the other to one buoy at a time around the fan. Knowing the position of the peg on the ground and the angle with respect to a fixed mark or benchmark (this benchmark may be any solid construction like an electricity pole, a big tree, the corner of a building, etc.) of each buoy, the depth readings may be plotted on paper in the right place in the form of a fan.
THE PARALLEL LINE METHOD
The parallel line method, though much more accurate, requires considerably more groundwork.
The instruments required are an optical square, 2 ranging rods, about 10 pegs and
buoys, and a 100-metre measuring tape.
This method consists in setting out a straight base line along the beach, say 100 metres long or more, with a ranging rod placed at either end. At every five or 10 metres from one end (5 metres for irregular terrain and 10 metres for flat beach), a steel peg should be driven into the ground and by means of the optical square, a buoy should be dropped offshore at right angles to each peg. Again, one end of the float line should be anchored to one peg and the other to its corresponding buoy offshore. As before, by tying in the base line to the topographic survey, the depth readings may be plotted on paper in the right place.
It is always a good practice to extend the survey a few metres, say 50 to 100, on either side of the proposed shelter or landing.
DEPTH RECORDING
The actual depth of the water may be read by simply lowering the sounding chain in Figure 15 every five or ten metres and the person using the chain calls out the readings to another person in the boat who records the figures on paper in the correct order. This type of recording yields a grid with spot levels only, as shown in Figure 21.
v5270e19.jpg (42396 byte)
Figure 19. The ray method of plotting soundings
If a hydrographic echo-sounder is available with an experienced operator, the actual soundings are recorded on a special paper roll by the instrument itself. In this case, only the operator need accompany the boat pilot on the survey vessel up and down the graduated float lines. A continuous bottom profile, is obtained on a continuous strip chart.
This strip chart could be read to the nearest 5 millimetres.
SOME IMPORTANT TIPS
The sounding chain must reach the bottom in a vertical line; when using a sounding chain the vessel must be still when the actual reading takes place. If the area is subject to strong tidal streams, the weight of the sinker should be increased by attaching further weights to the chain. If a hydrographic echosounder is being used, inbound runs are preferred to outbound runs, Figure 20. By starting an inbound run, say 50 metres away from the float, the vessel's skipper will be in a better position to place the boat parallel to the floating line. In both cases, stormy or windy days should be avoided as should the flood and ebb periods in strong tidal areas. The sea should be perfectly calm.
In rocky areas, before removing the float lines, a swimmer wearing a pair of goggles could then swim up and down the surveyed line looking for submerged rock outcrops or wrecks. He should point these out by placing small floats near them and measure the depth of water over the obstacle. These floats should then by plotted on the survey map by taking a series of fixes from the base line with the theodolite.
CONTOUR MAP OR GRID MAP
A detailed grid map, as shown in Figure 21 is usually sufficient for normal day-to-day coastal work. At local village level no attempt should be made to convert the grid map thus obtained into a contour map;
v5270e20.jpg (44179 byte)
Figure 20. The parallel line method of plotting soundings
v5270e21.jpg (16754 byte)
Figure 21. Soundings plotted using the parallel line method (the "+" sign indicates a rocky outcrop sticking out above mean sea level or m.s.l.)
this should be left to a professional surveyor at the Public Works office. If a hydrographic echosounder was used for the survey, then the same operator is the best person to interpret the strip chart and produce the contour map.
C - TIDE SURVEY
The reader may need the help of an experienced surveyor or extension worker to fully understand the following series of surveys.
It is most important that 'tides' should not be confused with 'tidal streams,' although loose terminology has undoubtedly come to use the word 'tide' for both. A tide is a periodic vertical movement in the level of the sea, whereas a tidal stream, even though resulting from a tide, is a periodic horizontal movement.
Tides affect the depth of water at a place; tidal streams affect navigation courses.As mentioned above, a tide is a periodic vertical movement in the level of the sea. In consequence of the solar cycle, at times of new and full moon, at a place the highest HIGH WATERS and lowest LOW WATERS of a tide cycle - SPRING TIDES - will be experienced and 7¼ days after these, with the first and last quarters of the moon, the lowest HIGH WATERS and the highest LOW WATERS - NEAP
TIDES - will occur. There are thus two separate tide cycles: Height fluctuations from SPRINGS to NEAPS twice each in a lunar month (29 days) and height oscillations of each tide from high water to low water twice each in each lunar day.
This is the basic description of the phenomenon of the tides. There are of course, other factors to be considered. The fact that the orbits of the Earth and the moon are ellipses and not circles must also be taken into account, for these conditions have a corresponding seasonal (equinox) effect upon the height of the tide wave (astronomical tide). Likewise, wind and barometric pressure exercise an uncertain influence on the tide wave: a wind blowing on shore usually tends to raise the height of a tide, a wind blowing off shore tends to lower it; a wind which blows in the same direction as the advancing tide wave crest tends to hasten the time of HIGH WATER at a place and vice versa. The tidal range can be as little as a hundred millimetres to a few metres. In most countries, tide tables are available from the Hydrographic Office or Harbour Office.
Tides are important factors in safe navigation and the navigator, whether he be a fisherman or a ferry captain, constantly asks himself "How much is the depth of water under my boat?".
To ensure safe navigation in and out of man-made ports, all depth soundings are referred to CHART DATUM or LOW WATER SPRING LEVEL and all land heights are referred to HIGH WATER SPRING LEVEL.
To record a tide table for a particular area or coastal village, all that is required is a simple tide gauge installed in a relatively calm place. A tide gauge may be easily made from a piece of steel or plastic tube or timber with a length of plastic tape measure tied to its side - a tailor's plastic tape is ideal, Figure 22.
In a sandy location, the upright pipe or timber should be driven inside an oil drum filled with concrete or stone and the whole buried in a suitably calm place where the tape can be easily read. In a rocky location, the pole or pipe should be concreted inside a hole in the rock. To install the tide board, a surveyor equipped with a level and staff should be called in. By recording the level of the sea a few days before and after a new moon, the low water
spring level may be deduced - the lowest point reached by the water level - and the tide board installed accordingly. By placing the zero mark of the tape at this level the full tidal range may be recorded. Once the tide board has been installed, the level of the sea surface should then be noted, say every hour, for a period of two months and recorded in a table together with the time, date and weather conditions.
E - TIDAL STREAM SURVEY
The tidal phenomenon described above gives rise to tidal streams - periodic horizontal movements of the water. In open ocean this horizontal movement is either non-existent or negligible, but in inshore and coastal waters where there is any appreciable vertical movement a horizontal movement also can be expected.
v5270e22.jpg (22363 byte) v5270e23.jpg (39787 byte)
Figure 22. Tides and methods of measuring tidal variations
v5270e24.jpg (31709 byte)
Figure 23. The influence of land form on the set and drift of a coastal tidal stream
The cause of tidal streams is primarily a change in water levels. The average velocity of tidal streams depends upon the average height of the advancing tide wave: in deep ocean where this height is small the stream rate is either very feeble or negligible; where the height is large the velocity will be correspondingly great. As a tidal stream encounters any obstruction to its to-and-fro movement, its direction and velocity are affected. Thus the tidal stream meeting a headland is deflected around it, and usually immediately off the headland its velocity is locally increased, Figure 23: round the headland its direction is deflected into the bay beyond, causing an indraught of indefinite direction and velocity. In the bay itself the spreading out of the effect of the stream, combined with the fact that the real strength runs from headland to headland leaving comparatively unmoved water in between, causes a diminished velocity.
In the absence of tides, feeble sea currents may be experienced during strong sea storms. These currents, though not very great when compared to tidal streams, should be observed closely because they usually carry weeds uprooted from offshore areas.
In the absence of seaweed or flotsam, currents in general make navigation more difficult but not impossible. In the presence of seaweed or flotsam (including timber and vegetation carried down by rivers), however, navigation may be hindered due to propellers fouling up in weeds. Flotsam, or floating debris, may also prove troublesome if it piles up inside a harbour by a prevailing tidal stream or sea current.
Using a simple can-float with a counterweight hanging about a metre below water level, Figure 24, the strength of a current may be measured by timing it to travel a known distance along the coast, or across a bay. When measuring currents at sea, the following points should be observed:
a) The general direction and duration of the storm or incoming waves, if the currents are storm generated;
b) If seaweed appears, after how many hours of storm does it make its first appearance;
v5270e25.jpg (12007 byte)
Figure 24. Simple can float
c) If flotsam or driftwood appear, where does it land. In many instances, one particular spot or bay may accumulate more debris than adjacent ones, in which case it should be discarded as a potential harbour site.
D - WAVE HEIGHT SURVEY
The precise nature of the types of waves incident on a particular stretch of coastline may be investigated by three different methods:
1) On-the-spot measurement by special electronic equipment - the wave rider buoy which may be hired for a set time from private companies or government laboratories together with an operator;
2) Prediction by statistical methods on a computer - statistical hindcast models which may be performed on a computer if wind data is available for the area;
3) On-the-spot observation by simple optical instruments - the theodolite.
Methods 1 and 2 give very accurate results but are very expensive; they are usually
reserved for big projects where precise wave data is of the utmost importance. Method 3 is not very accurate but is relatively cheaper and lies more within the scope of this booklet.This method differs from Method 1 in one respect only - the observer.
In Method 1 the observer is an electronic instrument capable of recording continuously on a 24-hour basis far out at sea where the waves are not yet influenced by the coastline. In method 3, however, the observer is a normal surveyor with a theodolite placed at a secure vantage point observing waves close to the shoreline. As a result, the wave heights thus recorded will be distorted and suitable only for minor projects.
SETTING UP A WAVE OBSERVATION POINT
The equipment needed consists of two large fluorescent plastic buoys, say 500 millimetres in diameter, a large stone or concrete sinker, a length of 10 millimetre nylon rope, a theodolite, a compass and a watch with a second hand or digital readout.
At a vantage point, which should be just high enough above sea level to be safe and dry during a storm, a stone pillar should be erected with an anchor screw concreted in at the top so that every time the theodolite is set up it faces the same way in exactly the same position, Figure 25.
The two fluorescent plastic buoys should then be moored a known distance (say 100 metres) offshore as shown in the figure. The white buoy keeps the mooring line taut whilst the red buoy floats freely on the incoming waves.
To calibrate the station, the theodolite should be pointed at the buoy on a very calm day. A witness mark should then be placed on something robust (a wall, for example, is preferable to a tree) in such a manner that the observer can repoint the eyepiece at the buoy in its rest position (even if the buoy is actually bouncing up and down with the waves during a storm) at a later date.
In this way the theodolite is not tied up completely with wave height observations but can be used for other work as well in between storms, Figure26.
v5270e26.jpg (24928 byte)
Figure 25. Observation
Pillar in stone and concrete
v5270e27.jpg (28585 byte)
Figure 26. Set up for a wave observation station
v5270e28.jpg (12274 byte)
Figure 27a. View through eye-piece
Figure 27 shows the view through the eyepiece of the theodolite with the base of the buoy just above the central hairline in perfectly calm conditions.
During a storm, the buoy will float up and down with the passage of the waves. By following the base of the buoy with the same centreline hairlines, the theodolite is made to traverse a small angle, Z, as shown in Figure 28. Using basic surveying principles, the distance A and angle Z may be used to calculate the height H of a wave, which as a rule of thumb, is twice the height of the displacement above calm water level. Again, it must be emphasised that this calculation is only very approximate and suitable for minor projects only. During wave height observations, the following additional information should also be recorded:
a) direction of both the incoming waves and wind using the hand-held compass;
b) the time difference between each successive wave peak, also known as wave period using the second hand on a watch;
c) the exact position of the buoy with respect to the coastline;
v5270e29.jpg (15156 byte)
Figure 27b. View through eye-piece during the passage of incoming waves
v5270e30.jpg (28460 byte)
Figure 28. Observing incoming waves during a storm
d) time of the year when each storm was recorded.
As mentioned earlier, various setbacks make this method suitable only for small projects where the anticipated financial outlay is very limited. These setbacks may be summarised as follows:
1) The human observer can only see waves during daylight hours, effectively reducing observation time by at least 12 hours;
2) In very bad weather, strong winds and rain usually reduce visibility to only a few metres making it difficult to keep the buoy under observation continuously;
3) The presence of swell or long period waves is very difficult to detect, especially during a local storm, due to the very long time (period) between peaks, 15 seconds or more.
Having completed the site survey, all the data collected should then be put on a drawing with the help of a surveyor.
Chapter 9 describes some of the ideal scales for the layout drawings and some of the more common drawing conventions used.
Ideally, the layout of the site should include the hydrographic survey (in grid or contour form) and the area where the fishing shelter will be situated.
All forms of access, together with landmarks, should also be plotted on the layout as should nearby utilities, like fresh water wells, water pipes and electricity, if available.
The tide, tidal streams and wave data should be drawn up in table form. Before embarking on the construction phase, however, it would be a good idea to show the drawing to an Engineer from the Public Works office for comments and suggestions.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 3
WHAT CONSTITUTES A GOOD FISHING SHELTER?
A good coastal fishing shelter normally consists of a breakwater to protect the