<section>e</section>
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
The first version of this training package was prepared by Paul Sommers for use in Indonesia in the FAO/UNDP Technical Support to the WFP Transmigration Development Project (INS/89/004). This expanded version was revised by Chris Landon-Lane following extensive field testing in Indonesia. The training package has benefited from the sound technical expertise in nutrition and horticulture of both authors as well as their local knowledge and extensive working experience in Southeast Asia. The illustrations were prepared by Mr Haryanto and Chris Landon-Lane.
Further acknowledgments are due to Jane Sherman who edited the first version of the training package and contributed her expertise as a trainer. Extensive comments were also received from FAO staff members in the Plant Production and Protection Division's Horticultural Crops Croup and from the Food and Nutrition Division, which supervised and guided the preparation of this training package.
<title>Improving nutrition through home gardening - A training package for preparing field workers in Southeast Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
This training package, Improving nutrition through home gardening, is for the instruction of agricultural extension agents and other field workers in Southeast Asia. It aims to strengthen their ability to promote home gardening for better family and community nutrition. The package was prepared by the Food and Nutrition Division of FAO on the basis of training materials developed for the FAO/UNDP Technical Support to the WFP Transmigration Development Project (INS/89/004) in Indonesia.
Access to an adequate amount and variety of safe foods at all times is one of the most basic rights of every individual, yet it remains difficult to attain for a significant number of families in Southeast Asia. However, when households are able to complement their resources such as land and labour with improved tools and seeds and the right information, they can increase their productivity and obtain sufficient nutritious foods by fully developing their land.
In the pert-urban areas of Southeast Asia, families often farm 500 to 1 500 m^2 of land around their home. This area offers great potential for improving household food supplies. For the purpose of this book, this entire area will be referred to as the home garden. The home garden can be used to raise many kinds of fruit, vegetables, staple food crops, medicinal plants, spices and, sometimes, farm animals and fish. It is also used as a playground for children, a work area and a place for storage of farm produce and equipment. The home garden also has an important economic function as a source of food production for sale and income generation.
THE ROLE OF AGRICULTURISTS IN IMPROVING COMMUNITY AND FAMILY NUTRITION
Agriculturists are usually trained to promote the production of food and cash crops and animals but are rarely given the training required to promote better diets and nutritional practices. By virtue of their direct access to rural farm families, extension staff are well placed to promote improved household food supplies and nutritious diets through the development of home gardening.
Where appropriate, agricultural extension workers can provide guidance and encourage the community to produce, not only for sale, but also for home consumption. It is a valuable investment in human resource development to expose extension workers to and train them to address human problems such as malnutrition as well as crop and animal production.
This training package has attempted to integrate food production and consumption issues and thereby to provide a comprehensive set of materials for teaching agricultural extension, home economics and community development workers to assist families in improving food production and adding nutritional value to their diets.
WHAT ARE THE COMPONENTS OF THE TRAINING PACKAGE?
The training package has three components:
- course materials and technical notes for trainers (marked in green) and course materials for participants (marked in yellow) - these are divided into ten sessions;
- information and participation
- home garden technology leaflets (marked in grey)
The course materials for trainers and participants provide an introduction to each topic and should be given to trainees as hand-outs after each session. The technical notes for trainers set out a programme of activities in which the trainer may lead the class.
The information sheets for trainers and participants contain technical information on each topic and should be distributed to and used by trainees as indicated in the technical notes for trainers.
The home garden technology leaflets are for use by extension workers and families whose members are able to read. There are 15 leaflets, each of which provides information on a different technology option or type of improvement a family may want to make to its home garden in order to increase food production, provide a greater diversity of fruit, vegetables and other plant crops and add nutritional value to its diet.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE TRAINING PACKAGE?
The materials contained in the training package assist the trainer in showing how the home garden can make a significant contribution towards meeting daily family food needs for good nutrition and health. The aim of the course is to provide agricultural extension workers, home economists and community workers with the technical, extension and planning skills necessary to help rural households identify problems and opportunities for improving home food production and to attain better nutrition for all the family.
A variety of foods are necessary for good family nutrition but, to keep the training materials simple, their focus is on food crops such as roots, vegetables, legumes and fruit that are common in home gardens. There is less technical emphasis on other crops, small farm animals and fish.
WHO SHOULD DO THE TRAINING?
Ideally, two trainers are needed: one with a background in agriculture and the other with experience in community nutrition. Both should have experience in in-service training in the informal education sector and be familiar with the needs and problems of rural communities. Materials for trainees should be provided by the trainer in the form of hand-outs.
WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE TRAINING COURSE?
The people to be trained include agricultural extension, home economics and community development workers as well as others concerned with nutrition improvement through community development. Trainees should have some secondary school education and have experience in agriculture, community work or practical family nutrition. Women's group leaders and home economics workers should also be encouraged to participate because their work is traditionally focused on assisting rural women in home gardening, budgeting and nutrition.
WHAT IS THE CONTENT OF THE TRAINING SESSIONS?
The training package is divided into ten sessions. The trainees gain an understanding of the home garden in daily family life and learn about nutrition in Sessions 1 to 4. The way a home garden can contribute to family and community nutrition is explored in Session 5, while Sessions 6 and 7 teach students how to assess a home garden and a family's nutrition status. Practical ways to plan and manage a home garden and nutrition improvement activities in a community are presented in Sessions 8 to 10.
Improving food production requires both technical and managerial solutions to problems encountered in the home garden. The technical part of the solution can only be found by field workers after they have worked with the community to appraise the situation. This training package follows such an approach, with technical and management issues carefully integrated into the course.
WHERE SHOULD THE TRAINING BE CONDUCTED?
The training should be conducted in a rural area in or near villages where trainees can visit home gardens and work directly with village families. Examples of suitable venues include local schoolrooms, a community meeting hall or a large local house. There should be accommodation nearby for those trainers or participants who come from outside the village.
HOW SHOULD THE TRAINING BE CONDUCTED?
The training requires access to both a classroom and the field, and encourages the trainer to make use of a range of training activities: formal classroom presentations, discussions, household visits and interviews, group work, role play and case-studies. Suggestions for trainers on how to conduct each session are contained in the technical notes for trainers. Fieldwork and household visits are often used directly after formal presentations to support, reinforce and practice what has been covered in the classroom.
WHAT IS THE DURATION OF THE TRAINING COURSE?
The training is designed to take six days to complete. Sessions I to 6 require half a day each, Sessions 7 and 8 require a full day each and Sessions 9 and 10 require half a day each but can be extended to one or more days, depending on the situation and aims of the organization supporting this training. Additional time needs to be allocated for refreshment breaks and travel to field sites, if necessary.
WHAT MATERIALS ARE NEEDED?
The trainer must have a copy of the training package and will also need a flip chart with large sheets of paper and pens, or a blackboard and chalk for teaching activities. Some of the charts, tables, forms, information sheets and home garden technology leaflets in the training package can be copied on to a flip chart prior to the training sessions. Materials, information sheets and survey forms for use by trainees during the sessions need to be photocopied.
Each participant should also receive a full set of home garden technology leaflets. Participants can use these in their daily work with farming families and also distribute them to literate farmers in the villages.
WHAT CONTRIBUTION DOES THE TRAINING COURSE MAKE TO IMPROVE NUTRITION AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT?
Every household and community is different, and so solutions to problems of food production and nutrition must be adapted to the needs of each family. Trained field workers can help each family to examine its home garden and select the changes that it can and wants to make. Later, the field worker can help the family to assess the improvements and evaluate the results.
While preparing these materials, it has not been possible to take account of individual country differences and needs. These should be assessed and the training materials adapted to fulfill the specific needs of different situations and countries in Southeast Asia.
<section>2</section>
Course materials and technical notes
Day 1
Session 1: The role of the home garden: Household survey 1
Session 2: The importance of better household food supplies
Day 2
Session 3 :Practical nutrition for field workers (1)
Session 4: Practical nutrition for field workers (2)
Day 3
Session 5: Contribution of the home garden to daily family food needs
Session 6: Case-study
Day 4
Session 7: Collecting data on food and nutrition problems and home garden utilization: Household Survey 2
Day 5
Session 8: Promoting home gardening for better nutrition
Day 6
Session 9: Plan of action (1)
Session 10: Plan of action (2)
Course materials and technical notes
Day 1
Session 1: The role of the home garden: Household survey 1
COURSE MATERIALS AND TECHNICAL NOTES
Objective
By the end of this session participants will be able to understand the importance of the home garden in the daily lives of rural people.
The home garden can produce many different things: fuel for cooking, wood for building, food, Income, medicinal plants, herbs, spices and flowers
OVERVIEW
The home garden is traditionally a very important piece of land for rural households of Southeast Asia. Covering an area of about 500 to 1 500 m^2, the structure and function of home gardens are similar throughout the region. The home garden can be defined as a farming system which combines different physical, social and economic functions on the area of land around the family home. Within the typical home garden are social areas for meetings, children's play and gardens for display; economic areas for growing food, medicinal plants and trees and for raising animals and fish; physical areas for storage, living, washing and waste disposal. It is a place for people to live in but it also produces a variety of foods and other things for both home use and income.
The major part of this session covers a home garden survey which concentrates on three important aspects - the home garden as:
- the most direct way of providing daily food;
- a source of income for the purchase of other foods;
- a means to produce non-food items such as medicinal herbs, spices, fuelwood and building materials.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 1. The trainer must also have identified a household nearby for the class to visit.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of the session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to explain technical points during the activities and leads the participants in a discussion. The trainer refers to the Technical Notes to explain:
- the definition of a home garden and its importance to households;
- the roles and uses of the home garden;
- foods commonly produced in the home garden.
The trainer invites participants to contribute to the discussion with examples from their own experiences. Next, the trainer prepares for the Household Survey by distributing Survey Form I and explaining each question.
Household visit. Trainer and participants visit a home garden. Participants walk around the home garden and make general observations. They then complete questions 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Survey Form 1 individually.
Small-group work. While they are still in the home garden, participants divide into small groups to compare their responses to questions 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Survey Form I and then to discuss and complete questions 5 and 6.
Group discussion. The trainer leads the whole group in a discussion aimed at reaching a consensus on the importance of the home garden to the household.
Summary. The trainer summarizes the main points of the session.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Survey Form 1.
TECHNICAL NOTES
THE ROLE OF THE HOME GARDEN: HOUSEHOLD SURVEY 1
Priority messages
THE HOME GARDEN IS AN IMPORTANT LAND UNIT FOR HOUSEHOLDS, AS IT IS OFTEN THE CENTRE OF FAMILY LIFE
A WELL-DEVELOPED HOME GARDEN IS A COMPLETE FARMING SYSTEM
THE HOME GARDEN IS THE MOST DIRECT MEANS OF SUPPLYING FAMILIES WITH MOST OF THE NON-STAPLE FOODS THEY NEED YEAR ROUND
The home garden is an important land unit for households, as it is often the centre of family life
The rural landscape in Southeast Asia is typically a mixture of different farming systems. Surrounding a lowland village is a rice-based agriculture with fields of rice and other staple crops (e.g. maize, sweet potato or beans) and cash crops (e.g. groundnuts or vegetables). On uplands further from the village, shifting agriculture is practiced and sometimes there are plantations of forest and of commercial or industrial crops such as tea, coffee and rubber.
Within the village, the small area surrounding a house is the home garden. Because the home garden is in the village, it is often close to a source of water, it is usually better protected from floods and wild animals than other farmland. Access is good because roads or paths lead to the village. This is where the family builds its house and it is the central daily living area.
The home garden can be defined as a farming system that combines different physical, social and economic functions on the area of land around the family home. It is used as a place of work and for the storage of farm produce. The home garden is also a place where people live and meet each other and where children play. Its economic functions are crop production and livestock rearing for home consumption or sale for income.
A well-developed home garden is a complete farming system
The home garden includes all of the functions of the entire farming system. A well-developed home garden can provide:
- Enough nutritious food, including some staple foods, for all the family year round. This also includes extra food stocks for processing and sale to obtain income, and a reserve for special occasions or emergencies (e.g. sometimes a staple food crop is lost in a flood, eaten by pests or reduced because the farmer falls sick and cannot work for a period of time).
- Income from the sale of home garden produce. Sale from home garden produce can make a substantial contribution to a family's income (to buy daily essentials and farming inputs that cannot be produced on the family's farmland as well as other goods and services).
- Important farm development activities take place in the home garden. Some farm inputs come from home garden activities, for example plant propagation, raising and housing draught animals, and making or repairing tools. The home garden is also a place for trying out new crops and farming techniques.
The home garden is the most direct means of supplying families with most of the non-staple foods they need year round
A well-developed home garden contributes significantly to daily food needs. It can supply households with nearly all the non-staple foods they need, such as fruit, vegetables, legumes, coconuts and root crops as well as spices, tea, coffee, medicines and flowers for ornamental purposes or for sale.
Food items that cannot be produced in the home garden or on other family land can be purchased from the sale of other items produced in the home garden. For example, coconut oil or woven mats produced from the home garden can be sold to traders or shops and the money used to buy foods that the family cannot grow.
The three kinds of farmland owned by typical families
SURVEY FORM 1
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE HOME GARDEN
1. What are the main uses of the home garden you are observing?
Social or living areas:
Rest or meeting area
Children's play area
Flower garden
Other
Physical or utility areas:
Storage rooms
Washing area
Crop drying/processing area
Other
Economic or production areas:
Food crop area
Plant nursery
Cash crop area
Other
2. Of the food items below, does the home garden produce none, some or all of what is needed?
Item
None
Some
All
Coconut
Tree fruits
Vegetables
Root crops
Legumes
Spices
Small animals
Coffee
Fish
Others
3. What major food items does the household purchase?
4. What are some of the things produced in the home garden for sale for income?
TO BE ANSWERED AFTER OBSERVING THE HOME GARDEN
5. Name the three most important ways in which the home garden contributes towards the daily food needs of households.
6. Why is the home garden important for households? Give three reasons.
Session 2: The importance of better household food supplies
Objective
By the end of this session participants will appreciate the importance of household supplies as a basic condition for the nutritional well-being of all the family. They will also be familiar with the food system; that is, the chain of activities from food production to food consumption
A family's nutritional well-being depends on adequate food supplies
OVERVIEW
Nutritional well-being requires access to enough nutritious and safe food to meet the dietary needs of all members of the household throughout the year. Attaining better food supplies and nutritional well-being is more than just producing enough food locally. It also requires sufficient resources (such as land and labour), tools, skills and knowledge. Roads and transport to markets are necessary so that goods such as food and other essentials can be traded and so that household members can find employment as well as having access to other commercial and government services.
This session focuses on the importance of household food supplies for the well-being and health of all its members. Factors that make it either easier or more difficult for people to obtain enough food are discussed.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 2.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to explain technical points during the activities and uses the following questions to lead participants in a discussion of how to improve household food supplies.
- What is the meaning of "a good food supply"?
- What are the effects of a household not having adequate food supplies?
- What factors contribute to the food supply of a household?
Small groups work on factors that make it difficult for a household to attain a good food supply. Groups record their summary and conclusions on the blackboard or large piece of paper. Participants divide into small groups to:
i) discuss and complete Table 2.1, Problems in the food system (p. 16-17);
ii) discuss one of the following sets of questions:
- How isolated is the village you are studying?
- Does isolation affect:
- Buying and selling opportunities?
- Work opportunities?
- When is isolation a constraint (all year or only part of the year)?
- Are locally grown products mainly sold in the village, neighboring villages or in more distant town markets?
- Is there an opportunity to expand marketing? If so, how?
- When village people buy food in the towns, which main foods do they purchase?
Which foods are more expensive, less expensive or about the same in price? Give some examples.
Presentation. Each group presents its findings to the other participants for discussion.
Review/summary. The trainer reviews the main points of the discussion. These points will serve as background information for Sessions 7 and 8.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Blackboard for group summary.
- Table 2.1, Problems in the food system.
TECHNICAL NOTES
THE IMPORTANCE OF BETTER HOUSEHOLD FOOD SUPPLIES
Priority messages
ADEQUATE HOUSEHOLD FOOD SUPPLIES ARE ESSENTIAL FOR FAMILY WELL-BEING AND ESPECIALLY FOR THE HEALTHY GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN
SEVERAL FACTORS MAKE "FOOD FIRST "THE PRIORITY STRATEGY FOR HOME
GARDEN DEVELOPMENT
Adequate household food supplies are essential for family well-being and especially for the healthy growth and development of children
"A good household food supply" can be defined as having access to enough nutritious and safe food to meet the dietary needs of all household members year round. Households can obtain food supplies either through their own food production or food purchases, but more often through a combination of both. Some factors that help people to have enough food are sufficient fertile land, access to credit and agricultural advice, seeds and other inputs, good storage and a sufficient number of family members who are healthy and strong enough to work on the farm or to undertake off-farm employment.
Poor diets and inadequate food intake are not always the result of a lack of food or of money to buy food. People must have some knowledge of nutrition: the most important information is what kinds of food to eat and how to prepare the food in the right quantities and mixes and in a way that is safe and clean for children's healthy growth and development.
In Southeast Asia, too many young children become seriously ill because they do not eat enough of the right kinds of food. There is a direct link between having a variety of nutritious foods and staying healthy. Studies in Southeast Asia and around the world have shown that when people do not eat the right amount of nutritious food they cannot fight off illness, even when access to medical services and a healthy environment make it easier to stay healthy. It is also important for mothers to know about proper feeding practices and to be able to have enough time for child care to keep their children healthy and well nourished.
An inadequate diet can affect other members of the household as well. Many households have limited family labour available to work their farmland. A poor diet leads to poor work ability and illness, illness means visiting the health centre and too many visits to the health centre mean lost working time as well as lost money. These losses can be reduced or prevented if everyone in the family eats enough healthy foods, drinks clean water and practices good hygiene.
Several factors make "food first" the priority strategy for home garden development
Developing the home garden for food production is a very important part of attaining an adequate food supply for the household. There are several reasons why this is so.
One reason is the isolation of many rural villages. Food from other areas must sometimes be transported from far away so are either expensive to buy in the village or are not available.
Opportunities for earning income are also limited in a number of villages. Although cash crops (tobacco, rubber, tea, coffee, etc.) can provide income, many of these agricultural commodities obtain very low returns on investment at present. For isolated villages, the cost of transport to markets or factories is very high.
There are other factors in the food system that make it difficult to ensure that household food supplies are adequate. The most common ones are listed in Table 2.1, which should be used as a checklist to identify local problems in the food system.
Growing one's own food as much as possible makes the best economic sense. Fortunately, if properly developed, the home garden can supply a significant proportion of a household's daily food needs. The things that can be done to help families to grow enough of a variety of nutritious foods for their own consumption are discussed later in this course.
TABLE 2.1
Problems in the food system
Stage of food system
Typical problems in the food system
Typical problems in your local food system *.
Home garden land
- Shortage of land
- Unsure tenure
- Infertile land
- Shortage of water
Clearing the home garden
- Too few people to clear the land
- Hand tools which limit the amount of land cleared
- Late land preparation because of bad planning
Planting the home garden
- Limited variety of crops
- Cash crops grown instead of food crops
- Crops planted wrongly
- Poor seed distribution
- Limited inputs
- Limited extension advice
- Women farmers are not contacted by extension services
- Limited family labour
Harvesting the home garden
- Stealing of crops
- Labour shortage
- Late pest damage
Home storage and preservation
- Inadequate on-farm storage
- Producers sell most food
- Pests or mould destroy food
- Lack of equipment
- Insufficient knowledge of food preservation
Food distribution and marketing
- Markets tar from food-producing areas
- Poor roads
- Shortage of lorries and spare parts
- Shortage and high cost of fuel
- Inefficient marketing system
Buying
- Lack of money
- Too many debts
- Not enough money budgeted for food
- Poor-value foods bought
- Healthy foods difficult to get
Food preparation
- Parents not knowing the right foods to cock
- Lack of fuel
- Lack of mother's time
- Shortage of equipment
- Shortage of water
- Low-prestige foods not used
- Food values lost in cooking
Sharing within the family
- Children not getting adequate share of food
- Too many children
- Taboos on certain foods for children or mothers
- Bigger children eating taster
- Poor appetite
- Lack of information on children's needs
Eating
- Loss of appetite through illness
- Food too bulky for enough to be eaten
- Infrequent feeding
- Lack of variety in foods
- Diarrhoea preventing body from keeping and using food
- Parasites taking food from body
- Increased nutrient requirements through illness
* Use this third column to write down the most important problems in your local food system.
Source: Adapted from FAO. 1985. Field programme management:: food and nutrition. A training pack: Rome.
Day 2
Session 3 :Practical nutrition for field workers (1)
Objective
By the end of this session participants will:
- understand the meaning of the word "nutrition";
- know what food consists of;
- know why nutrients are needed and the amount of each kind needed;
- know the value of specific foods
Home garden produce
OVERVIEW
Most people eat because they are hungry. However, while the feeling of hunger tells you to eat, it does not tell you what to eat. Field workers promoting home gardening need to have a basic understanding of nutrition in order to help households achieve adequate daily nutrition. This session will define the meaning of "nutrition" and identify the main nutrients in food. It discusses the importance of each nutrient, how much of each nutrient is needed in the diet and the nutrient value of different foods.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 3.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session, explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to lead a discussion on the following questions:
- What is "nutrition" about? Participants should try to explain what their understanding of "nutrition" is.
- What are the nutrients in food and what are they for?
- Does the amount and type of food needed by different people vary? How does it vary? Why does it vary?
Discussion of the value of different foods. The trainer uses Survey Form 1 (from Session 1), to list on a blackboard the main foods grown in local home gardens. The trainer asks participants to estimate the value of each food in terms of energy (carbohydrates and fat), protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals).
After the group discussion and presentation, the trainer confirms or adjusts the participants' estimate, referring to Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods (p.24). Finally, the trainer distributes or displays Table 3.3 as a reference document for the activities in Session 4(2).
Reading for information on dietary deficiencies. The trainer draws the following box on the blackboard and invites participants to speculate briefly on the effects of the lack of specific nutrients.
Symptoms of nutritional deficiencies
Cause
Effects
Not enough energy
Lack of fat in the diet
Too few protein foods
Lack of iron (Fe)
Lack of vitamin A
Lack of iodine
Lack of vitamin C
Participants then read Information Sheet 5, Food and nutrition problems. After reading, they complete the box together with the trainer.
Summary. As a group, participants use important information from this session to think of messages to spread among family members. For example:
- Variety is important in the diet.
- Different foods contain different kinds and amounts of nutrients.
- Meals should contain a mixture of several kinds of food.
- If children do not get the right kinds of food, they will not develop properly.
- The home garden can contribute significantly to the family's daily food needs.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Survey Form 1.
- Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods.
- Information Sheet 5, Food and nutrition problems.
- Blackboard for Box, Symptoms of nutritional deficiencies, and for group summary.
TECHNICAL NOTES
PRACTICAL NUTRITION FOR FIELD WORKERS (1)
Priority messages
"NUTRITION" IS ABOUT FOOD AND HOW IT IS USED IN THE BODY
FOOD IS MADE UP OF A COMBINATION OF NUTRIENTS
NUTRIENTS ARE NEEDED TO KEEP THE BODY ALIVE AND HEALTHY
THE AMOUNT OF NUTRIENTS NEEDED VARIES FOR EACH PERSON AND AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF LIFE
"Nutrition" is about food and how it is used in the body
Nutrition is an area of knowledge and practice. It is concerned with the food system; that is, how food is produced, collected, bought, processed, sold, prepared, shared and eaten. It is also concerned with what happens to food in the body - how it is digested, absorbed and used and how it finally influences the well-being of the human body.
Food is made up of a combination of nutrients
Food is made up of nutrients such as carbohydrates, fats, protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals). Nutrients are needed for energy (for activities such as working, playing, running), for growth (building and maintaining the body) and for protection against infection.
In the past, nutrition workers used the idea of the "three food groups" (food for energy, food for building the body and food for protection) when they taught people to plan meals. However, it is important to teach that many foods belong to more than one food group and that people need to ea