<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Flavours and fragrances of plant origin </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Non-wood forest products are extremely heterogenous. They play a vital role in the life and welfare of the people. A large number of items of our everyday use contain a varying proportion of non-wood forest products.
Sustainable utilisation and development of non-wood forest products are highly demanding on scientific knowledge and information relating to their resource distribution and management, chemical and biological properties, uses, supply-demand situation and so on. However, the information base of non-wood forest products is still weak. Sources of existing information are dispersed. There is a lack of an adequate system of compiling and disseminating available information. These exert a negative influence on the development of non-wood forest products.
In order to remedy this deficiency, the FAO Forest Products Division has initiated publication of a new series on non-wood forest products. The present publication on flavours and fragrances of plant origin is the first of the series.
The material for this publication was prepared by John Coppen of the UK-ODA Natural Resources Institute under the advice and general guidance of C. Chandrasekharan, Chief of the FAO Non-Wood Forest Products and Energy Branch.
We hope that this publication will serve as a useful reference for all concerned with non-wood forest products.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
CENARGEN Centro Nacional de Recursos Genéticos e Biotecnologia (Brazil)
C & F Cost and freight
CIF Cost, insurance, freight
EMBRAPA Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária (Brazil)
EC European Community
EOA Essential Oil Association of USA
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FCAP Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias do Pará (Brazil)
FMA Fragrance Materials Association of USA
FOB Free on board
FOT Free on tanker
INPA Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia (Brazil)
ISO International Standardization Organization
ITE Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (UK)
NRI Natural Resources Institute (UK)
ODA Overseas Development Administration
pa per annum
In all Tables:
- indicates nil
~ indicates < 0.5 tonnes (except Table 1, < 0.05 tonnes)
na indicates not available
ne indicates not estimated
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1
FLAVOURS AND FRAGRANCES OF PLANT ORIGIN
INTRODUCTION
Taste and smell are the two most sensitive human senses. The nose can often detect and distinguish odours at a level which even modern instrumentation is hard pressed to achieve. The natural world - especially that of higher plants - provides a multitude of flavours and fragrances, either directly or indirectly, which impinge upon these senses. Over the course of time, and with the benefit of many thousands of species of plants from which to produce them, countless numbers of such flavours and fragrances have found their way via essential oils into everyday life: into foods and drinks and confectionery items; into products for personal use such as perfumes, deodorants, shampoos, bath lotions, toilet soaps, toothpastes and mouth washes; into pharmaceutical preparations where flavours are added to make the product more appealing or to mask the taste of less agreeable ones; into items used about the house or office or in industry such as air fresheners, laundry soaps,
detergents, cleaning agents and the like; into tobacco products; the list is endless.
In 1985, LAWRENCE estimated total world production of essential oils to be approximately 36,500 tonnes. (This figure excludes turpentine, which in 1985 would have been around 250,000 tonnes; see TURPENTINE, this report.) Levels of production were given for 168 individual oils; a further 62 oils were listed for which estimates could not be provided. Production ranged from the large-volume orange oil (ca 12,000 tonnes) to those with less than one tonne.
More recently, the same author (LAWRENCE, 1993) listed the world's top 20 essential oils in volume terms (again, excluding turpentine). Orange oil production was estimated at 26,000 tonnes (valued at US$58.5 million). Cornmint (Mentha arvensis) and eucalyptus oil (cineole-type) were placed second and third, respectively, with around 4,000 tonnes each. Patchouli was 20th, with just under 600 tonnes production. In total, the top 20 oils amounted to almost 56,000 tonnes valued at US$340 million.
VERLET (1993) has given a slightly lower estimate of world production of "volatile oils": approximately 45,000 tonnes. Of this, about 65 percent is estimated to come from perennial woody plants. About 55 percent of world production (in value terms) comes from 25 developing countries, the most important of which are the People's Republic of China, Brazil, Indonesia and India.
Such figures are quoted to give an indication of the scale and scope of the industry. The number of plant species which are involved is impossible to estimate accurately but must reach several hundreds for those oils which are traded and many more for those which are produced and used locally. They are distributed amongst numerous botanical families and encompass higher and lower plants, gymnosperms and angiosperms, mono- and di-cotyledons, annuals and perennials, wild and cultivated sources. Thousands more species have yielded volatile oils in the course of searching for new oils but, for one reason or another, (poor yields, poor quality, unfavourable economics, poor markets) have never reached the point of commercial exploitation.
Before the advent of synthetics and the production of certain flavours and fragrances from petrochemicals, virtually all such materials were obtained from plant sources. A few were obtained from animals. Even today, the building blocks of many synthetic compounds are derived from plants. Turpentine obtained from pine trees is the prime example of this: alpha- and beta-pinene have no direct flavour and fragrance use themselves, but are isolated from suitable species of Pinus and converted into derivatives with a wide range of flavour and fragrance applications.
Other plants, too, yield essential oils which are used as sources of chemical isolates for derivative manufacture. Chinese and Brazilian sassafras oils from Cinnamomum camphora and Ocotea pretiosa, respectively, are both sources of safrole, which is used to manufacture heliotropin, a valuable flavour and fragrance compound. C. camphora is also a source of natural camphor.
Rosewood oil was once an important source of linalool, an aroma chemical in its own right but also a precursor for other fragrance compounds. Although cheaper sources of linalool are now utilized (still of plant origin), rosewood still finds favour as a whole oil for perfumery use. Sandalwood oil, too, is prized in perfumery and the whole oil gives an aroma which synthetic substitutes cannot match. Lemon-like citral is obtained from Litsea cubeba.
Eucalyptus oils are used in whole form for perfumery use; in refined form as flavour and fragrance products; or as raw materials for the isolation of cineole or citrinellal (depending on the species of Eucalyptus which is utilized). Cedarwood oils are also used both in whole form and as sources of aroma chemicals.
Some odoriferous materials are obtained, and used, in a form other than an oil. The best grades of olibanum (frankincense) are chewed for their pleasant flavour, while others are burnt and employed as incense in religious ceremonies or about the house.
All of the oils or resins referred to above are employed today as flavour or fragrance materials and form the basis of this report. They all have established markets but offer potential for increased or improved production, sometimes from plant sources which are alternatives to existing ones. They are chosen to illustrate the diversity of natural flavours and fragrances and the sorts of opportunities (and constraints) which exist. Many others might have been used.
Some, such as frankincense and myrrh, have been used for thousands of years. Others such as Litsea cubeba and Cedrus deodara oils have become articles of commerce more recently, in the last forty years. The plants from which they are obtained come from a variety of ecological zones: the moist rainforests of South America; the semi-arid regions of Africa; the more temperate areas of North America; the mountainous regions of Asia; and many others. They range from the slow-growing sandal tree to the fast-growing eucalypts.
Basic data on the plants described in this report are given below:
Genus Family Main producing regions Main applications
Cinnamomum Lauraceae Asia& Flavours
Fragrances
Chemical isolates
Ocotea Lauraceae Latin America Fragrances
Chemical isolates
Aniba Lauraceae Latin America Fragrances
Litsea Lauraceae Asia Fragrances
Chemical isolates
Piper Piperaceae Latin America Chemical isolates
Eucalyptus Myrtaceae Worldwide Flavours
Fragrances
Chemicalisolates
Medicinal
Santalum Santalaceae Asia, Pacific Fragrances
Boswellia Burseraceae Africa, Asia Flavours
Fragrances
Commiphora Burseraceae Africa, Asia Flavours
Fragrances
Pinus Pinaceae Worldwide Flavours
Fragrances
(both via chemical isolates)
Others
Cedrus Pinaceae Africa, Asia Fragrances
Chemical isolates
Cupressus Cupressaceae Asia Fragrances
Chemical solates
Juniperus Cupressaceae North America,
Africa Fragrances
Chemical isolates
FORMAT OF THE REPORT
The format within which each oil or resin is discussed is structured so as to highlight a number of points:
- its uses;
- present (and, where possible, predicted) supply and demand, including
national and international quality criteria and prices;
- plant sources, including the variability in oil yields and quality that may
occur within natural populations, and the effects, possibly harmful,
that oil production may have had on the resource;
- the type of harvesting and primary processing methods employed;
- the nature of any value-added processing;
- other uses to which the plant is, or could be, put;
- and the developmental potential of the oil, with an indication of some
of the research needs necessary to maximize the social and
economic benefits which are sought.
A selected bibliography is appended for each oil/resin to enable those who wish to explore the subject in more detail to do so.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT OF NEW OR IMPROVED SOURCES OF FLAVOURS AND FRAGRANCES
Some importance has been attached in the report to providing an indication of markets for the oils or resins and past and present supply sources. It is a mistake, often made by researchers and others, to have no thought for which market the product of one's endeavour is most likely to succeed in or the opportunities or constraints that may exist for its development. If such considerations are given, they are usually relegated to second place while technical matters are attended to.
Essential oil production is no different from any other agricultural-based industry. Sustainable production is dependent upon it being remunerative to the producer and at least as attractive as other options that are open to him. This means that there needs to be a reasonable market for the product. Development will not follow spontaneously from the enthusiasm of researchers, no matter how well-intentioned this is (COPPEN and GREEN, 1993).
One misconception is that there are particular opportunities for new perfumery oils, previously unknown in trade. The reality is that the generally conservative nature of the essential oils industry and the uncertainties in supply of such oils from origin (both in terms of quantity and quality) make the production of completely new oils something that has only a small chance of success.
Of more likely success is the production of:
(a) established oils for which there is known demand and fair
prospects for a new producer; or
(b) large-volume oils to serve as alternative sources of chemical
isolates to existing ones.
One example of the latter approach (which is discussed in this report) is the potential use of previously unexploited Piper spp. as sources of safrole. Success in such a venture will bring with it environmental benefits as well as the provision of income-earning opportunities to those who take it up.
Over the past decade, as has been remarked elsewhere (GREEN and HONE, 1992), there have been many initiatives within developing countries to establish new essential oil industries. Unfortunately, the number of failures has exceeded the successes. The former have frequently arisen from basic mistakes: hasty, inappropriate selection of planting stock; misreading of markets and prospects in the face of the known competition; miscalculation of returns against alternative crop options in the investment area; and poor marketing of the product.
An important factor in those developments which have succeeded is the degree of local commitment to the venture which has been made by the primary raw material producers. The attitudes and motivations of the prospective farmers to essential oil production need to be understood and modified if necessary to assist in the development. Where harvesting of wild trees or plants is practised which threatens the survival of the species or the maintenance of biodiversity, then alternative, sustainable options must be put forward to the people whose livelihoods may depend on it. Enforced regulation by legislation is not the answer.
Having established that there is a market for a particular flavour or fragrance (whether domestic or international) and an opportunity for new or improved production, what action is necessary to put these ideas into practice? One approach to the problem in some parts of the world is the development of agroforestry systems, involving trees and a mix of food and cash crops. The cash crops might be essential oil-bearing plants but must be carefully selected on the basis of known demand rather than on fanciful ideas of exotic natural oils inevitably finding a market in the environmentally-conscious world.
Selection of tree crops such as Cinnamomum, Piper and Eucalyptus, which can be harvested under a coppice system of management, offers opportunities for development. Some or all of the research needs enumerated in the section on Piper hispidinervium in Chapter 3 are applicable to other tree crops and the sequence of events which are needed to develop them. In the case of Eucalyptus it is possible to grow it as a multipurpose crop from which fuelwood or poles can be produced as well as oil. Slower-growing trees such as rosewood and sandal are more difficult to bring under cultivation but the possibility of utilizing sustainably harvested rosewood leaf, rather than wood, as a source of essential oil might be possible; and the successful cultivation of sandal in India in areas of natural stands not susceptible to spike disease may yet be achieved.
Harvesting of wild forest trees or shrubs is conceptually attractive, particularly if it involves non-destructive harvesting of aerial parts such as leaves or terminal branches which quickly regrow. However, the problems of collecting material that may be scattered over wide areas, perhaps of difficult terrain, are great. The supply of raw material for distillation would be unpredictable and probably too small to meet market demand, and the variability and uncertainty of the oil quality from widely sourced biomass would create further problems.
Bringing trees under cultivation has advantages insofar as both inputs and outputs are well-defined and can be controlled and adjusted as the needs demand. Selection and improvement of planting stock as a means of improving oil quality and productivity - which are not options when utilising wild trees - also become possible. Provision of sustainably harvested plant material for distillation can be undertaken in several ways: on a smallholder basis, with farmers owning individual distillation units; by some form of cooperative in which individual outgrowers contribute raw material to a single distillery; or through an estate feeding a central distillery.
Whatever the fashions of the day, flavours and fragrances of plant origin will continue to be in demand. And whatever form of exploitation is best suited to forest and man - natural stands, monocultures or mixed cropping systems - the opportunities for developing countries will remain.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
COPPEN, J.J.W. and GREEN, C.L. (1993) Options for development of new essential oil industries with special reference to Malaysia. 12 pp. Presented at International Conference on Essential Oils, Fragrances and Flavours, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October-4 November, 1993.
GREEN, C.L. and HONE, G.A. (1992) Essential oil production in developing countries. pp. 197-202. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Aromatic and Medicinal Plants, Nyons, France, 2-4 December, 1991.
LAWRENCE, B.M. (1985) A review of the world production of essential oils (1984). Perfumer and Flavorist, 10(5), 1-16.
LAWRENCE, B.M. (1993) A planning scheme to evaluate new aromatic plants for the flavour and fragrance industries. pp. 620-627. In New Crops. Janick, J. and Simon, J.E. (eds). 710 pp. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
VERLET, N. (1993) Commercial aspects [of essential oil production]. pp. 137-174. In Volatile Oil Crops: Their Biology, Biochemistry and Production. Hay, R.K.M. and Waterman, P.G. (eds). 185 pp. Harlow, UK: Longman.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2
CINNAMOMUM OILS (INCLUDING CINNAMON AND CASSIA)
Cinnamomum is a large genus, many species of which yield a volatile oil on distillation. The composition of the oil, and therefore its value and the use to which it is put, depends very much on the species that is distilled as well as the part of the plant which is utilized. The most important Cinnamomum oils in world trade are those from C. verum (cinnamon bark and leaf oils), C. cassia (cassia oil) and C. camphora (sassafras and Ho leaf oils). The latter species provides oils which are utilized as sources of chemical isolates.
However, a number of other Cinnamomum species are distilled on a much smaller scale and the oils used either locally or exported to regional markets. Given the large number of Cinnamomum species that exist, their widespread distribution in Asia, and the number still not characterised in terms of essential oil content and composition, the genus has much potential for providing new tree crops in developing countries.
The spice oils cinnamon and cassia are discussed first. An indication is then given of the types of oil found in other Cinnamomum species, including C. camphora, and those with the greatest perceived potential for future use.
DESCRIPTION AND USES
Cinnamon bark oil possesses the delicate aroma of the spice and a sweet and pungent taste. Its major constituent is cinnamaldehyde but other, minor components impart the characteristic odour and flavour. It is employed mainly in the flavouring industry where it is used in meat and fast food seasonings, sauces and pickles, baked goods, confectionery, cola-type drinks, tobacco flavours and in dental and pharmaceutical preparations. Perfumery applications are far fewer than in flavours because the oil has some skin-sensitizing properties, but it has limited use in some perfumes.
Cinnamon leaf oil has a warm, spicy, but rather harsh odour, lacking the rich body of the bark oil. Its major constituent is eugenol rather than cinnamaldehyde. It is used as a flavouring agent for seasonings and savory snacks. As a cheap fragrance it is added to soaps and insecticides. The oil's high eugenol content also makes it valuable as a source of this chemical for subsequent conversion into iso-eugenol, another flavouring agent.
Cassia oil is distilled from a mixture of leaves, twigs and fragments of bark. Cinnamaldehyde is the major constituent and it is used mainly for flavouring cola-type drinks, with smaller amounts used in bakery products, sauces, confectionery and liqueurs. Like cinnamon bark oil, its use as a fragrance is limited by its skin sensitizing properties.
WORLD SUPPLY AND DEMAND TRENDS
Markets
Cinnamon bark oil is a high-value essential oil but the volumes traded are very low. In the ten years since 1983 exports from Sri Lanka, virtually the only supplier of the oil, have never been more than 2.8 tonnes. Exports from Sri lanka for the six years 1987-92, together with their destinations, are shown in Table 1.
The major market is the EC, within which France is the biggest importer. In recent years the United States has emerged as the second largest importing country.
World demand for cinnamon leaf oil has been around 120-150 tonnes pa in recent years, met almost entirely by Sri Lanka. Sri Lankan exports (Table 2) have averaged about 120 tonnes pa for the period 1987-92, but this includes an exceptionally low output in 1990.
The United States and Western Europe are the largest markets for cinnamon leaf oil. Imports into France and the UK have fallen in the last few years, as they have slightly for India. Hong Kong is a significant importer although most of the oil is re-exported.
The ready availability of eugenol ex clove leaf oil has led to some loss in markets for cinnamon leaf oil. When eugenol is required for further conversion into iso-eugenol, that produced from cinnamon leaf oil possesses a more desirable aroma and flavour than when derived from clove leaf oil. For most other purposes, however, the cheaper eugenol ex clove leaf oil is preferred.
Estimation of world demand for cassia oil is complicated by the fact that export data are not available from the People's Republic of China, the major producer. Furthermore, the oil is only separately specified in import statistics of the USA and Japan, although these are known to be the major markets.
The levels of imports of cassia oil into the USA are shown in Table 3 for the period 1987-93.
Imports into the USA have risen in recent years and, with a soft drinks market which shows no sign of weakening, demand for cassia oil is expected to remain strong. Imports from Japan and Hong Kong are almost entirely re-exports of Chinese oil.
Japanese imports of cassia oil have averaged 60 tonnes pa for the six years 1988-93, virtually all of it coming directly from the People's Republic of China. A significant proportion of the imports are re-exported (to the USA, for example, above).
Supply sources
Sri Lanka is the only regular supplier of cinnamon bark and leaf oils. With the exception of 1990, when both oils were in short supply, production (as reflected in exports) has remained very constant for bark oil, with a slight downward trend for leaf oil. Internal consumption is small so that production levels are not much greater than exports.
Madagascar and the Seychelles have been intermittent suppliers of leaf oil on a very minor scale in the past. India produces very small amounts of leaf oil for domestic use.
Most cassia oil in international trade is of Chinese origin. There is believed to be significant domestic consumption so total annual production may be in excess of 500 tonnes.
Small quantities of cassia oil are produced in Indonesia, Viet Nam, India and Nepal but these are obtained from species of Cinnamomum other than C. cassia (see PLANT SOURCES) and are much less widely traded than Chinese oil.
Quality and prices
There is no international standard for cinnamon bark oil although batches containing cinnamaldehyde at the higher end of the range fetch the higher price. In the United States, an EOA standard specifies an aldehyde content of 55-78 percent.
International (ISO) standards exist for cinnamon leaf and cassia oils. For cinnamon leaf oil, ranges between which the major constituent, eugenol, should fall are specified in terms of total phenol content for oils of different origin. Oil from the Seychelles used to be preferred because of its high eugenol content (ca 90 percent). In practice, Sri Lanka now accounts for almost all of the oil in international trade and the standard specifies a 75-85 percent phenol content. Another constituent of the oil which contributes to its aromatic character is cinnamaldehyde and for Sri Lankan oil a maximum level of 5 percent is specified. Physico-chemical requirements are also given.
In the United States an FMA monograph, which replaces the old EOA standard, specifies the eugenol content of cinnamon leaf oil in terms of its solubility in potassium hydroxide (80-88 percent).
For cassia oil, cinnamaldehyde is the major constituent and a minimum content of 80 percent is specified in the ISO standard. Again, physico-chemical data are provided.
Cinnamon bark oil is considerably more expensive than the leaf oil and probably the most highly priced of all essential oils. During 1992 it was being offered at around US$385/kg, largely reflecting the high raw material cost. In 1993 and early 1994 dealers in London were only quoting prices on request.
Cinnamon leaf oil, in contrast, has been in the range US$6.50-7.50/kg for most of the last three years. Its price fell gradually from about US$7.50 in early 1991 to US$6.50 in mid-1993. In late 1993 it had risen again to US$7.30/kg and in early 1994 it was US$8.25/kg. Although it is a comparatively low-priced oil it is still more expensive than clove leaf oil as a source of eugenol (which was approximately US$2.70/kg in early 1994).
Cassia oil, too, has remained fairly level in price over the last few years. In the period early 1991 to mid-1993 it fetched US$33-35/kg. It then fell slightly and in early 1994 it was about US$29/kg. These prices are significantly lower than those which prevailed in the early and mid-1980s, when there was a shortage of cassia bark in the People's Republic of China. Any appreciable rise in price above the US$30-35/kg level is likely to encourage end-users to blend cheaply available synthetic cinnamaldehyde with natural cassia oil.
PLANT SOURCES
Botanical/common names
Family Lauraceae:
Cinnamomum verum Presl (syn. C. zeylanicum Nees) True or Ceylon cinnamon
C. cassia Presl Cassia, Chinese cinnamon, "Cassia lignea"
C. burmannii Blume Indonesian cassia
C. loureirii Nees Vietnamese cassia
C. tamala (Buch.-Ham.) Nees & Eberm. Indian cassia
Description and distribution
The genus Cinnamomum comprises several hundred species which occur naturally in Asia and Australia. They are evergreen trees and shrubs and most species are aromatic. C. verum, the source of cinnamon bark and leaf oils, is a tree indigenous to Sri Lanka, although most oil now comes from cultivated areas. Smaller areas of wild trees are found in southwestern parts of India. C. cassia, the source of internationally traded cassia oil, occurs wild as a bush in the mountains of southern China but is now cultivated for oil production, mainly in the provinces of Kwangsi and Kwangtung.
The other cassias occur wild on the islands of Sumatra and Java, Indonesia (C. burmannii); in Viet Nam (C. loureirii); and India and Nepal (C. tamala). In all cases the trees are also cultivated.
Effects of oil production on the natural resource
Most of the above oils are now derived almost entirely from cultivated sources and there is no longer pressure on the wild resource.
HARVESTING/PRIMARY PROCESSING
Cinnamomum usually coppices well and commercial production of the bark spices entails cutting the stems low down after an initial establishment period and harvesting the bushy re-growth stems at regular intervals thereafter. In Sri Lanka, a first harvest may be obtained after 3-4 years, although both quality and yields improve with subsequent cutting. The stems are cut during the rainy season to facilitate peeling of the bark. Details of harvesting practice differ slightly from country to country but the basic principles are the same. Strips of bark are then formed into the familiar compound quills (cinnamon) or hollow quills (cassia) of the spices.
In Sri Lanka, cinnamon bark oil is produced by distillation of chips and variable amounts of featherings (pieces of inner bark from twigs and twisted shoots) and quillings (broken fragments of quills). In many cases the older form of hydro-distillation is used in which chips and water are placed together in the distillation vessel which is heated by direct fire. The oil distils over in two fractions, one lighter and one heavier than water, and a form of cohobation is used to recover residual oil from the distillation waters. More modern methods involve steam distillation.
The leaves left after trimming the cut stems, as well as those obtained from pruning operations, provide the raw material for production of cinnamon leaf oil. They are usually allowed to dry for a few days before distillation. Traditional stills in Sri Lanka are large wooden vessels capable of holding up to 200 kg of leaves, on top of which is fitted a copper still head. Steam is introduced from a separate wood-fired boiler. In some cases, all-metal vessels are used and water-steam distillation is employed.
Chinese cassia oil is produced by hydro-distillation of leaves, twigs and fragments of bark.
Yields and quality variation
For cinnamon and cassia oils there is more potential than usual for variation in oil yields and quality and this makes it difficult to cite typical data. Not only is there the expected intrinsic variation due to different geographical origins of the source raw material, but the composition of the charge that is distilled is liable to vary, particularly in the case of cinnamon bark oil and cassia oil. The method of distillation used (steam vs water-steam vs hydro-distillation) and other differences in distillation practice give rise to further causes of variation.
VALUE-ADDED PROCESSING
Cinnamon and cassia oils are both normally rectified within the importing country before sale to end-users in order to give a cleaner product or to provide an oil with more uniform composition. Rectification is also required to produce feedstock eugenol for subsequent derivative manufacture.
PRODUCTS OTHER THAN OIL
The major incentive to cultivation of C. verum and C. cassia has been their value as spice crops, for which world demand is considerable (tens of thousands of tonnes of bark annually). Indonesian cassia (C. burmanii) is much more important as a spice than as a source of oil and enters international trade along with Chinese cassia. There is some production of oleoresin for flavouring purposes, chiefly in North America from the cheaper Indonesian cassia. Bark also finds local use medicinally, particularly in the People's Republic of China.
DEVELOPMENTAL POTENTIAL
For the cinnamon and cassia oils of international commerce, production of oil is secondary to the production of the spice. The establishment of new areas of these particular Cinnamomum species will depend upon demand for the spice and economic returns to the farmer. Whether "waste" material from spice production is then utilized for oil production is, again, dependent on demand, prevailing oil prices and economic returns. The close relationship between the two commodities makes it unlikely that production of oil will shift, geographically, from the traditional centres of spice production.
Research needs
Apart from improvements in distillation practice, the greatest advances in productivity and quality will come from breeding programmes aimed at producing superior germplasm for planting. Some progress has already been made in identifying mother plants which give high yields of oil and high cinnamaldehyde and eugenol contents in the bark and leaves (GURUSINGHE and KIRINDE, 1985) and this work needs to be continued.
OILS FROM OTHER CINNAMOMUM SPECIES
The diversity of Cinnamomum as a genus, although not as great as, say, Eucalyptus, has analogies with the latter in terms of the variety of chemical types of volatile oil that may be distilled from the plants. Like Eucalyptus, the same species of Cinnamomum can afford oils with quite different compositions according to the population being studied, i.e. it may exist as different chemotypes. C. camphora is a well-known example and the wood from different groups of trees may yield camphor, linalool, safrole or cineole as the major chemical upon distillation.
This diversity, coupled with the ability of most Cinnamomum to respond to coppicing (a system of management which enables it to be harvested on a sustainable basis), and a market that is always receptive to new, alternative sources of natural aroma chemicals, makes Cinnamomum one of the most promising areas for research. The increasing number of reports in the scientific literature describing the oil characteris