<title>Role of Acacia species in the rural economy of dry Africa and the Near East</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The importance of Acacia species in rural life in dryland Africa and the Near East cannot be overstressed. Acacia formations are the major component of 817 million hectares of dry and very dry woodlands and steppes of Sub-Saharan Africa. They are always present even in the heart of the Sahara and the Kalahari, where other hardy species have given up in the harsh dry conditions; they are an important link in the ecosystems of dry zones on which many wildlife species rely; they are a major support to the livelihood of the population in large expanses of the Sahelian steppes up to the woodlands of the Sudanian zone and the deserts of the Near East.
Acacia formations are central to the sustenance of the huge herds of cattle, sheep and goats of these regions; they contribute to the increasing energy needs of households in rural as well as in urban areas and they provide timber for shelter, handicrafts and utensils. The non-wood tree products that they offer to human communities include the universally used gum arable, tannin from pods, leaves or bark, medicines and many other commodities. All these are still intensively used in Africa and the Near East and will remain so for some time to come.
The influence of Acacia species as individuals and stands in maintaining and restoring soil fertility is of paramount importance to populations who cannot always afford to buy fertilizers to sustain their agricultural production. Finally, one should not forget the role of Acacia trees in the landscape and in beautifying villages and individual dwellings.
The Forestry Department of FAO has, since 1990, accumulated information on the Acacia species and corresponding formations with particular reference to their contribution to rural development in Africa and the Near East. A number of specialists have provided useful reports on West Africa (Pr. Guinko Sita of the University of Ouagadougou); East Africa (Mr. Abul Ghasim Seif El Din from Sudan); Near East (Professor Ibrahim Nahal of the University of Aleppo, Syria). Dr G.E. Wickens has prepared the present report from the contribution of A.G. Seif el Din "A first synthesis for Africa" and other documentation available in FAO, the U.K. and elsewhere. It is hoped that it will be useful to researchers and development agents in the field. FAO is greatly indebted to these colleagues mentioned above and to all who commented on previous drafts.
This work was conceived and coordinated by E.H. Sène, Chief, Forest Conservation, Research and Education Service, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department. Colleagues in this arid the Forest Resources Development Service, and members of the Subgroup on Desertification of FAO's Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Energy, which deals with drylands, contributed valuable and helpful guidance and comments.
Information will continue to be gathered on the role of local and exotic Acacias in Africa and the Near East, especially in relation to their contribution in combating desertification, for future updating of this report.
J.P. Lanly
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
Always present... where other hardy species have given up.
<section>2</section>
Abstract
Some 160 Acacia species are native of Africa and the Near East, in the drier regions of which 78 (97 taxa) are reported to be utilized for fuel, timber, forage, gum, tannins, fibre, medicine, food, handicrafts, domestic utensils, environmental protection, soil fertility, shade and shelter, game refuge, amenity and ornamental plantings, and agroforestry. Much of the information is provided by means of tables although the major uses, fuel, forage, gums and tannins are discussed in some detail.
Their distribution and role in the Sahel, Horn of Africa, East, Southern and North Africa, Arabia and the Thar-Sind Deserts are briefly described. The four most widely distributed and utilized species, A. nilotica, A. Senegal, A. tortilis and Faidherbia albida are treated separately. Some of the introduced acacias are briefly discussed, especially regarding physiological problems associated with their introduction in the Sahel.
There are problems in the management of Acacia communities, many of which have already been subjected to anthropogenic pressures. It is difficult enough to manage for sustainable development for timber, fuel and non-wood products for the rural communities; the demands by urban communities for fuelwood certainly cannot be met from forest resources within the arid and semi-arid regions. In severely decertified areas there is very little hope of improvement. Protection of local communities in the higher rainfall areas through sound management is recommended in order to form a base from which it is possible to attempt reclamation of the decertified regions.
<section>3</section>
Introduction and acknowledgements
This study is an attempt to better understand the role played by Acacia species in the rural economy of the drier regions of Africa and the Near East, the latter extending from the eastern Mediterranean and Red Sea to the Indian Desert.
Much of the information presented has been gleaned from the Libraries of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the Oxford Forestry Institute. Special acknowledgement is given for invaluable support provided by Mrs. F. Monti of the Forestry Library Service Point. I am greatly indebted to the help given me by D.M.W. Anderson, J. Ball, C.W. Fagg, W.J. Howard, J.K. Jackson, P.D. Koné, M.L. Malagnoux, P.L. Pugliese, F. Riveros, El Hadji Sène, and many others, who have aided me in the production of this report.
<section>4</section>
Preface
Acacia species are widely distributed through the drier regions of tropical and southern Africa, often the dominant tree and in some areas forming monospecific communities. In North Africa eastwards to Sind the genus is less well represented, mainly due to overexploitation, although in Arabia through Iraq and Iran eastwards to Pakistan and India species of Prosopis may replace Acacia both ecologically and economically.
Most species are important sources of browse, fuel and pole timber; some are important commercial sources of gum and tannin. Many are utilized by the rural populations in local medicines, for fibre, domestic utensils and handicrafts. Nitrogen-fixing, their potential for use in agroforestry, apart from a few species, has been neglected. Some can be effectively utilized for shade, shelter, live fences, soil stabilization as well as street trees and ornamentals.
In the past, the role of Acacia species in the rural economy and their economic potential has not been fully appreciated. For some rural communities they are absolutely essential for their survival, in others they may be of secondary importance. Importance is a relative concept, governed by availability and quality. Acacia seeds as a source of food are only just beginning to arouse interest, stimulated by the nutritional studies of seeds eaten by the Australian Aborigines!
The part played by Acacia species in the ecosystem is still imperfectly understood, the autecology of only a very few species has been studied; their associated biota are virtually unrecorded. Species of Acacia from Australia tend to be better understood and have consequently been widely introduced for timber, fuel, browse and ornamentals. That does not imply that they must be more suitable, just that knowledge leads to appreciation and helps to make them easier to manage.
Recent environmental and sociological changes resulting from prolonged drought, desertification, internal strife, AIDS and dwindling national resources and their effect on the rural economy are largely unrecorded. Indeed it would require a major international input to provide a proper assessment. Without such a study it is difficult to fully appreciate the role Acacia, and other species, must play in the rural economy of the present day.
Some of the information has been conflicting; deforestation has meant that species that were formerly economically important may have been replaced by other, often less effective, species. Changing economies has also meant that some usages are no longer required. However, the demand for fodder and fuel is likely to remain.
<section>5</section>
Part one: Acacia in the ecosystem
1.1 Acacia in Africa and the Near East
1.2 The ecosystems
1.3 Biomass production
1.1 Acacia in Africa and the Near East
There are c. 1250 species of Acacia, of which 134 species (represented by 170 taxa) are native of Africa, with 20 species (26 taxa) extending into Asia and 6 species (7 taxa) native to East Asia (Ross, 1979; Hassan and Styles, 1990; Lock, 1989, 1991). For the purposes of this present study Faidherbia albida (formerly known as Acacia albida) is also included here since its role in the rural economy is so similar to that of the Acacia that its omission by what are relatively minor taxonomic distinctions does not appear to be justified; never-the-less it is still treated throughout this document as Faidherbia albida. The accepted names of species cited in the text and their synonyms found in the consulted literature are listed in Annex A.
Despite this richness of Acacia species, relatively few appear to have been investigated. They are Acacia nilotica, A, senegal, A. tortilis and Faidherbia albida; their taxonomy and distribution are dealt with in Brenan (1983) and are further discussed in Part 4. This does not imply that the other species are worthless. Indeed, some are extremely important locally; all species make some contribution to the environment and rural economy by way of shade, shelter, soil stabilization and fertility, browse, fuel, etc. (Table 1.1).
1.2 The ecosystems
Approximately 55 per cent of the land surface of Africa is arid or semi-arid (Jahnke, 1982, cited by Seif el Din, 1991) and is illustrated in Annex B. These areas are characterized by annual rainfalls of less than 100 mm to c. 600 mm in a short season of 2-4 months. In some parts of Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda a bimodal regime prevails and although the total annual rainfall may be higher, the distribution of the rainfall and the intensity of the dry season imposes a semi-arid regime. The total precipitation in the arid and semiarid regions varies widely from year to year and its distribution within a year is also variable. This low, erratic and poor distribution of rainfall means that the productivity of annual crops, especially in areas with less than 400 mm, is unpredictable, placing even greater value on perennial vegetation, especially multipurpose trees such as the Acacia.
The semi-arid ecosystems of tropical Africa are, with few exceptions, either thorn scrub or thorn savanna, with Acacia as the dominant species, either forming pure stands, e.g. Acacia mellifera thorn scrub, A. seyal thorn savanna, Acacia albida riparian woodland (now more correctly known as Faidherbia albida riparian woodland), etc. These ecosystems are important rangelands for the livestock industry, especially in those areas where A. tortilis is widespread.
Grasses and herbs alone cannot support a livestock industry in the semi-arid regions; browse, especially from Acacia species, plays an essential part. The dietary requirements of herbivores requires an intake of 20-25% browse, of which some 5% is consumed during the rainy season when herbage is relatively plentiful and 30% in the long dry season. Consequently the loss of these Acacia and other browse species would mean that herbivores would no longer be able to live through the dry season without costly and currently uneconomic food supplements. Livestock production is undoubtedly the most suitable industry for the utilization of the rangelands but full regard must be made for sustainability not exploitation. It has been suggested that in the Sahel, if the present trend in overexploitation and desertification continues unhindered, most of the browse species would disappear within the next 20 to 25 years and the livestock industry, which is the main economic activity would be
seriously jeopardized (Le Houérou, 1989).
Pure stands of A. mellifera or, in higher rainfall areas, A. seyal often occur on clay plains. Such areas can be suitable for irrigation, as is the case of the so-called 'cotton soils', the Quaternary alluvial clay plains of the Blue and White Nile in northern Sudan. In recent decades large areas have been clear felled for the mechanized cultivation of irrigated crops of cotton, sorghum, groundnuts, sugarcane, etc. with disastrous results with regard to fuel wood resources and wind erosion - the latter being associated with an increase in both number and severity of dust storms (Wickens, 1968). It should be noted that the black 'cotton soils' of the Lake Chad basin are far less tractable than those of the Sudan despite the similarity in the vegetation and are better suited to the growing of rice and not wheat.
Riverine communities of Acacia nilotica subsp. nilotica or subsp. tomentosa, such as those growing on the alluvial soils of the Blue and White Nile are also widely used for the growing of such irrigated crops as cereals, beans, cucurbits, tomatoes, onions, etc. on both a peasant and commercial scale. As a result of the influx of displaced nomadic tribesmen into the Nile valley following the recent prolonged drought the trees of these communities are in danger of extinction due to excessive cutting for fuelwood (Wickens, in ed.).
Open stands of Faidherbia albida, especially in West Africa, are highly valued for the enhanced yields of crops grown beneath their canopy as well as being a source of highly nutritious browse during the dry season. The riverine stands along the Wadi Aribo in western Sudan probably present the largest concentration of this species in Africa and the Aribo basin is rightly regarded as a prime dry season grazing area. The trees are similarly valued to those in West Africa although the stands are now endanged following the heavy and indiscriminent lopping for browse during the past two decades by the camel nomads who have moved into the area following the desertification of their former grazing areas.
These are but a few examples of the valuable ecosystems being destroyed; without due regard to their role in the local rural economy, further examples will be given elsewhere in the text. In general the ecosystems represent a state of equilibrium between the rainfall and soils in terms of available moisture and anthropogenic factors such as fire (for land clearance and hunting), grazing, cultivation, fuelwood etc. Excessive anthropogenic pressure will eventually lead to desertification, an insidious process which, in arid and semi-arid areas is ultimately more damaging than deforestation of the rainforests in that even partial recovery is almost always impossible.
Desertification can be defined as the destruction through man's activities of the natural vegetation around such focal points as watering points, habitation, livestock routes, etc. Through time the destruction expands centrifugally until the various areas of devastation coalesce, presenting a false impression of a frontal advance of the desert. Desertification is independent of drought, which is a climatic phenomenon, although desertification can certainly be aggravated by drought, hence the present dramatic devastation in the Sahel. Whether the albedo effect of desertification affects the climate and prolongs the drought remains debatable.
Although it has been repeatedly stated, e.g. Seif el Din (1991), etc. that the farmer and pastoralist appreciated the value of the natural vegetation, this is considered a rather sweeping and somewhat inaccurate generalization. It is apparent from the recent SOS Sahel Oral History Programme that practically all those questioned did not appreciate until too late the role trees had played in preventing desertification (Wickens, in prep.). The value of trees certainly appears from the examples cited above not to be appreciated by desert nomads, perhaps understandably so since they inhabit an area where trees are very few and far between and are consequently unfamiliar with their role in preventing erosion.
The boundaries between the different plant communities are not static. With the exception of abrupt pedological boundaries, such as occur in the central Sudan between A. senegal and A. mellifera where a dune system abuts onto a clay plain, boundaries are generally accepted as the point of interdigitation where there is a noticeable change in dominance, such as on clay soils where A. mellifera gives way to A. seyal. During the present extended period of drought, the former boundary of the more mesophytic A. seyal has retreated before the more xerophytic A. mellifera. Should the rainfall return to its pre-drought 'norm', the process will be reversed. However, where the desert has encroached onto the formerly lightly wooded A. tortilis grass savanna, the recovery is likely to be very slow indeed. A raw soil and low seed availability are not conducive to a rapid recovery. Indeed, according to Le Houérou (1989), the planting of indigenous woody species in francophone Sahel as
part of recovery programmes has proved largely unsuccessful in areas with less than 400 mm annual rainfall. The raw soils resulting from the desertification processes are generally inhospitable to plant life and it is the writer's opinion that ground cover should be established before trees, in line with the seral stages of succession.
The major mapping regions and their subdivisions recognized by White (1983) which are relevant to this present study are given in Table 1.2
Table 1.2 Vegetation regions of Africa and the major subdivisions containing dry zone Acacia species (White 1983).
Region
Area km²
Mapping units
Mediterranean/Sahara Regional Transition Zone
Argania spinosa scrub forest and bushland
Acacia gummifera-Ziziphus lotus bushland
Succulent sub-Mediterranean shrubland
Sub-Mediterranean anthropic landscape
Sahara Regional Transition Zone
Atlantic coastal desert
Red Sea coastal desert
Sahel semi-desert grassland
Sahel Acacia wooded grassland and deciduous bushland
Somalia-Masai Region
Somalia-Masai Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland and ticket
Karoo-Namib Region
Kalahari deciduous Acacia bushland and wooded grassland
Namib Desert
Total area
Acacia species are the dominant trees or shrubs in most of the mapping units shown in the above Table. Unfortunately, while the areas covered by the various regions is known, those of the mapping units have not been recorded although they probably occupy some 4,500,000 km².
1.3 Biomass production
As Fagg and Stewart (1994) have pointed out, there have been very few quantified studies of fodder production from the acacias (Tables 1.3.1 and 1.3.2). Preliminary results from A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha in the Tugela valley, South Africa (Milton, 1983), provide an estimated yield of 1 ton/ha/yr shoot and leaf dry weight, a figure that agrees favourably with foliage production in India from A. tortilis of 2.5 kg/tree/yr from young plantations (at 400 trees/ha). Booth (1966), working in Kordofan Province, Sudan, also obtained an oven-dry weight of 2.5 kg of leaf litter from a seven-year old A. senegal.
Table 1.3.1 Annual foliage and pod biomass production of A. senegal in Senegal (Bille, 1980)
Rainfall
Diameter
Twigs
Leaves
Pods
mm/yr
cm
kg/DM
g/DM
g/DM
Table 1.3.2 Annual foliage production (kg/DM) of Acacia species (Bille, 1980)
Diameter (Cm)
Species
Rainfall (mm)
A. laeta
A. seyal
A. tortilis
F. albida
The average foliar dry matter from Faidherbia albida in Mali over a number of sites was c. 300 kg/ha/yr (Cissé and Koné, 1992), while pod yields varied from 200 to 600 kg/ha/yr (Montgolfier-Kouevi and Le Houérou, 1983).
Pellew (1983a) working in the Serengeti National Park, obtained dry weight browse productivity rates of 5000 kg/ha/yr for A. xanthophloea, and 1725 kg/ha/yr for A. tortilis, with 90 and 49% of available canopy volume and a giraffe offtake of c. 80% and c. 60% respectively per annum, the upper browse level being 5.75 m.
The measurement of leaf biomass production is extremely complex and is discussed in some detail by Bille (1983). There does, however, appear to be a highly significant correlation between between trunk circumference and annual foliage production for which there is an exponential relationship per species (Cissé, 1983). Not only is the productivity of browse poorly known, it is also difficult to assess with any degree of accuracy. It is known to be related to rainfall and ecological environment and ranges from 100 kg to 1000 kg of edible DM/ha/yr. The feed value of the foliage in terms of energy is generally low to medium, ranging from 0.25 to 0.40 FU per kg of DM, i.e. 400 to 700 Kcal per kg of DM, while digestible protein is usually high, normally above 4% and often above 10% and may even reach as high as 30% in the Capparaceae (Le Houérou, 1983c).
<section>6</section>
Part two: The uses of Acacia in the rural economy
2.1 Wood products
2.2 Non-wood products
2.3 Services
2.1 Wood products
2.1.1 Fuel
It is generally accepted that the current use of trees for fuel nationally is exceeding incremental growth. The standing volume obtainable from some of the best 20 year-old Acacia woodlands is only 8.5 m³ ha (Vink, 1989), equivalent to about 0.42m³/ha of mean annual increment.
Wilson (1983) obtained annual values per capita of 0.50-0.62 m^3 of fuelwood for urban use in Niono, Mali, and cites 0.62 m^3 in northern Ethiopia and 0.63 m^3 in northern Nigeria. In those areas of Ethiopia where wood is extremely limited and cattle dung (which should have been used on cultivated land) has now become the principal fuel, as in Makalle, Tigre Province, with annual fuelwood consumption per capita now as low as 0.15 m^3 and, in areas where wood is still abundant, as high as 1.5 m^3. Other authors give values ranging from the annual fuelwood requirements in the Sahel of one person for cooking of 0.7 m^3 (Maydell, 1987) up to 1.5 m^3 (Montalembert and Clement, 1983) and, in Tanzania for Dar es Salaam, 2.1 m^3 (Hines and Eckman, 1993). For the higher ranges it is uncertain whether fuel consumption is for domestic use only or includes bakeries, brewing, brick kilns, potteries, blacksmiths, etc. Since the degree of drying and efficiency as a fuel also affects
fuelwood consumption, any conclusions based on the above figures would be inconclusive apart from obvious deduction that fuelwood consumption is exceeding supply and must inevitably affect other forms of tree usage too.
The present trend of a 2-3% annual population increase and its concomitant increase in demands for more fuel and land for food have placed an impossible strain on existing forest resources, especially in the drier regions. The Mbeere of northern Kenya have been forced to reduce their fuel consumption, great log fires no longer burn overnight in their compounds (Riley and Brokensha, 1988). Similar economies must surely be practiced throughout Africa, where an exponential population explosion creates a demand that excedes natural regeneration of the fuel source. However, more efficient stoves could reduce fuel consumption considerably and thereby substantially reduce some of the pressure on the existing fuel resources.
Whereas it is suggested that the use of fuel by the rural population, which relies heavily on dead wood, may be more or less in balance with regrowth, the urban population places an unbearable strain upon fuelwood tree resources. Land cleared for cultivation, especially in poorly-planned development schemes, also represent a future loss of potential fuelwood supplies (M.A. Trossero, verbal information, 1993). This is well illustrated by the changes in the source of fuelwood for Khartoum, Sudan.
The original source of firewood was from the fairly dense, even stands of Acacia tortilis subsp. spirocarpa which formerly occurred to the east of Khartoum (Harrison and Jackson, 1958). Although the cutting of living trees was illegal the firewood cutters had little difficulty in making a dead tree from a live one. There were quarrels between the firewood cutters and the graziers over this destruction of living trees as the pods were a valuable dry season feed for livestock.
In order to reduce the destruction of trees in the vicinity of Khartoum, the Government, by the 1940s, was bringing in subsidised firewood by rail from the clay plains in the region of Gedaref, some 370 km to the southeast. Both A. mellifera and A. seyal were used, but A. mellifera was the preferred species since A. seyal is susceptible to the bostrychid beetle Sinoxylon senegalense and, if not used quickly enough, is soon reduced to a pile of sawdust (J.K. Jackson, pers. comm. 1994). Charcoal production has helped to overcome this problem as well as easing transport difficulties. However, since the 1960s, vaste areas of the clay plain have been more or less cleared for irrigation and mechanized agricultural schemes and much of the A. mellifera has been eliminated. Woodcutters have been equally successful in destroying all the A. tortilis in the Khartoum area.
The effect of such clearance schemes has been that charcoal from relatively local A. mellifera has now been replaced by that from the more distant A. seyal. The latter species, because of its abundance, is now considered to be the most important charcoal source in the Sudan (Badi et al., 1989). A consequence of this shrub and tree clearance is that the incidence and severity of the haboob (dust storm) have also increased. Not only have the plant communities been ruined, the local people have been displaced from their land and their social structure destroyed. Many have been dispersed to new homelands, either in marginal areas or newly opened farming areas, and so the cycle of deforestation has continued.
The once abundant natural stands along the Nile of A. nilotica subspp. nilotica and tomentosa were formerly important sources of fuel for the Nile steamers and the railways as well as timber for boat building and railway sleepers (Muriel, 1901); they were even used to pay taxes (Schweinfurth, 1893). Plantations of these species are now minor sources of fuel for Khartoum.
Other urban areas have a similar history of fuel problems, for example Niono, Mali (Wilson, 1983), Nairobi, Kenya (Kinyanjui, 1985) and Kano, Nigeria (Cline-Cole et al., 1990).
In terms of calorific value, multiple use, natural regeneration, fast growth and yield under Sahelian conditions A. nilotica subsp. adstringens and tomentosa are regarded by Maydell (1986) as superior to all other indigenous candidates; subsp. nilotica, which differs from subsp. tomentosa in having glabrous to nearly glabrous pods and glabrous to shortly puberulous twigs, is not mentioned but should also be included.
See Table 2.1.1 for the use of Acacia species for fuelwood and charcoal. In the absence of alternative fuelwood sources, all Acacia species are probably used for firewood, even though the references cited do not mention their use, even A. oerfota with its slender branches and obnoxious smell. Conversion to charcoal has certain specific requirements, the species listed are therefore more likely to be a more accurate portrayal of usage.
2.1.1.1 Firewood
The desirable criteria for firewood species are (Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Hines and Eckman, 1993):
1. Rapid growth, high volume production, ability to coppice or sprout readily when cut. an requiring minimum management.
2. Wood dense with a low moisture content, relatively easy to cut, easy to handle, with few or no thorns, splitting easily and readily transportable; wood collected during the rainy season should not absorb moisture (the scandent or non-climbing shrub A. ataxacantha and A. brevispica are preferred by the Mbeere in Kenya for this reason despite their small dimensions)
3. Slow burning with high calorific value, producing very little smoke without objectionable nor toxic fumes and neither spits nor sparks.
These are criteria that are found in many Acacia species; they are also to be found in many of the Combretaceae. Although no comparative studies have been made, personal observation suggests that some Combretum species are slower growing than those of Acacia. This is supported by the preference of members of the Combretaceae by the Mbeere for charcoal, the hardness being equated with slow growth (Riley and Brokensha, 1988); in West Africa one of the most prized woods for charcoal is from Anogeissus leiocarpus (Combretaceae), while other members of the family, Combretum spp. and Guiera senegalensis provide most of the firewood as they are the most readily available coppice in fallow lands
The preferred Sahelian species in Burkino Faso and Niger are, because of their high calorific value, freedom from smoke and sparks, Acacia ehrenbergian, A. tortilis subsp. raddiana and A. nilotica subspp. adstringens, nilotica and tomentosa, while the wood of A. macrostachya and A. erythrocalyx is not highly regarded and are little used (Guinko, 1991). By their occurrence in large pure stands, offering easy harvesting and processing conditions, Acacia seyal formations have played a special role in the supply of charcoal to growing cities in Sudano-Sahelian Africa such as Dakar, N'Djamena as well as for many other cities in the Sudan where mechanized farming and the needs for fuel have contributed to the depletion of extensive areas of pure Acacia seyal stands.
Because of decreasing availability there is an increasing gap between preference and actual use. The deciding factor is availability and ease of collection (Riley and Brokensha, 1988). The use of such an obnoxious fuel as A. oerfota in the Yemen can only be tolerated because all other fuelwood sources have already been exploited; its local abundance in the lowlands is attributable to overgrazing and the replacement of more palatable species by the less palatable (Al-Hubaish and Müller-Hohenstein, 1984).
2.1.1.2 Charcoal
Charcoal, whether by desire or availability, is often the preferred or only fuel used in urban areas. Its manufacture can be a lucrative industry but inefficient practices can often result in a conversion efficiency that can be as low as 15% so that it is consequently a wasteful process.
The desirable criteria for charcoal are similar to those for fuelwood but requiring large, uniform stands producing wood of suitable dimensions and a high specific gravity (0.7-0.9) for efficiency and ease of manufacture. The characteristics of the finished product are: moisture <7%, ash <3 %, fixed carbon >75 % and apparent density >0.3 g/cc (FAO, 1962).
2.1.2 Timber
See Table 2.1.2 for timber properties and uses of Acacia species. According to Hines and Eckman (1993) the desirable criteria for construction and pole timber are:
1. Rapid growing, with straight stems of uniform size and small branches, naturally pruning and rapidly self-healing..
2. Possess good physical, mechanical, seasoning, preserving, and processing properties and insect, fungus and rot resistant.
For domestic use and handicrafts, such as platters, spoons, shuttles, mortars, tool handles, musical instruments, carvings, bows, arrows, etc. shape, strength, density, ability to peel, work or carve easily, freedom from splinters and, for such items as spoons and bowls, low permeability to liquids, are additional requirements.
While a number of species can provide pole timber, which is widely used in the domestic economy for construction purposes, commercial sawn timber is largely from A. nilotica subspp. indica, nilotica and tomentosa, A. polyacantha and A. sieberana.
<section>7</section>
2.2 Non-wood products
2.2.1 Forage
The desirable criteria for forage are, according to Hines and Eckman (1993):
1. Provision of palatable, non-toxic, nutritious foliage and fruit.
2. Ability to withstand browsing, lopping, pruning and coppicing
3. Quick growing, especially during the early stages of growth.
Forage refers to all browse and herbaceous food that is available to livestock and game animals; fodder, which is often wrongly applied to forage, refers to dried, cured plant material of crops such as maize and sorghum, including the grain. Browse refers to the tender twigs and leafy shoots of woody plants (Ibrahim, 1975) and is extended by Skerman et al (1988) to include their fruit. For the purposes of this document the former definition, which excludes pods, is used since, depending on the height of the tree or shrub, fallen pods may be available