<title>Quality assurance for small-scale rural food industries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
For the preface of this book the authors felt that the following article, written by a food technologist from an African country - who is clearly frustrated at the lack of quality assurance, would highlight the real situation in some food manufacturing enterprises and demonstrate the need for more attention to quality assurance.
It is hoped that this small book will provide readers with the basic knowledge to start applying total quality assurance to their processes and so avoid the pitfalls described below.
"In this article I would like to look at some of the companies I have visited in which basic hygiene rules are so flagrantly flouted. The employee is a prime determinant of final product quality; hence rules about washing hands before contacting foods, use of utensils to handle products, disposable gloves, clean clothes, and protected hair need to be applied regardless of the size of the operation.
In practice what can be seen? An employee happily picking his nose while waiting for the next can on the line to fill. Meanwhile a colleague is sweeping up a cloud of dust right in the middle of the production line. At the change of shift a casual worker rushes in and quickly changes into soiled overalls and goes to the production line. He shakes his (unwashed) hands with those around. Washed hands and gloves do not feature. Late in the shift the worker goes to a dark corner for a sleep while colleagues cover for him. Rules are being ignored whilst management complain about the cost of providing clean protective clothing daily.
Even where basic processing standards are being met they are often undermined by post-processing operations. In one example seen, the rate of production far exceeds the rate of packaging. Here the excess baked product is put into large open sacks for later packaging. Under the steamy conditions in the plant it picks up moisture and becomes soggy. Workers, as they pass the sacks, dip in for a snack. The basic rules state that finished stock should be kept in separate stores. But what do we often see? Poor store management with final products in the same room as rejected raw materials and old flour bags.
All too often basic safety rules are flouted while consumers look on and public health officials turn a blind eye. In meat handling (a very high risk area) rules state that raw meat should be transported in a sealed compartment made of food-grade material, impermeable floors and with ventilation. In my country, meat is commonly distributed in pick-up trucks with a crude metal bin in the back. It is made of any metal, poorly sealed and not ventilated. The meat is simply dumped in and it then sweats as it is moved to the market. The whole system is conducive to microbiological growth. At the point of delivery the meat is hoisted onto the shoulders of a porter wearing a dirty, bloodstained coat.
Consumers, law-makers and public health officials look on, accepting such standards as a necessary evil in a game of hide and seek with microbes and germs.
But who is to blame for this often prevailing state of affairs? In my humble opinion all those involved: management for failing to provide guidance, workers for a lack of sense of duty, consumers for silently accepting the situation and the regulatory agencies for looking the other way.
As worldwide competition increases, manufacturers in African countries will have to improve their hygiene standards to have a chance of survival. Accolades will not be awarded to mediocre performance and the final arbitrators, the consumers, will vote with their feet and buy where quality and safety are assured."
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge the help and assistance given by Ann Watts for editing the manuscript, Matthew Whitton for the illustrations and Calvin Onyango for permission to use his article as the preface.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
In most countries the safety and quality of foods is becoming a matter of increasing concern. Information is more readily available to consumers through the mass media and they are considerably more aware of existing and potential risks from pesticides, food poisoning and a poor diet. The impact of this greater awareness can be seen with consumers preferring to buy foods that are made by larger manufacturers, for example, a plastic bag of well dried fish rather than loose dry fish from a basket in a market. The small and medium scale food processor is thus well-advised to pay heed to this rapid change in customers attitudes if they are to survive in business. This book is targeted at such small food manufacturers and the agencies that can assist and advise them. Its purpose is to present the basic principles of quality assurance to satisfy customer demands and safety. Hopefully it will guide food manufacturers, however small, on how to improve their particular production
unit, keep up to date with a changing world and stay in business.
After introducing the basic principles and differences between quality control and quality assurance, the comparatively new management tool of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point systems (HACCP) is briefly described. These aspects are then related to four specific sub-sectors: baking, fruit processing, cereal or oilseed milling and herb and spice processing in order to show, in a practical way, how small, rural enterprises can implement appropriate quality assurance systems at low cost.
Quality improvement and control is not easy, particularly for very small manufacturers who may feel isolated. For this reason this publication ends with a series of appendices which list relevant publications, useful contacts and simple test methods.
However, in a publication of this size it is not possible to describe in detail every aspect of quality assurance and quality control and the reader is therefore advised to consult these publications and contact institutions for further information.
<section>4</section>
Glossary
Aflatoxins dangerous poisons produced by moulds of the Aspergillus species, found in cereals, oilseeds and nuts when incorrectly dried and stored.
Acid preserves foods that have a high acid content that inhibits spoilage.
Adulteration deliberate contamination of foods with materials of low quality.
Average weight a known proportion of containers have a fill-weight above system that shown on the label.
Bulk fermentation the whole of the dough is fermented at 27°C in a closed container to prevent surface drying.
Capacity of flour used to calculate bakery recipes.
Case hardening the formation of a dry skin on a wet food due to over-rapid drying. It slows the rate of drying and can lead to spoilage during storage.
Chlorination the addition of chlorine to water to destroy micro-organisms.
Composite flours mixtures of wheat flour (usually more than 80%) with other flours such as maize, rice, sorghum etc (usually less than 20%)
Conditioning standardisation of the moisture content of grains or oilseeds before milling.
Contamination materials that are accidentally included with a food (eg dirt, leaves, stalks etc).
Critical control stages in a process where quality control can have a major points effect on food quality.
Critical faults those faults in a product or package that would injure a consumer or cause substantial financial loss to the producer.
Cross contamination the transfer of soils or micro-organisms from raw food to processed.
Crumb the internal structure of baked products, especially bread and cake.
Detergent a chemical that removes soils but does not sterilise equipment (see soils below).
Enzymes natural proteins in foods that can cause changes to colour, flavour or texture of the food.
Equilibrium relative the moisture content at which a food does not gain or lose weight
humidity (ERM) and is stable during storage.
Fill-weight the amount of food placed into a container or package and written on the label (also net weight).
Final proof tinned loaves are placed in a prover at 35°C (85-90% RH) until desired height is reached before baking.
Gelatinization swelling and rupturing of starch grains due to heat and of starch moisture.
Gluten a protein found in wheat that gives the characteristic crumb structure to bread.
HACCP (Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point) system a system used to identify and control contamination in food processing.
Headspace the gap between the surface of food in a container and the underside of the lid.
High risk foods those foods that are capable of transmitting food poisoning micro-organisms to consumers.
Humidity the amount of water vapour in air.
Hydrometer an instrument that measures specific gravity of liquids, used to measure salt, sugar or alcohol concentration.
Low-acid foods foods that have little acid and therefore can contain food poisoning bacteria if poorly processed.
Micro-organisms tiny forms of life, including moulds, bacteria and yeasts, that are invisible until they are in large numbers.
Minimum weight all packages have a fill-weight equal to system or greater than that shown on the label.
Moulding process of passing dough through a moulding machine prior to filling into baking tins.
Net weight the amount of food filled into a container.
Pectin a natural gelling agent found in some fruits
pH a scale used to express acidity or alkalinity, from 1 (strong acid) through 7 (neutral) to 14 (strong alkali).
Potable water drinkable water that will not cause illness.
Preservation index a figure that is calculated to show that the amounts of acid, sugar and salt used in pickles will be enough to prevent spoilage.
Quality assurance a management system which controls each stage of food production from raw material harvest to final consumption.
Quality characteristics of a food. a set of descriptions that identify the specific quality features
Quality control a series of checks and control measures that ensure that a uniform quality food is produced.
Refractometer an instrument that measures the refractive index of a liquid, which is used to measure soluble solids in syrups, jams and marmalades, or salt in brines.
Rope in bread bacterial spoilage that produces rope-like threads in bread and can cause food poisoning.
Scaling dividing of dough into pieces of equal weight.
Shelf life the time that a processed food can be stored before changes in colour, flavour, texture or the number of micro-organisms make it unacceptable.
Sodium benzoate a chemical preservative that is particularly effective against yeasts.
Sodium metabisulphite a chemical preservative that is effective against moulds and yeasts.
Soils any material that contaminates equipment (ea. grease, scale, burned on food or other food residues).
Sterilant a chemical that destroys micro-organisms but does not remove soils.
Strong flour wheat flour that has a high level of gluten.
Sugar preserves foods that have a sufficiently high sugar content to stop spoilage.
Thief sampler equipment to take samples from sacks of food.
Titration a method of accurately adding one liquid to another, commonly used in food analysis.
Water absorption measurements that indicate how much water can be held in a dough.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1 Basic principles
1.1 The importance of quality assurance
Small and medium sized food processing businesses all over the world increasingly have to consider the production of good quality products as essential to their survival. Consumers and buyers are becoming more aware of the importance of safe, high quality products. Large companies that can afford advertising space on the radio, television or in the press emphasise the quality of their goods, often in a very subtle way. This quality image is given by stating for example "our foods are made only from high quality ingredients." They also project a quality image through packaging etc. Producers who sell intermediate products, such as dried fruits, to a secondary processor will find that the buyer expects the foods to meet an agreed standard. In the case of exporters, these standards are becoming more and more strict.
In order to improve and control product quality it is essential to fully understand the meaning of the term quality. A common definition is "achieving agreed customer expectations or specifications". In other words, the customer defines the quality criteria needed in a product. To meet this standard the manufacturer puts in a Quality Control System to ensure that the product meets these criteria on a routine basis.
1.1.1. Quality control or quality assurance
The following examples using baked goods illustrate the difference between quality control and quality assurance. A customer may specify that bread should be white, with a good loaf volume and pleasant flavour and taste. The manufacturer then needs to focus on the process to ensure that the raw materials are consistently handled to produce uniform white loaves with the expected volume and taste.
Controlling quality may be achieved by:
* Inspection of raw materials to ensure that no poor quality ingredients are used.
* Carrying out checks on the process to ensure that the weights of the ingredients and temperature and time of baking are correct.
* Inspecting the final product to ensure that no poor quality loaves are sent to the consumer.
However, this Quality Control approach is focused on the process whereas the problems that customers may face can also occur elsewhere in the production and distribution chain. The following examples highlight the shortcomings of a simple quality control approach.
Problem: Many of the loaves are contaminated with pieces of wood.
Reason: The distribution system involves transporting the loaves on wooden trays to retail stores where the loaves are packaged and then sold to customers. The wooden trays are not part of the quality control system because they are used after the product has left the bakery.
Problem: A particular customer has asked for loaves of a different size and colour but these do not arrive as requested.
Reason: The sales staff have no formal procedure for informing the production staff about changes in this customer's specification. The problem has occurred because of missing links in quality management in the bakery.
Problem: Bread has been returned because of a bad flavour and some customers have complained that they have been made ill.
Reason: The flour has been stored next to cleaning chemicals in the dry goods store. One old unlabelled chemical container has been found to have leaked. The company have no documented rules for the storage and handling of chemicals.
The staff who routinely clean the store are not trained and receive lower wages than other members of the production team. The container is old and unlabelled (Fig. 1).
Figure 1: Hazardous storage of chemicals
In order to overcome the types of problems outlined above, a wider approach than quality control is required. This is termed Total Quality Assurance.
Quality Assurance systems take a much wider view of what is involved in satisfying customers' needs. The quality assurance system focuses on the prevention of problems and not simply on their cure. Curing problems is expensive and quality cannot be 'inspected into' a product.
A quality assurance approach therefore, includes the whole production and distribution system, from the suppliers of important raw materials, through the internal business management to the customer. Quality assurance systems should be documented in a simple way to show who has responsibility for doing what and when. The focus of quality assurance is prevention and this should mean that action is taken to meet a specification and prevent failures from occurring a second time. This is done by planning, management action, agreements with key suppliers and other people in the distribution chain.
Quality assurance can only be operated when staff are well trained and motivated. Workers are normally well aware of the causes of most problems and when quality assurance is used properly they can resolve most quality problems within their control. It is the responsibility of business owners to ensure that the quality assurance system, together with any necessary equipment and information, are available to the workers to allow them to exercise this control. The importance of people in quality assurance is represented in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: Good staff are important in quality assurance
It is important to recognise that any system is operated by people. It is people who manufacture a food product and ensure that it has the right quality. People working together ensure that the information, materials and equipment are all correct to allow the production of a product. People also store the product and deliver it on time. All therefore need the necessary training and skills to complete their tasks correctly. They need to know what their own responsibilities are in this quality chain and where they fit into the overall system.
Business owners must not regard communication as a one-way process. The information they send to workers must also be modified by feedback from the staff. Well trained and informed staff are an essential element of the Quality Assurance approach. The other main element of the quality assurance approach which ensures that the system works is to document in a simple way the procedures and responsibilities within a team of workers.
Consider the problems faced by the bakery described previously:
Problem 1 The use of wooden trays
This problem was related to the use of trays by the distributor. Who was responsible for arranging the contract with the distributor and specifying the use of wooden trays?
A quality assurance system ensures that this link in the chain is discussed by the manager and staff and that proper controls and arrangements with the distributor are put into place (for example, plastic sheets on the wooden trays). The producer needs to use the complaint information to modify the process and prevent the complaint occurring again. The types of complaints should be recorded, sources of the problem identified within the factory or supply chain and control measures put into place.
Problem 2 The customer requiring special bread
The internal business communication broke down and important information did not reach the production staff.
A quality assurance system ensures that this communication is constantly operating and being improved. Responsibility and authority are defined and written down.
Problem 3 Tainted bread causing sickness
The management had not identified and controlled the potential hazard that improper handling and storage of chemicals can cause. The effective creation of a quality assurance system should include an assessment and development of methods to control or prevent hazards.
Quality Assurance systems are not mysterious and need not be complex. They simply require the business to agree what are the customers' needs and then ensure that staff have the skills, materials, and information needed to deliver the promises that are made.... every time. A quality assurance system should not be static but it should be continually modified and refined.
This requires an investment in training people to ensure that the quality assurance system controls the essential steps in the whole manufacturing and distribution process to satisfy customer needs.
A range of problem solving techniques can be provided for process workers to use when trouble arises during production. These simple techniques are tried and tested. They involve problem identification, analysis of the cause, suggestions for solutions and implementation and feedback methods. These techniques allow the operators more control over their work and allow problems to be prevented rather than solved. More advanced statistically-based methods can be used for sampling plans and process optimisation but these are beyond the scope of this book.
One of the main building blocks used for developing a quality assurance system is the 'Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point' system which is described in the next section.
1.1.2 Analysing food processes to improve quality using hazard analysis
All food companies, including the smallest manufacturers, have a responsibility to provide consumers with safe, wholesome foods. Safety is not an option but it is an essential part of the planning, preparation and production of foods. Any lack of consideration of safety can result in a serious threat to public health. This is recognised by the law in most countries and serious penalties exist for those who contravene hygiene and food safety legislation. At present in many countries, enforcement staff are not always sufficiently resourced to be fully effective, but this situation is changing as consumers become more concerned about food safety.
An important management method to ensure the safety of foods is the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system. This is based on quality control, microbiology and risk management and it has been adopted throughout the world, although some countries have tailored the approach to the needs of their particular food sectors. Many small producers may consider that the development of HACCP systems is not feasible or appropriate to their current needs. However larger manufacturers and producer groups who export to industrialised countries are increasingly finding that HACCP is not a matter of choice but is demanded by the importing company. With time, it is likely that the use of HACCP will be more broadly required by food manufacturers. For this reason a brief description of the application of HACCP is included in this book and examples are given using a number of commodity groups.
This Chapter examines the basic principles and practical methods for implementing the HACCP approach that are adopted to analyse a process and identify where improvements are needed in safety or quality.
An understanding of problems of food safety and quality improvement can start in one of a number of different ways. It can begin for example with an analysis of customer complaints to identify their types and frequency. However, in many developing countries the mechanisms and habit of reporting faults to a producer do not exist and many manufacturers have little knowledge of customers' reactions to their products.
An alternative approach is for the processor to carefully examine every stage in a process to see where and how improvements can be made in the quality and safety of the finished products. The aim of such an exercise is to focus the attention of operators and the manager on the prevention of problems rather than cures, by identifying potential hazards or quality failures and then developing preventative measures for their control.
To implement such an analysis it is necessary to first decide whether the work will focus on improvements to product quality or improvements to the safety of foods. These are obviously connected as food safety is one aspect of quality, but they should be treated as separate exercises.
The level of risks is then assessed and procedures are implemented to monitor and control these risks. If analysis of safety is selected, it is necessary to identify the hazards in a process. This is especially true for high-risk foods (those that can support the growth of food poisoning micro-organisms). If high-risk foods are involved then the severity of the hazard is greater and these food products must be investigated thoroughly as very stringent controls are needed. It is for this reason that inexperienced producers should not be encouraged to make high-risk foods such as canned meats and fish.
If quality improvement is selected, it is necessary to identify where a loss in quality is likely to occur in the raw materials or the process and then find methods to control the procedures that are used in order to improve quality in the finished product.
Most small-scale processors do not have the necessary skills or time to conduct such a study, and it is likely that assistance will be needed from other people who have the necessary experience. Ideally a small team of people should be assembled to effectively analyse the process and then develop and implement the improvements for the selected product. Those selected should have appropriate expertise of the product, the processing operations, microbiology and quality control. Staff from a manufacturer's association, the local Bureau of Standards, Government Regulatory Food Control Office, a University, Trading Standards Department or suppliers may be suitable resource people to assist staff from the food business itself.
For example if the focus of the group is to improve product safety it should conduct its work in the following way:
Gather information
* Identify sources and routes of contamination by micro-organisms, biological, chemical or physical contaminants (Table 1). It is easier to select one type of hazard which is most important to the product and complete the analysis. Other hazards should then be reviewed later in decreasing order of importance and added to the plan of action.
Table 1: Types of contaminant
Hazard Example
Microbiological yeasts, moulds; bacteria, viruses
Biological bone, hair, insects, faeces
Chemical pesticides, toxins, cleaning liquids
Physical wood, string, dirt, etc.
* Study the effect of the process on levels of contamination and assess the probability of micro-organisms surviving the process to grow in the finished product. This should include all parts of the process, from growing foods or buying ingredients to storage and consumption of the finished product.
* The production process for the food is then shown diagrammatically by constructing a process flow diagram (see Chapter 2 for examples), which is taken to the processing building and checked for accuracy.
Find solutions
* The team then prepares a diagram showing the hazards that have been identified and where they occur in the process. This should be the focal point for discussions by the team.
* The severity of risk of each of the above hazards should be assessed and any areas of doubt should be investigated further. An example of common questions that are used to assess the level of risk is shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Examples of questions used to assess the level of risk in foods
What is the product formulation?
What types of micro-organisms are likely to be present in the raw materials?
What is the pH of the product?
What is the moisture content of the product?
Are preservatives used?
Will any of these factors prevent microbial growth?
What is the intended process?
This should be considered in relation to micro-organisms of concern. Stages in the process that destroy, reduce or allow survival of micro-organisms should be evaluated (including conditions of intended distribution and use, temperatures and times of processing, types of packaging, expected shelf-life, storage and final use).
How will the product be prepared for consumption, is there a risk of mishandling by consumers?
Will the product be consumed by susceptible people (for example children eating weaning foods)?
Implementation
* The owner or manager of the business also needs to be fully convinced that the new procedure is necessary, or else it will fall into disuse after a short time. Operators need to be involved and made aware of problems so that they will understand why new procedures are introduced.
* Control procedures are introduced at the control points using a "decision tree" (Figure 3: Critical control point decision tree) to help in this procedure. Target limits and tolerances are given for each critical control point. Staff are trained how to operate the new methods and the limits that are placed on any variation from the specified methods.
Monitoring and documentation
* · The group sets up a procedure to monitor the changes that have been introduced and to ensure that everyone involved in the process understands his or her responsibilities. A system for monitoring these is produced, together with a plan for corrective actions, should the tolerances be exceeded.
* · Where action is taken it should be clear who has the authority to make decisions and who is responsible for checking that the action was properly done. These responsibilities should be discussed and written down so that everyone is aware of each other's part in the new system. The system is checked and reviewed each year.
When the focus is on quality improvement, a similar sequence of events is used. The quality problems are first identified and possible causes and solutions are discussed. If the problem is associated with poor quality raw materials or ingredients for example, this should be negotiated with suppliers and if needed, quality testing methods can be introduced with agreed tolerance limits. If the problem is associated with the process, for example a critical heating time, then improved process control measures are introduced. In all cases staff must be fully involved and trained so that the improved quality management is sustainable. The effects of any changes should be carefully monitored and recorded.
Such systems need not be complex. Only limited documentation is required and this should assist the small scale processor rather than prevent flexible working. These simple systems are designed to control the key parts of the process and help producers to concentrate valuable manpower where it is most effective. Examples of how this can be done with specific commodities are described in Chapter 2.
1.2 Building design and equipment layout
The type of building in which food products are manufactured and the general level of plant hygiene have a major influence on product quality. In this chapter, basic principles of the correct design of buildings, layout, cleaning of equipment and worker hygiene are described.
Ideally a food manufacturer should have a building constructed specifically for the purpose, but in reality this rarely happens and an existing building has to be modified. If care is taken in the way that the building is adapted, it adds little extra to the total cost but it ensures that the unit is appropriate for food processing.
The Site
The location of the building is very important but is often ignored at the outset. The following examples are points that need consideration and many of relate to quality aspects:
* Is the building situated close to the supply of raw materials?
* Are expected markets easily accessible?
* Is labour available locally and will workers find problems in getting to work?
* Is the building situated in a clean area or is it an area that has a lot of dust, waste or stagnant water nearby?
The site should be on cleared ground, away from sources of insects, rodents or smells. It should have a good supply of potable water and if required, electricity. A road access for bringing in raw materials and packaging, and sending out products is usually essential (Figure 4: Selecting the correct site for a food processing building).
Buildings
The external appearance of the building is a key factor that can influence customers to believe that the company has good management (Figure 5: Examples of a suitable and unsuitable building for processing foods). The points described below can enable quality assurance procedures to be better implemented. Externally and internally the building should be clean and painted, with a professionally made nameplate. Ideally the surrounding area should be planted with grass, as short grass acts as a very efficient trap for airborne dust.
Washing and toilet facilities must be provided, preferably in a separate building. If this is not possible there must be two closed doors between the toilet and the processing area to prevent insects and odours from entering.
All internal walls of the building should be smooth plastered and painted with a water-resistant paint so that they can be washed. Ideally walls should be tiled to about one to one point five metres above ground level. If this is too expensive then tiling should be carried out around sinks and on walls where food may be splashed.
The bottom of the wall, where it meets the floor, is often forgotten. A right angle joint is difficult to clean and can collect dirt. The concrete floor should be curved up to meet the wall (Figure 6: Some desirable features in a food processing building) and so provide a smooth surface that is easily cleaned. Similarly window ledges should slope so that they do not collect dust, dirt or old cloths that may be left there by workers.
Most manufacturers are aware that windows should be 