<title>Report of the Twenty-Second Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary and Conclusions
CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION
Twenty-second Session, Geneva, 23-28 June 1997
The Commission:
· Noted with satisfaction that in the proposed budget for the biennium 1998/1999, US$ 400 000 had been restored mainly to strengthen the documentation service and provide additional expert support to the Commission, but felt that the implications of the proposed reduction in the overall Codex budget should be carefully evaluated and that the budgetary reduction as currently proposed should not lead to inefficiency in Codex document distribution nor in its other important activity areas (paragraphs 16, 17);
· Raised concern that reducing the duration of Codex sessions would not allow sufficient time for the consideration of the matters in question and limiting the length of Codex meeting reports would make them less useful for understanding how positions were reached (paragraph 18);
· Approved certain amendments to the Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including the establishment of an Appendix containing the General Decisions of the Commission, Statements of Principle relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment, and Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms relating to Food Safety (paragraphs 19-31);
· Adopted maximum residue limits for 45 pesticides and 7 veterinary drugs in various commodities; 6 new or revised Codex standards, amendments and additions to a variety of existing standards including the General Standard for Food Additives; and a variety of other texts including a major revision of the General Principles of Food Hygiene and other codes of practice (paragraphs 32-103 and Appendix II);
· Adopted a variety of draft standards and related texts at Step 5 (paragraphs 104-121 and Appendix III);
· endorsed proposals to elaborate new standards and other texts (paragraphs 122-130 and Appendix IV);
· revoked a number of existing standards considered to be obsolete or not of significance to international trade including over 300 obsolete maximum residue limits for pesticides and the Standard for Edible Ices (paragraphs 131-132);
· abolished the Codex Committee on Edible Ices (paragraph 131);
· requested FAO and WHO to convene an international expert advisory body similar to JECFA and JMPR on the microbiological aspects of food safety to address particularly microbiological risk assessments (paragraph 139);
· requested the Codex Committee on General Principles to consider the application of "other legitimate factors" than science in relation to the adoption of maximum residue limits for bovine and porcine somatotropins (paragraphs 68 and 124), to address the question of improving procedures aimed at obtaining a better consensus of opinion at Commission and Committee session (paragraph 125), and consider the issue of providing special or differential treatment to developing countries in the application of Codex standards (paragraph 126) and to develop guidelines on procedures for granting observer status to non-governmental international organizations (paragraph 159);
· adopted an Action Plan for the development and application of risk analysis principles and guidelines (paragraphs 160-167);
· requested the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures to clarify how it would differentiate between Codex "standards, guidelines and other recommendations" in relation to the implementation of the SPS Agreement by WTO Members, and discussed other matters relating to follow-up to the Uruguay Round (paragraphs 168-176);
· approved the general direction of the proposed Medium-Term Plan 1998-2002 (paragraphs 177-180);
· expressed concern about possible implications of abolishing committees adjourned sine die and expressed interest in the "alternative mechanisms", stating that there should be clear rules for their establishment and operation and that such mechanisms should be as inclusive, transparent and responsive as the current system (paragraphs 185-188)
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
ALINORM 97/37
July, 97
1. The Codex Alimentarius Commission held its Twenty-second Session in Geneva, from 23 to 28 June 1997. The Session was attended by 444 Delegates and advisors representing 84 Member countries and Observers from 1 Non-Member country, 7 intergovernmental organizations and 36 international non-governmental organizations. A complete list of participants is given in Appendix 1 to this report.
2. The Session was opened by Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, Director-General of WHO and by Dr. Hartwig de Haen, Assistant Director-General, FAO. The Session was presided over by its Chairperson, Professor Pakdee Pothisiri (Thailand) and by its three Vice-Chairpersons for certain items of the Agenda.
<section>3</section>
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA (Agenda Item 1)^1
^1 ALINORM 97/1
3. The Commission adopted the Provisional Agenda as its Agenda for the Session. It agreed to discuss the following matters under "Other Business":
· Review of Codex Subsidiary Bodies
· Problems concerning distribution of working documents.
It also agreed to discuss a draft Code of Practice for Good Animal Feeding under Item 8 of the Agenda.
4. The Delegation of India requested that consideration of the Draft Standards for Sugars and Honey and the Maximum Residue Limits emanating from the 29th Session of the Committee on Pesticide Residues be deleted from the Agenda in view of the late arrival of the documents. The Commission, however, decided to discuss these matters under Agenda Item 7, without prejudice to any decision which might be taken on whether or not to discuss them in detail at that time.
<section>4</section>
ELECTION OF OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION AND APPOINTMENT OF REGIONAL COORDINATORS (Agenda Item 2)^2
^2 ALINORM 97/2 and ALINORM 97/2, Addendum 1
5. During the Session the Commission re-elected Prof. P. Pothisiri (Thailand) as its Chairperson to serve from the end of the Twenty-second to the end of the Session. The Commission also elected Mrs María E. Chacón (Costa Rica)^3, Mr. Thomas Billy (USA), and re-elected Mr. S. van Hoogstraten (The Netherlands), as Vice-Chairpersons of the Commission for the same period.
^3 The Delegation of Uruguay noted that a candidate from Africa, Dr. J.A. Abalaka (Nigeria), had withdrawn in favour of the candidate from Latin America and the Caribbean, in the spirit of facilitating consensus in Codex.
6. The following persons were appointed as Regional Coordinators:
Africa:
Mr. David Nhari (Zimbabwe)
Asia:
Ms. Kanya Sinsakul (Thailand)
Latin America and the Caribbean:
Dr. Galdós Ugarte (Uruguay)
Europe:
Mr. Felipe Mittelbrunn García (Spain)
North America and South-West Pacific:
Mr. Thomas Billy (USA)
7. In view of the election of Mr. Thomas Billy as Vice-Chairperson, the USA resigned as Regional Representative for North America and the Commission elected Canada to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the current term of office.
<section>5</section>
REPORT BY THE CHAIRPERSON ON THE FORTY-THIRD AND FORTY-FOURTH SESSIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (Agenda Item 3)^4
^4 ALINORM 97/3 and ALINORM 97/4, respectively.
8. The reports were provided in accordance with Rule III.5 of the Commission's Rules of Procedure. Except for a revised version of the document on The Application of Risk Analysis Principles in Codex^5, all items arising from the Executive Committee sessions had been addressed by Codex Committees or were included in the Commission's present Agenda.
^5 See ALINORM 97/9-Revised (CAC/LIM 21), agenda item 10.
<section>6</section>
REPORTS BY COORDINATORS ON REGIONAL ACTIVITIES (Agenda Item 4)
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR ASIA
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR EUROPE
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NORTH AMERICA AND THE SOUTH WEST PACIFIC
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR ASIA^6
^6 ALINORM 97/15
9. The Delegation of Japan, on behalf of Dr. Yuzo Hayashi, Coordinator for Asia, presented a brief summary of the activities of the Committee. He highlighted the following:
· identification of standards having a potential major trade impact in the Region;
· the development of Proposed Draft Guidelines for National Codex Contact Points and Codex Committees;
· discussions on micronutrient malnutrition and a need for food fortification regulations; and
· discussions on risk assessment, especially exposure assessment taking into account dietary habits in the region.
10. The Delegation noted that a new regional initiative on food intake surveys led by Japan, was being undertaken in response to the discussions at the Session. The Delegation of India stressed difficulties experienced by developing countries in applying low maximum limits for residues and contaminants.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR EUROPE^7
^7 ALINORM 97/19
11. The Coordinator for Europe, Dr. Stuart Slorach (Sweden) reported that the Committee had focused its attention on proposals for extending the Acceptance Procedure to all Codex texts; prioritising standards and related texts on the basis of the list drawn up by the SPS Committee; transparency in the decision making process; the importance of consumer participation; harmonisation and regional cooperation as well as technical assistance in food related activities within the European region.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA^8
^8 ALINORM 97/28
12. The Coordinator for Africa, Mr David Nhari (Zimbabwe) pointed out that the Coordinating Committee for Africa had placed emphasis on the following problems of particular importance to the Region: strengthening the food control systems, improving the work of the national Codex structures, and inter-regional coordination. Improving and updating the work of food import/export inspection and certification systems, harmonization of food standards and legislation were also high on the agenda of the Coordinating Committee. Regional Draft Guidelines on the Design of Control Measures of Street Vended Foods were also elaborated by the Committee (see Item 7).
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN^9
^9 ALINORM 97/36
13. Dr. Galdós Ugarte (Uruguay), Coordinator for Latin American and the Caribbean informed the Commission that the Committee had:
· agreed to initiate the revision of the Regional Code of Practice for the Preparation and Sale of Street-Vended Foods and to incorporate the new approach reflected in the revised General Principles of Food Hygiene and the HACCP Guidelines;
· recommended that in view of the importance of the "Four Statements of Principle" they should be included in the General Principles of Codex in the body of the Procedural Manual (see Item 6);
· agreed that the late reception of documents was an obstacle to effective participation in Codex's work and recommended to make a wider use of modern means of communication and to strengthen the Codex Secretariat;
· agreed on the necessity to review the present acceptance procedure and to study a revised system of notification and/or acceptance, which should be simple and the least bureaucratic possible;
· noted the progress of harmonization of food legislation and the extensive use of Codex standards and MRLs as reference in the framework of economic integration organizations and at the national level;
· agreed to continue working on food contamination by Salmonella, as well as food safety in tourist areas;
· agreed that the Draft Regional Guidelines for Codex Contact Points and National Codex Committees prepared by the Coordinating Committee for Asia could not be adopted in the Region;
· endorsed the recommendations of a Workshop on the Harmonization of Food Law.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NORTH AMERICA AND THE SOUTH WEST PACIFIC^10
^10 ALINORM 97/32
14. The Delegation of New Zealand, on the behalf of Dr. P. O'Hara, Coordinator for North America and the South West Pacific, reported the results of the Committee's 4th Session. The following issues were highlighted:
· a special focus was given to risk analysis and related aspects, and their impact on Codex;
· efforts to increase the coordination and participation of the countries of the South West Pacific region, with particular reference to facilitating greater participation of the Pacific Island countries;
· closer cooperation between Codex and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) was strongly supported;
· a working group which was convened to identify Codex Standards and related texts which had a major impact on trade concluded that there was little benefit in continuing this work; and
· problems in the timeliness of distribution of reports and working papers.
Status of Regional Standards and Related Texts
15. The Delegation of the United Kingdom noted the important work underway in relation to the elaboration of regional standards and related texts and stated that the use which might be made of these texts under the WTO Agreements needed to be clarified (See also paras. 45 and 172).
<section>7</section>
REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL SITUATION OF THE JOINT FAO/WHO FOOD STANDARDS PROGRAMME FOR 1996/1997 AND 1998/1999 (Agenda Item 5)^11
^11 ALINORM 97/5 and ALINORM 97/5 Corrigendum.
16. The Commission noted the budget and expenditure for the last and present biennium as well as the estimated magnitude of the host government support for individual Codex Committees. As regards the proposed budget for the next biennium 1998/1999, the Commission noted with satisfaction that US$ 400 000 had been restored mainly to strengthen the documentation service and provide additional expert support to the Commission, subsequent to the strong support in favour of the Codex programme by Member Countries at the 112th Session of the FAO Council which had met early in June 1997.
17. The Commission however felt that the implications of the proposed reduction in the overall Codex budget should be carefully evaluated and it was stressed that the budgetary reduction as currently proposed should not lead to inefficiency in Codex document distribution nor in its other important activity areas. Delegations expressed concern that the level of the budget, being the minimum necessary to provide adequate support to the Commission should not be further reduced in the final review of the budget-setting process. Several delegations stated that the budgetary implications of the on-going exercise of the review of Codex subsidiary bodies initiated by FAO^12 should be closely examined.
^12 See Agenda Item 14.
18. The Commission also raised concern that reducing the duration of Codex sessions would not allow sufficient time for the consideration of the matters in question and limiting the length of Codex meeting reports would make them less useful for understanding how positions were reached (especially for those of the commodity committees). This might result in false economy and could eventually decrease the transparency and efficiency of the work of Codex.
<section>8</section>
CONSIDERATION OF AMENDMENTS TO THE PROCEDURAL MANUAL OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION (Agenda Item 6)^13
^13 ALINORM 97/33 (Appendices II, III and IV); ALINORM 97/10
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE (RULES II AND IX)
GUIDELINES FOR CODEX COMMITTEES
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE (RULES II AND IX)
19. As the quorum specified in Rule IV.6 for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure was not attained, the Commission was unable to adopt the proposed amendments and it was agreed that they would be considered again at the next session of the Commission.
GUIDELINES FOR CODEX COMMITTEES
Observers
20. The Commission expressed the view that further clarification was needed regarding the definition of "recognized international organizations" as the definition included in the current draft was too broad, and did not adopt the proposed amendment. It agreed to refer this question to the Committee on General Principles with a view to defining the modalities for the participation of international organizations and noted that related issues would be further discussed under Agenda Item 9 (see also para. 159).
Preparation and distribution of papers
21. The Commission expressed its disagreement with the proposal for a deadline for the reproduction of Member and Observer comments. It agreed to defer consideration of the proposed amendment and to consider all issues related to the distribution of documents and comments from an overall perspective under Agenda Item 14 - Other Business (see also paras. 191 - 195).
Guidelines on the Elaboration and/or Revision of Codes of Hygienic Practice for Specific Commodities
22. The Commission recalled that the Committee on Food Hygiene, while discussing the revision of the Codes, had agreed that exclusive stress on food safety could limit their usefulness and that some flexibility was needed to provide guidance on certain non-safety factors such as incipient deterioration in fish and fishery products. It agreed that this should be reflected in a preliminary statement to this section as follows:
The establishment of additional food hygiene requirements for specific food items or food groups should be limited to the extent necessary to meet the defined objectives of individual codes.
23. The Commission adopted the Guidelines with this amendment. It noted the views of the Delegations of Germany and Austria that this statement was not essential and should not be included in the Procedural Manual.
24. The Commission adopted all other amendments to Sections H, J and K of the Procedural Manual proposed. These are included in Appendix II of this report.
General Decisions of the Commission
25. The Commission agreed to include in the Procedural Manual a new Appendix incorporating all general policy decisions of the Commission, which provide essential guidance from the Commission to its subsidiary bodies and in particular the Four Statements of Principles Concerning the Role of Science in the Codex Decision-Making Process and the Extent to which Other Factors are Taken into Account. The Commission recalled that all such decisions had the same status, irrespective of the section of the Manual which included them.
Statements of Principle relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment
26. Several delegations proposed to add a fifth principle to reflect the concept that "different processes and procedures may achieve the same objectives", as had been recognized by the Committee on General Principles. Other delegations expressed the view that the inclusion of this principle was premature at this stage as food safety objectives were not clearly defined and that this was an important issue which required further discussion in the Committee on General Principles.
27. The Delegation of India, while not objecting to the principles themselves, stressed the difficulties of developing countries in the application of risk assessment methodology. The Commission noted that the principles under discussion were not directed to governments but were intended to provide orientations for the work of Codex Committees.
28. The Commission adopted the Statements of Principle as currently drafted, with the understanding that the Committee on General Principles would further consider issues related to equivalence and food safety objectives, and recognized that adequate flexibility should exist to take into account the needs of developing countries. It was also agreed that the Statements of Principle would be included in the new Appendix of the Procedural Manual containing general decisions of the Commission (see para. 25 above).
Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms Related to Food Safety
29. Some delegations proposed specific amendments to the current text and expressed the view that some inconsistencies existed between certain definitions. The Commission however recalled that the definitions originated from a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation and had been discussed at the 21st Session of the Commission, the Executive Committee and the Committee on General Principles; the latter Committee proposed the adoption of the definitions on an interim basis.
30. The Commission adopted the definitions as currently drafted, for inclusion in the Definitions Section of the Procedural Manual, with the understanding that they would be subject to regular review and that Member countries would have the opportunity to provide comments for further consideration by the Committee on General Principles.
31. The general decisions and definitions for inclusion in the Procedural Manual are attached as Appendix II to this report.
<section>9</section>
CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS (Agenda Item 7)^14
^14 ALINORM 97/21, Part I; ALINORM 97/21, Part I, Supplement 1; ALINORM 97/12, Appendix IV; ALINORM 97/25.
FOOD HYGIENE
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
FOOD LABELLING/NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
FOOD LABELLING
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING
PESTICIDE RESIDUES
RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA
FATS AND OILS
FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
NATURAL MINERAL WATERS
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
SUGARS (AND HONEY)
32. Appendix III to this report contains a list of Draft and Proposed Draft Standards and Related Texts for Specific Commodities adopted by the Commission at Steps 8 and 5 respectively. Decisions of the Commission in regard to the adoption of the texts are tabulated in this Appendix. The remainder of this part of the report contains certain specific observations on the texts under consideration.
FOOD HYGIENE^15
^15 ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (FH); ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (FH) Add. 1 (comments from Mexico).
Draft Revised Recommended International Code of Practice: General Principles of Food Hygiene (at Step 8)^16
^16 ALINORM 97/13, Appendix II; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from UK).
33. Some delegations noted that reference to rinsing after disinfection should be made in Section 6 of the Code and that supply of both hot and cold water for personal hygiene facilities as mentioned in Section 4.4.4 was not necessary in certain situations. The Commission requested the Committee to consider these proposals as a possible amendment to the Code, but adopted the Draft Revised International Code of Practice at Step 8.
Draft Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (at Step 8)^17
^17 ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix II; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from Hungary and UK); CAC/LIM 31 (Corrigendum in Spanish only - prepared by the Delegation of Spain).
34. Indonesia and some other delegations expressed their concern that difficulties might be encountered in applying the HACCP system in smaller businesses and in developing countries. The Commission was informed that the Committee on Food Hygiene was proposing to initiate new work on a guidance document for the use of HACCP-like systems in small businesses, with special reference to developing countries, to address this concern. It also noted the importance of providing technical assistance to those countries in need, to facilitate the progressive implementation of the HACCP-based system.
Draft Revised Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods (at Step 8)^18
^18 ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix III; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from Hungary and UK).
35. The Commission adopted the Revised Principles at Step 8.
Additional Remarks
36. The Delegation of India stated that the three aforementioned texts on food hygiene constituted additional quality criteria and should only be applied by commercial partners on a voluntary basis.
37. The Chairperson of the Committee on Food Hygiene pointed out that the three texts referred above all to food safety and that they addressed food safety issues throughout the food chain; they were not exclusive to any one food sector.
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
Draft Guidelines for the Exchange of Information between Countries on Rejections of Imported Food^19
^19 ALINORM 97/30, Appendix II.
38. The Commission amended paragraph 4 of the text to make reference to "appropriate" information being provided to the exporter and included references to WHO in addition to the references to FAO in paragraph 10.
39. The Commission adopted the Guidelines as amended.
Draft Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems^20
^20 ALINORM 97/30A, Appendix II.
40. The Commission was split into two opinions: (1) in favour of adopting the Guidelines without delay; and, (2) in favour of postponing adoption.
41. Delegations supporting the postponed adoption of the Guidelines expressed the opinion that the text required further examination, review and comment by countries to further clarify its long term consequences. Concerns were expressed as to its status under the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreements on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). It was also noted that the Guidelines did not include a procedure for the determination of equivalence.
42. Delegations supporting the immediate adoption of the Guidelines noted that the text had been discussed and developed over many years and that the text allowed certain flexibility for governments in their efforts to apply these guidelines. In this regard it was also noted that the CCFICS would be examining a discussion paper related to the process of determining equivalence at its next session. Some delegations proposed a different title to avoid any unexpected WTO consequences.
43. The Representative of the WTO clarified that nuances in titles given to Codex texts would probably not be relevant in the application of the SPS and TBT Agreements. Governments applying stricter measures than Codex texts could be called upon to justify the deviations if challenged. The Representative also noted that even in the absence of relevant Codex texts governments could still be requested to provide justification for their national measures under current WTO procedures when international trade disputes arose.
44. As a result of a vote by show of hands, the Commission adopted the Guidelines (46 votes in favour of adoption, 16 votes against adoption and 7 abstentions) as presented.
45. The United States, supported by Chile, India, the Philippines and the United Arab Emirates, stated that it was highly inappropriate for such broad based and significant Guidelines to be adopted before member countries had the opportunity to consider their legal impact on national legislation in the light of the WTO Agreements. Concerns were also raised because the Executive Committee of the Codex Alimentarius Commission had just proposed that the Commission, through the Secretariat, consult with the WTO on the status of Codex guidelines and recommendations under the SPS Agreement, and that the Commission should await the outcome of these discussions before proceeding further.^21
^21 ALINORM 97/4, paras. 15-18.
FOOD LABELLING/NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES^22
^22 ALINORM 97/22, Appendix II, ALINORM 97/26, Appendix II, ALINORM 97725 Part 4, CAC/LIM 14 and 25
Draft Guidelines on Use of Nutrition Claims
46. The view was expressed that the conditions for the claim "free" did not actually ensure that the food was free from the nutrient.
47. The inclusion of definitions relating to nutrient function claims and healthy diets was also questioned. One delegation expressed its disagreement with the footnote concerning trans-fatty acids in the Table. The Delegation of Spain stated that the section of the Table concerning fibre, protein and certain nutrient reference values required further scientific evaluation.
48. It was proposed by some delegations and observers that an exception be made to allow a "low fat" claim for products with a naturally high fat content, especially milk products, when a significant reduction in fat content was made; on the basis that commodity committees should be able to establish provisions deviating from general requirements. Several delegations and the Observer from Consumers International were strongly opposed to any such exceptions.
49. The Commission noted that commodity committees had the possibility to propose specific labelling and/or nutrition provisions in commodity standards which might deviate from the general provisions, provided they were submitted with adequate justification to the general committees for endorsement.
50. The Commission adopted the Guidelines for Use of Nutrition Claims (including Part A of the Table) at Step 8 with the understanding that additional work was needed on the expression of claims per serving and further consideration should be given to the issues raised in government comments when finalizing the Table of Conditions.
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES^23
^23 ALINORM 97/26, Appendices IV and III, ALINORM 97/25 Part 6, CAC/LIM 3 and 13
Proposed Draft Amendment to the Standard for Infant Formula (Vitamin B[12]) (Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure)
51. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Amendment at Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure.
Proposed Draft Revised Standard for Food Grade Salt (Salt Iodization) (Steps 5 and 8)
52. The Commission noted comments concerning food additives and, while recalling that the additives section had not been changed as the amendment concerned only iodization, agreed that it should be forwarded to the Committee on Additives and Contaminants for further consideration.
53. In reply to a question on salt iodization technology, the Commission noted that relevant information could be found in the report of the FAO Technical Consultation on Food Fortification.^24
^24 FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 60
54. The Commission agreed to omit Steps 6 and 7 of the Procedure and to adopt the Proposed Draft Revised Standard at Step 8.
FOOD LABELLING^25
^25 ALINORM 97/22, Appendix III; ALINORM 97/22A, Appendix II
Draft General Guidelines for the Use of the Term "Halal"
55. The Commission adopted the Draft General Guidelines at Step 8 as proposed.
Proposed Draft Amendment to the Labelling Section of the Standard for Quick Frozen Fish Sticks (Fish Fingers), Fish Portions and Fish Fillets, Breaded or in Batter (Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure)
56. The Commission agreed that the Accelerated Procedure should not be confirmed and that the Proposed Draft Amendment should be considered at Step 5 of the Procedure.^26
^26 The Commission subsequently advanced this text to Step 6: see Appendix IV.
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
General Standard for Food Additives: Draft Schedule of Additives Permitted for Use in Foods in General, Unless Otherwise Specified, in Accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice^27
^27 ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix IV
57. The Commission adopted the above Appendix at Step 8 with the understanding that the Schedule be kept under constant review by the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants to ensure that the information was always based on the latest scientific data.
58. Because of the late receipt of the draft, the Delegation of India objected to the adoption of the Appendix.
Food Categories or Individual Food Items Where the Use of Food Additives with Good Manufacturing Practice Limitations on Use are Not Allowed or Restricted^28
^28 ALINORM 97/12A, Annex to Appendix IV.
59. The Commission adopted the Annex at Step 8 on an interim basis, noting that a number of countries had not had the opportunity to review the proposal in detail. It requested the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants to review the Annex at its next session in light of comments and report its findings to the Commission.
60. Because of the late receipt of the draft, the Delegation of India objected to the adoption of the Annex.
METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING^29
^29 ALINORM 97/23, paras. 37-40 & Appendix II; ALINORM 97/23A, paras. 20-24 & Appendix II; ALINORM 97/21, Part I, Table 1; ALINORM 97/21, Part I Supplement 1, Table 2; ALINORM 97/25 Part 2; and CAC/LIM 7.
Proposed Draft Guidelines for the Assessment of the Competence of Testing Laboratories Involved in the Import and Export Control of Foods
61. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Guidelines with deletion of reference to "determining equivalency" pending the development of the definition of "equivalency" by the relevant Codex Committee.
PESTICIDE RESIDUES^30
^30 ALINORM 97/24, Annex II; ALINORM 97/2