<title>Gum naval stores: turpentine and rosin from pine resin </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This global study was undertaken by the Natural Resources Institute (NRI)*, the scientific arm of the United Kingdom's Overseas Development Administration (ODA). Funding for the study and for the publication of the report was met by ODA's Forestry Research Programme.
* Natural Resources Institute, Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4 4TB, United Kingdom.
The information and analyses presented in this report are based on the authors' research and first-hand knowledge of gum naval stores production in a number of producing countries.
A complementary study carried out by NRI, which provided some inputs for the present one and which was financed by the ODA Forestry Research Programme with support from FAO, has involved an assessment of the prospects for development of new gum naval stores industries in Central and Southern Africa. Single copies of the Africa report are available from the FAO Regional Office for Africa (PO Box 1628, Accra, Ghana).
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
c & f
cost and freight
EC
European Community
IMDG
International Maritime Dangerous Goods
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
US$
United States dollar
In tables:
na
indicates not available
ns
indicates not specified
indicates nil
<section>3</section>
Summary
Information is provided on the technical and economic aspects of crude resin production from pine trees and on the subsequent production of gum turpentine and gum rosin (known commercially as gum naval stores). Recent trends in world production and markets are also reviewed. The publication is aimed at prospective new producers of gum naval stores, and organizations and individuals appraising projects involving their production. It is particularly intended for those in developing countries.
Total world production of rosin is approximately 1.2 million tonnes annually, of which almost 720000 tonnes, 60% of the total, is estimated to be gum rosin derived from tapping living pine trees. World production of turpentine is about 330000 tonnes from all sources, of which 100000 tonnes is estimated to be gum turpentine. The number of countries producing gum naval stores is large but the People's Republic of China dominates production and world trade; of the other producers, Indonesia, Portugal and Brazil are the most important in terms of world trade. Present (early 1995) prices for gum rosin are at the highest levels for some years, due largely to recent events in the People's Republic of China. The prospects of entry into the international market by new suppliers will depend mainly on future trends in Chinese production and consumption.
Rosin has a wide range of applications including adhesive, paper size and printing ink manufacture. Turpentine is used either as a solvent for paints and varnishes, or as a raw material for fractionation and value-added derivative manufacture. Most prospective new producers will have opportunities for domestic or regional sales of rosin and turpentine.
While most pines are capable of yielding resin on tapping, it is only economic to do so if the quantity obtained is sufficient and its quality is acceptable. Both these factors are determined primarily by the species of Pinus which is tapped, so information is provided on the suitability of different species for gum naval stores production. Tapping can be carried out either on natural stands or plantations. Methods of tapping which do not adversely affect the quality of the trunkwood are described and these enable plantation pines to be felled and utilized in the normal manner when tapping is stopped. The cleaning and distillation operations involved in processing the crude resin are described, and quality criteria, specifications and packaging options for rosin and turpentine are provided.
An indication of the costs involved in the production and processing of pine resin is given. These are based on 1000 tonnes of resin being produced from 400000 trees which each yield an average of 2.5 kg of resin. The comparative advantages and disadvantages of domestic, regional and export markets for a new producer are discussed.
<section>4</section>
Introduction
'Naval stores' is the inclusive term used to denote the products obtained from the oleoresin or resin* of pine trees (genus Pinus). The term originates from the days when wooden sailing ships, including naval ships, were waterproofed using pitch and tar and other resinous products from pine trees. Although the connection with s hips is now remote, the term is still commonly used by those in the trade and elsewhere. There are three distinct sources of naval stores:
o Gum naval stores are obtained by the tapping of living pine trees. Collection of the 'gum' or resin is a labour-intensive operation (similar to rubber tapping). Distillation of the resin, which can be undertaken in fairly simple equipment, produces gum rosin and gum turpentine in varying ratios, usually between 4:1 and 6:1.
o Sulphate naval stores are by-products recovered during the conversion of pine wood chips to pulp by the sulphate (kraft) pulping process. Sulphate turpentine is condensed from the cooking vapours. Crude tall oil, obtained from the alkaline liquors, is fractionated into various products including tall oil rosin and tall oil fatty acids.
o Wood naval stores are obtained from resin-saturated pine stumps long after the tree has been felled. The stumps are solvent extracted using capital intensive technology to give wood turpentine, wood rosin, dipentene and natural pine oil.
* The terms 'oleoresin' and 'resin' may be used interchangeably, and for convenience the term 'resin', which must not be confused with rosin, is used in this report. Standard terminology relating to naval stores is given in the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard D 804-92.
Pinus is one of the most widely distributed genera of trees in the northern hemisphere, extending from the polar region to the tropics; one species, P. merkusii, occurs naturally south of the Equator. The genus is also one of the most widely planted exotics because of its large-scale use for timber and pulp, and large areas of Pinus are found outside its natural range in South America, Africa and Australasia. Standing resources of pine trees exist, therefore, in many parts of the world.
The two major products of the naval stores industry are rosin (a brittle, transparent, glossy, faintly aromatic solid) and turpentine (a clear liquid with a pungent odour and bitter taste). Annual world production of gum rosin and gum turpentine is approximately 700000 tonnes (valued at around US$ 420 million at first half 1994 prices) and 100000 tonnes (valued at US$ 50 million), respectively. For many years rosin and turpentine were used in an unprocessed form in the soap, paper, paint and varnish industries. Today, most rosin is modified and used in a wide range of products including paper size, adhesives, printing inks, rubber compounds and surface coatings. The composition of turpentine can vary considerably according to the species of pine exploited, and this greatly influences its value and end use. Turpentine, like rosin, is a very versatile material and nowadays is used mainly as a feed stock by the world's chemical industries. The alpha- and beta-pinene
constituents of turpentine, in particular, are the starting materials for the synthesis of a wide range of fragrances, flavours, vitamins and polyterpene resins, and form the basis of a substantial and growing chemical industry. However, the simpler, more traditional products in which rosin and turpentine can be used, such as soap, paper size and paints and varnishes, can still be of value to the domestic economy of developing countries, and it is not necessary to think only in teens of the wider international markets when planning naval stores production. Consumer demand in developing countries is expected to grow with increasing industrialization and urbanization and there are, therefore, opportunities for countries with suitable pine resources to replace imported naval stores products with those produced locally.
The aim of this publication is to provide basic information to enable prospective new producers of gum turpentine and gum rosin to make considered judgements on whether or not to proceed with investment. Information on the production of wood and sulphate naval stores, and on further processing of gum rosin and gum turpentine, is not included. The publication is intended particularly for prospective producers and government bodies, financial institutions or donor agencies in developing countries concerned with the appraisal of projects involving gum naval stores production. It is hoped, also, that it will assist existing producers, traders and consumers of gum turpentine and rosin by increasing their awareness of production methods and product characteristics in other parts of the world, and their knowledge of market demands, trends and preferences.
The text is presented in five chapters. Following this introduction, Chapter 1 summarizes major aspects of production, trade and markets for gum naval stores. The chief pine species used in different parts of the world are listed, and the levels of production and trends in all the major producing countries are indicated. Chapter 2 reviews the tapping methods used to recover resin from the free, and in Chapter 3 the technology required to process the resin into rosin and turpentine is described. In Chapter 4, the financial and economic aspects of the resin tapping and processing operations are analysed. In the final chapter, the technical and economic aspects which must be considered when planning a gum naval stores industry are summarised. The appendices contain references and suggested further reading, quality criteria, specifications and test methods for rosin and turpentine, a discussion of genetic factors influencing resin composition and yields and the importance of
correct species and provenance selection when assessing pine trees for tapping, packaging requirements for turpentine and rosin, a list of importers and traders of naval stores, and statistical tables.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1. Production trade and markets
Description, uses and principal sources
World production, trade and outlook
Estimates of world production and exports
Description, uses and principal sources
Resin
Rosin
Turpentine
Resin
Crude resin obtained by tapping living pine trees is a thick, sticky, but usually, still fluid material. It is opaque (due to the presence of occluded moisture), milky-gray in colour, and inevitably contains a certain amount of forest debris (pine needles, insects, etc.) when it is collected from the trees.
Most Pinus species 'bleed' when the stem wood (xylem) is cut or otherwise injured, but probably only a few dozen of approximately 100 species which exist has ever been tapped commercially as a source of resin for rosin and turpentine production; in the others, poor yields and/or quality of the resin make exploitation uneconomic. The principal species which are presently tapped, and the countries in which this takes place, are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Commercially tapped sources of pine resin: species and country of production
Species^a
Producing country^b
Pinus elliottii Engelm.
Brazil, Argentina, South Africa, (USA, Kenya)
P. massoniana D. Don
People's Republic of China
P. kesiya Royale ex Gordon
People's Republic of China
P. pinaster Aiton
Portugal
P. merkusii Jungh. & Vriese
Indonesia, (Viet Nam)
P. roxburghii Sarg.
India, (Pakistan)
P. oocarpa Schiede
Mexico, Honduras
P. caribaea Morelet
Venezuela, (South Africa, Kenya)
P. sylvestris L.
Russia
P. halepensis Miller
Greece
P. radiata D. Don
(Kenya)
Notes:
a.
In some case only the major species tapped in a particular country is indicated. In the People's Republic of China, P. massoniana is the main species utilized and although the contribution of species such as P. kesiya is small by Chinese standards, it is significant compared to the scale of production in other countries. Relatively small but increasing areas of P. elliottii and other exotic pines are tapped in China in addition to P. massoniana and other native species. In Mexico, P. oocarpa often occurs in mixed stands so that other species are likely to be tapped.
^b. The list of countries is not intended to be exhaustive. Parentheses indicate a minor producer.
Until very recently, the crude resin was never considered to be a product for international trade. Although it might often be transported some distance by road or rail to the factory where it was processed, processing still took place within the producing country. However, the acute shortage experienced by some traditional producers in recent years has led to the importation of resin for the first time; India and Portugal are both known to have imported crude resin. Although losing the benefits of added value, new producers therefore have the option of tapping trees and exporting crude resin to nearby countries without needing to process it themselves.
Rosin
Rosin is the major product obtained from pine resin. It remains behind as the involatile residue after distillation of the turpentine and is a brittle, transparent, glassy solid. It is insoluble in water but soluble in many organic solvents. It is graded and sold on the basis of colour, the palest shades of yellow-brown being the better quality. Quality criteria and specifications are described in. Appendix 2. Several other physico-chemical characteristics influence the quality and these are largely dependent on the species of pine from which the rosin is obtained, i.e., they are determined more by genetic than environmental and processing factors. These aspects are discussed in more detail in Appendix 3.
Most rosin is used in a chemically modified form rather than in the raw state in which it is obtained. It consists primarily of a mixture of abietic- and pimaric-type acids with smaller amounts of neutral compounds. This intrinsic acidity, coupled with other chemical properties, enables it to be converted to a Large number of downstream derivatives which are used in a wide range of applications. The derivatives include salts, esters and maleic anhydride adducts, and hydrogenated, disproportionated and polymerized rosins. Their most important uses are in the manufacture of adhesives, paper sizing agents, printing inks, solders and fluxes, various surface coatings, insulating materials for the electronics industry, synthetic rubber, chewing gums and soaps and detergents.
Although it is more economical to manufacture derivatives if large quantities of rosin are involved, small producers often manufacture simple derivatives for sale in the domestic market as a substitute for imported products. For example, fortified rosin sizes can be made based on the reaction of rosin with maleic anhydride. However, for the purposes of this report, no further reference is made to the technical aspects of additional processing or to the products them selves.
Turpentine
Turpentine is a clear, flammable liquid, with a pungent odour and bitter taste. It is immiscible with water and has a boiling point above 150°C. Quality criteria and specifications are indicated in Appendix 2. Turpentine is a mixture of organic compounds, mainly terpenes, and its composition can vary considerably (more so than rosin) according to the species of pine from which it was derived. This greatly influences its value and end use and is discussed in greater detail in Appendix 3.
For some applications turpentine is used in whole form, usually as a solvent for paints and varnishes or as a cleaning agent. However, like rosin it is a very versatile material chemically, and nowadays, it is used mostly after further processing. It usually undergoes fractional distillation to isolate the desirable chemicals (mainly alpha-pinene and beta-pinene) which are then transformed into value-added derivatives. This further processing is only economic if it is carried out on a very large scale, and it is not something to be considered by a new producer of gum naval stores. Occasionally, the turpentine is rich enough in alpha-pinene, for example, to be used in whole form. The derivatives are widely used in fragrance, flavour, vitamin and polyterpene resin manufacture, and form the basis of a substantial and growing chemical industry. The biggest single turpentine derivative, synthetic pine oil, is used in disinfectants, cleaning agents and other products with a 'pine'
odour. Many derivatives, including isobornyl acetate, camphor, linalool, citral, citronellol, citronellal and menthol are used either on their own or in the elaboration of other fragrance and flavour compounds. A few of the minor constituents of turpentine, such as anethole, are employed for fragrance or flavour use without the need for chemical modification. Downstream derivatives are not discussed further in this report.
World production, trade and outlook
Production and trade
Prices
Major markets
Trading structures and procedures
Trade in crude resin
People's Republic of China
Indonesia and other countries of Southeast Asia
Portugal and elsewhere in Europe
Russia
North America
Central and South America and the Caribbean
Africa
Indian sub-continent
Many of the uses to which rosin can be put are subject to intense competition from synthetic, petroleum-based resins, and between gum rosin and tall oil rosin. Tall oil rosin, which used to suffer from odour problems associated with its method of production and a tendency to crystallize, was considered to be inferior to gum rosin for many applications. Today, most of these problems have been overcome and tall oil rosin competes more effectively with gum rosin. Technical developments which have led to more effective formulations for many rosin-based products have meant that less rosin is needed to achieve a particular result. In the paper industry, for example, the development of more effective fortified rosin sizes and emulsions, and changes in the paper-making process itself, have led to a marked decrease in the amount of rosin consumed per tonne of paper produced. The increasing demand for paper, however, means that the use of rosin by the paper industry is still
substantial.
Any detailed analysis of the naval stores industry which attempts to follow production, trade and markets beyond the primary rosin and turpentine stage, and between the different sources of naval stores, is complex and difficult and beyond the scope of this report. In any case, a prospective new producer of gum naval stores will first need to assess local pine resources, and their capacity to meet domestic or regional markets for rosin and turpentine (rather than their derivatives), and such additional detail is unnecessary.
Production and trade
Total annual production of rosin is about 1.2 million tonnes world-wide. Of this, it is estimated that almost 720000 tonnes, or 60%, is gum rosin; most of the remainder, about 35% is tall oil rosin and the rest is wood rosin. World production of turpentine is approximately 330000 tonnes from all sources; almost 100000 tonnes (30%) is estimated to be gum turpentine, and the bulk of the remainder is sulphate turpentine.
The naval stores industry is complex and ever-changing. In the early part of the century, gum naval stores production was the dominant, and in most cases, the only, means of producing rosin and turpentine. Wood naval stores production, involving the uprooting and extraction of old pine stumps, developed in those countries with large areas of raw materials, such as the United States and the former Soviet Union; production in the United States peaked during the 1950s and has since declined to a low level. The recovery of tall oil rosin and sulphate turpentine as by-products of chemical pulping of pine chips also began during the 1950s.
As labour in the more industrialized countries has become more expensive and less willing to undertake the task of tapping, gum naval stores production has declined and the centre of its production has shifted. The United States and many former producing countries of Europe are either no longer producers, or are now only able to sustain production at very low levels. Production has also declined in countries such as India and Mexico; in India, a shortage of trees for tapping has added to the other problems. During the 1980s, Brazil emerged as a significant producer of gum naval stores, but here too, the cost of labour is now being felt. Also, government financial incentives which encouraged new planting in Brazil have been reduced, so as existing areas of plantation come to the end of their tapping life fewer suitable trees are available to replace them.
The focus of production for world gum naval stores today is Southeast Asia. The People's Republic of China has been the world's dominant producer for many years, but a dramatic increase in production, signalled by the installation of an improved and expanded processing capacity in the early 1980s, has seen Indonesia become the second biggest producer of gum rosin and turpentine in the world. Chinese production accounts for 430000 tonnes (about 60%) of the total annual production of gum rosin and Indonesia accounts for a further 69000 tonnes (almost 10%). While Chinese production is unlikely to increase further, Indonesia has an ample (and growing) number of trees available for tapping and the potential to increase production significantly in the years to come.
The People's Republic of China and Indonesia also dominate world trade in gum rosin and turpentine. Trade statistics for the major exporting and importing countries are given in Appendix 6. Chinese exports of gum rosin were approximately 277000 tonnes in 1993 (70% of world trade) and Indonesian exports were about 46000 tonnes. Russia and Brazil produce more gum rosin than Portugal but most of it is used to meet domestic needs. Portugal is the third biggest exporter and exports most of its output (about 26000 tonnes in 1992, although some of this was produced from imported crude resin). A much smaller proportion of the turpentine produced in the People's Republic of China is exported (about 5500 tonnes); both Indonesia (7500 tonnes) and Portugal (6000 tonnes) export more.
The future supply of gum rosin and turpentine to the world market depends mainly on production trends in the People's Republic of China, Indonesia and Portugal (in that order), and to a lesser extent, Brazil. It also depends on consumption trends in China which are difficult to predict; increasing Chinese industrialization and domestic consumption of naval stores may eventually result in a decreasing surplus available for export. The desire to earn foreign exchange, and the potential for some provinces to expand production as others decline (see below), may enable exports to be maintained at about their present level. Any decrease in exports could be partly or wholly made up by increased supplies from Indonesia.
The availability of gum rosin (and turpentine) decreased sharply in late 1994 as the effects of severe floods in the People's Republic of China during June to September became known. Many of the major production areas were affected and this led to a significant reduction in China's ability to collect and process crude resin and export it to world markets. Some trade estimates have suggested that supplies for 1994/95 may be reduced by as much as 30-40%. This damaging drop in production has been compounded by a rapid and competitive expansion in the number of licensed exporters within the country, and by a radical change in the export licensing system. Severe droughts in the production areas of Indonesia and Brazil also led to reduced production in 1994, and as a result of the ensuing disruption and disorganization, world prices rose sharply between late 1994 and early 1995.
Prices
Estimates for gum rosin price levels from 1991-94, and for the first quarter of 1995, are shown in Table 2. They show the large price rises between those dates and the difference in the price of rosin from different origins, but they are not exact transaction prices
Table 2. Gum rosin^a: landed prices, 1991-95^b (US$/tonne)
Portuguese
Chinese
Indonesian
Brazilian
Source: London dealers
Notes:
a
WW grade
^b Average annual prices except 1994 (July) and 1995 (January)
It is likely that prices will fall back from the high levels of early 1995 to about US$ 700/tonne by the end of 1995. However, some uncertainty exists because the extent of lost production in the People's Republic of China, and the ability for production to recover during 1995/96 is not known. At the early 1995 price levels, Portugal and Brazil could both expand tapping but further falls in rosin prices would make this extra output doubtful. Indonesia will continue to expand production.
It is not useful to give a similar price series for gum turpentine, which is traded at high prices in drums or much lower prices in 20000 litre ISO tanks. The scale and extent of international trade is more limited than for gum rosin, but a price level of US$ 450 delivered was typical from 1993 to mid-1994. Levels of US$ 600-650/tonne c&f India or Europe would be more representative of early 1995 price levels.
Major markets
Virtually all the non-producing countries in the world (and some of the producers) import rosin and turpentine, or their derivatives or synthetic competitors. Examples of the scale of imports can be seen in some of the trade statistics in Appendix 6. The biggest markets for imported gum rosin are Japan, Western European countries, particularly Germany, the Netherlands and France, the Republic of Korea, the United States and India. Globally, the European Community (EC) is the biggest importer and consumer, and the People's Republic of China is its biggest supplier by far. France and Spain are the biggest importers of gum turpentine in the EC; they fractionate it and manufacture downstream derivatives for domestic consumption and re-export. Japan and India are other large importers of turpentine; supplies of rosin and turpentine to India supplement indigenous production. The very large requirements for both rosin and turpentine in countries such as the United States and the
former Soviet Union are met primarily through domestic supplies of tall oil rosin and sulphate turpentine.
Elsewhere, although demand may be relatively low it is still significant. Demand is sometimes met by domestic production. In Kenya, the paper industry uses about 1000 tonnes of rosin per year, most of which is supplied from local sources. In other countries it is necessary to import most or all of the requirements. Thailand, for example, produces a few hundred tonnes of rosin but imports several thousand tonnes a year.
Trading structures and procedures
In some of the major producing countries, the structure of the industry, and the channels of distribution of gum naval stores into the international market, has changed in recent years. In Portugal, individual producers have formed producer groups through which trade is conducted. This relatively small number of groups has generally simplified the negotiation of imports from Portugal and given some measure of consistency in the level of prices. Conversely, there has been a move away from the more centralized system of trading in the People's Republic of China to one in which different provinces have the freedom to enter into contracts with international buyers. Even within one province there may be several groups competing for sales.
Most of the production in smaller producing countries is for domestic consumption. The processors sell directly to end users such as paper mills, paint or chemical companies. However, there are some basic procedures and practices which should be noted by prospective new producers or others considering the sale of exports. Most purchases are made on the basis of agreed specifications. As indicated in Appendix 2, these specifications will vary according to the origin of the rosin or turpentine. New producers will therefore need to reassure potential buyers of the quality of the material being offered by providing samples beforehand and, perhaps, a trial shipment. International trade is normally conducted through agents or dealers, rather than by direct negotiation between producer and end user. Agents usually act on behalf of a specific producer. Dealers buy and sell on their own account, their main contacts being other dealers, producers and end users. They are very well
informed about markets and trends, prices, product uses and end user requirements; this knowledge may be difficult for producers to acquire, particularly small ones.
A new producer of gum naval stores may wish to sell directly to the final user to avoid paying commission to intermediaries. When selling the products domestically, this may be the only option. However, in the international market, various middlemen have a valuable role and end users will usually prefer to conduct their transactions using agents and dealers. Commercial practices vary between companies and countries, and details of terms and conditions for buying and selling are a matter of negotiation between the two parties. Established suppliers are normally paid by cash against documents, but buyers would prefer to make payment after receipt of the merchandise from new producers.
Brief reference is made to packaging options for rosin and turpentine in Chapter 3 and they are described in more detail in Appendix 4. Buyers of material transported by ocean freight prefer to minimize transport and handling costs by importing a minimum shipment size of one container load (approximately 20 tonnes gross weight).
Trade in crude resin
In any analysis of world production and trade in gum naval stores, the volume of trade taking place in crude resin needs to be estimated. Until recently, this did not need to be considered as all resin was processed at origin and rosin and turpentine were the primary products of trade. However, trade in crude resin has developed over the past five years as the c capacity for tapping has fallen in some of the traditional producing countries, notably Portugal and India. These countries have excess processing capacity (usually fully depreciated) which can be brought back into production if an economic, external source of crude resin is found. The absence of capital costs therefore enables the processors of imported resin to sell the outputs (gum rosin and turpentine) at a price which only need cover raw material and processing costs, freight, drums and profit. The sale of crude resin also allows producing countries with a surplus to earn extra revenue without investing in
additional capacity for processing.
The main suppliers of crude resin in 1993 were Brazil (exporting about 12000-13000 tonnes), Indonesia (2000-3000 tonnes) and the People's Republic of China (3000-4000 tonnes). Total exports in 1993, based on trade estimates, were therefore 17000-20000 tonnes. Present levels are likely to be much reduced in the short term as a result of the destructive floods in China in 1994 and the impact of severe summer droughts in Indonesia (Java) and Brazil. At the moment, Brazil is probably exporting less than 10000 tonnes of crude resin, and the People's Republic of China and Indonesia may not be exporting any. The buyers of crude resin in 1993 were Portugal (which imported 8000-10000 tonnes of Brazilian resin) and India (which bought 3000-4000 tonnes from Brazil, and most of Chinese and Indonesian resin exports, to give a total of 8000-11000 tonnes).
There is little likelihood that tapping will be expanded in either Portugal or India, and if the present reduced trade in crude resin becomes permanent, Portugal will have less rosin to sell, and India will need to import more Chinese and Indonesian rosin and turpentine in order to meet domestic requirements.
It is suggested elsewhere (Chapter 4) that once domestic market demand has been satisfied, the export of crude resin could be more profitable for new, small producers than the export of small volumes of gum rosin and turpentine. However, this would depend on a continuing demand for external supplies of resin from Portuguese and Indian processors.
One unfortunate consequence of the use of crude resin which is not indigenous to the country in which it is processed is that the compositional characteristics of the rosin and turpentine may no longer indicate source of the processed produ