<title>Reforming water resources policy - A guide to methods, processes and practices</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The 25th Session of the FAO Conference agreed that the policy advisory role of FAO, especially at the country level, was extremely important and likely to expand. In particular, the Conference expressed the view that FAO should focus on sector and subsector reviews, and sector and structural adjustment work at the level of the countries concerned. The recommendations from Agenda for Development by the UN Secretary-General in 1994 (UN-GA, 1994) stated that development should be driven by national policies dedicated to improving the well-being of the country and its people. While each country is specific and so differs from others, the general concept is that water-sector policy is a priority requirement and that the approach and the process of policy review and policy management can be developed.
This Guide responds to the above mandate. FAO is concerned with the efficient and sustainable management and use of water resources for food production and rural development. The increasing scarcity of water and growing environmental concerns over the decline in water resources are forcing water policy-makers to enlarge the focus of their work. It is now necessary to view the sector as a whole, acknowledge the claims of all water users, assess and plan the resource in an integrated fashion, and consider changes in policies and institutions as well as projects.
This Guide has a number of purposes:
· to indicate the wide range, and ramifications, of water management, and the relationship between the 'water sector' and other parts of the economy;
· to identify the principal issues involved in managing water resources, for the guidance of policy-makers;
· to set out principles and criteria by which water resources can be managed;
· to introduce some of the methods and processes entailed in a water policy review;
· to illustrate how different countries have carried out such reviews, and how they have gone about implementing their findings; and, by means of the above,
· to promote national policy and legislative reform, planning, and institutional development in the water sector.
It is intended to be of benefit to all those likely to be involved in national water policy reviews. This includes ministers, their advisers, senior administrators and managers, and specialists and professionals. It should be read by those active in the water sector in its widest sense, not just those in directly water-related undertakings.
A first draft was prepared internally by the Water Resources, Development and Management Service, the Policy Analysis Division and the Development Law Service, based on internal research and specially commissioned legal case studies, which have been published separately (FAO, 1993b). That draft drew upon the experience of FAO-assisted water policy reviews in various countries, and also upon material contained in the State of Food and Agriculture 1993 Report focusing on Water Policies and Agriculture.
The final version of the Guide was prepared by Mr James Winpenny of the Overseas Development Institute, London. It incorporates original material on policy analysis by Mr B.G. Appelgren, legal aspects by Mr S. Burchi, and economic analysis by Mr R. Stringer. It also benefits from comments and material supplied in the Expert Consultation on Methodology for Water Policy Review and Reform, held in FAO, Rome, 1995.
Non-specialists, or specialists interested in a wider appreciation of the subject, would find Chapters 1, 2 and 3 relevant, as well as the later chapters. Readers with a good grounding in the subject and looking for guidance on how to carry out a water policy review might wish to turn to Chapters 4, 5 and 6.
Chapter 5 would take the reader quickly to the heart of the process of water policy reviews, and contains the essence of the approach recommended in this Guide.
The Bibliography can be used as a selective guide to some of the more relevant recent literature on this subject.
<section>2</section>
Glossary of technical terms and abbreviations used
Aquifer
A water-bearing stratum of permeable rock or soil able to hold or transmit much water.
Assessment
(water resources)
An examination of the aspects of the supply and demand for water and of the factors affecting the management of water resources.
CBA
cost-benefit analysis
CEA
cost-effectiveness analysis
Comprehensive water resources management
Water resources planning, development and control that incorporates physical, social, economic and environmental interdependencies.
Cost recovery
Fee structures that cover the cost of providing the service or investment.
De-centralization
The distribution of responsibilities for decision making and operations to lower levels of government, community organizations, the private sector, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Demand management
The use of price, quantitative restrictions, and other devices to limit the demand for water.
Dublin Statement
The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development, adopted at the International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE).
EC-HELCOM
European Commission-Helsinki Commission, which in 1992 agreed the Revised Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area, setting, i.a., standards for effluent water quality.
Ecosystem
A complex system formed by the interaction of a community of organisms with its environment.
EIA
environmental impact assessment
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP
gross domestic product
GNP
gross national product
IAP-WASAD
International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development
ICWE
International Conference on Water and the Environment, attended by over 500 participants from over 100 countries and over 80 international governmental organizations and NGOs, and held in Dublin, Ireland, 26-31 January 1992.
Institutions
Organizational arrangements and the legal and regulatory framework - the 'enabling environment' - in which organizations operate.
Market failure
A divergence between the market outcome, without intervention, and the economically efficient solution.
NGO
non-governmental organization
O & M
operation and maintenance
Policy
A declared intention and course of action adopted by government, party, etc., for the achievement of a goal.
Programme
A definite plan of intended procedure.
Project
A scheme or undertaking.
Opportunity cost
The value of goods or services foregone, including environmental goods and services, when a scarce resource is used for one purpose instead of for its next best alternative use.
Ramsar Convention
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat, done at Ramsar on 2 February 1971 and signed by 22 European States. It came into force on 21 December 1975.
R & D
research and development
River basin
A geographical area determined by the watershed limits of a water system, including surface and underground water, flowing into a common terminus.
Sewage
Liquid refuse or waste matter carried off by sewers.
Sewerage
The removal and disposal of sewage and surface water by sewer systems.
Stakeholder
Organization or individual that is concerned with or has an interest in water resources and that would be affected by decisions about water resources management.
Strategy
A set of chosen short-, medium- and long-term actions made to implement water-related policies.
UFW
un-accounted-for water, i. e., the volume of water lost through leakage or irregular practices between entering a distribution system and reaching the users.
UN
United Nations
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1992). Also known as The Earth Summit.
Wetlands
Areas of marsh, fen, peatland, or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water less than six metres deep at low tide.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Special attributes of water
The case for public intervention
The water sector and its outreach
The international debate
Purpose of the guide
Target readership
The chapter begins by noting some of the special characteristics of water - physical, social and economic - which make it special, and which make a high degree of government involvement in the sector inevitable. Special emphasis is placed on the size and scope of the sector, making the point (for a mainly agricultural readership) that water involves many other sectors, and its use has wide repercussions. Since some of the results of water use transcend international boundaries, the chapter includes an account of recent international events, notably the Dublin Conference and the Rio UNCED, at which governments accepted the need to review policies in the water sector, recognizing in particular its growing scarcity value.
The purpose of the Guide is described as identifying the issues involved in water management, setting out principles and criteria for such management, introducing some useful methods and key processes, and indicating some of the results obtained in actual cases. The target reader is defined widely as anyone likely to be involved in water policy reviews, from ministers to technical specialists. It is also intended for those specialists working in the water sector who wish to satisfy their interests in the wider issues addressed, and particularly the general philosophy underlying the Guide.
Special attributes of water
It is commonly accepted that access to water is a basic human right. The Dublin Conference (International Conference on Water and the Environment [ICWE]) in 1992 asserted that
"...it is vital to recognize first the basic right of all human beings to have access to clean water and sanitation at an affordable price."
The connection between water and human life is most dramatic in arid regions, where crop irrigation is essential to food production.
Many societies believe that water has special cultural, religious and social values, which marks it out from other economic goods. In many cultures, goals other than economic efficiency influence the choice of water management institutions. Some religions even prohibit water allocation by market forces.
However, the focus on water's special status tends to obscure the fact that, in most societies, only a tiny fraction of water consumption is actually for drinking and preserving life. A large portion of urban water is used for convenience and comfort. In the arid western USA, per caput water withdrawal by households frequently exceeds 400 litres per day, about half of which is used to irrigate lawns and gardens. Most of the remainder is for flushing toilets, bathing, and washing cars.
The value of water to particular users depends crucially on its location, quality and timing. Its location determines its accessibility and cost. Its quality affects whether it can be used at all, and at what treatment cost. The time when it is available governs its reliability and its relative value for power, irrigation, environmental or potable uses.
In addition, the value of water, especially in agriculture, is inseparable from the type of land to which it is applied, the nature of the soil, its drainage possibilities, etc. Saline water is, for instance, unusable on some soils, but viable on others.
Water has two features that further complicate management efforts: bulkiness and mobility. The value per unit weight tends to be low. Transporting and storing water is costly relative to its economic value at the point of use. In crop irrigation, the water applied may yield additional economic values of less than $US 0.04 per tonne of water.
Water is also difficult to identify and measure because it is a fugitive resource - it flows, evaporates, seeps and transpires. This evasive nature means that exclusive property rights, which are the basis of a market economy, are hard to establish and enforce.
Water projects that attempt to compensate for extreme seasonal variations such as floods and droughts frequently require enormous investments. The economies of scale are such that a single supplying entity is often the most economically efficient organizational arrangement. This is a classic 'natural monopoly'. At the other extreme, most economies of size for pumping groundwater are achieved at relatively small outputs and multiple suppliers can therefore operate efficiently.
Aquifer management is often complicated by the aggregate impact of the actions of many individuals. Even though each individual may have a negligible impact when taken alone, the sum total can be of major importance. One tube-well has little effect on the total water supply, but thousands of tube-wells can quickly deplete an aquifer. Establishing effective policies to regulate water abstraction by these many small, scattered decision-makers is exceedingly difficult.
The case for public intervention
The above characteristics of water make a large measure of public intervention inevitable. Economies of scale in the collection and distribution of water tend towards natural monopolies, which need to be regulated to serve the public interest. The fact that many investments are huge, and have a long time-horizon, often discourages private capital, and requires large amounts of public investment.
Water uses in a river basin or aquifer are inter-dependent, which is to say that users impose 'externalities' on others that they ignore in their own decisions (e.g., discharging polluting effluent into a river causes harm, inconvenience and costs to other river users). In some respects, water is a 'public good' in the sense that it is impractical to exclude users or beneficiaries, and therefore impossible to apply charges for such ill-measurable benefits as improved navigation, flood control, or reduced river pollution. Where this is the case, private investment will not be forthcoming. In both these respects, water is prone to 'market failure', which implies that some public involvement is called for.
Ultimately, water is vital to life, and certain water systems are of national strategic importance. Governments have a responsibility to manage water for the national welfare. This does not imply that the water system needs to be 100% in public ownership. It does, however, mean that appropriate laws, regulations, institutions and incentives should be in place to underwrite the public interest, and that governments stand ready to invest where the market will not.
Governments are, unfortunately, subject to shortcomings of their own, and it cannot be assumed that they are always efficient servants of the public good. 'Policy failures' are the public twin of market failures. The management of water is often fragmented between different agencies and parties, leading to conflict, confusion and mutually damaging tactics.
Water authorities and service agencies are often overextended and inefficient. They often fail to recover enough funds to cover essential operations, and there is often a growing backlog of unserviced consumers. Publicly owned companies and utilities are usually among the worst water polluters, whatever legislation is formally in place.
In short, a well managed water sector needs a balance of public and private involvement, recognizing the limits of both the market and government, and building on what each seems to do best.
The water sector and its outreach
The water sector embraces direct consumption and use of water, land drainage, flood relief, farm irrigation, fisheries, industrial and other abstraction, in-stream use of water for recreation, amenity, wildlife, etc., environmental protection, and disposal and treatment of sewage and industrial effluent.
It follows that decisions about water concern many interested parties - the 'stakeholders' - in the sector. The decision to use more water in agriculture, for instance, could affect power generation, municipal use, industrial offtake, in-stream uses such as fishing, navigation and recreation, and environmental purposes such as wetlands, deltas and game parks. These decisions could also entail major public health risks, such as the spread of malaria and bilharzia.
Apart from being the largest worldwide consumer of water, agriculture is also a major water polluter. Saline irrigation off-flows or drainage containing agrochemical residues are serious contaminants for downstream water users. Agricultural nitrate is contaminating groundwater in a number of areas. The disposal of liquid animal wastes pollutes surface and groundwater and is the main environmental problem in some intensively farmed regions.
Conversely, natural resources sectors such as agriculture, forestry and nature conservation can hold the key to improving the management of water resources. Certain kinds of farm practices, such as terracing and agroforestry, can help to preserve and improve the functions of watersheds and catchment areas. Afforestation, and sustainable management of standing forests, also has a vital part to play in the protection of upland water sources. Thus more careful use of water by irrigators can release supplies for the use of growing cities, or for hydropower or environmental purposes, while more diligent use of agrochemicals and better drainage practices would improve the quality of water for downstream users.
Water has an international dimension where countries share a river, lake, coast or aquifer. The issues are similar to those arising where the resource is of purely national concern, except that sovereignty is involved, international law is applicable, aid is often at stake, and countries may be willing to go to war to defend their interests. There is a serious risk of water becoming a casus belli in some of the arid parts of the world.
The international debate
Water issues have been the subject of increasing international concern and debate. From 26 to 31 January 1992, the UN system sponsored the International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE) in Dublin, Ireland. The ICWE called for innovative approaches to the assessment, development and management of freshwater resources. In addition, the ICWE provided policy guidance for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992. UNCED highlighted the need for water sector reforms throughout the world.
In 1993, the World Bank issued a comprehensive policy paper defining its new objectives for the water sector. FAO recently established an International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development (IAP-WASAD). Likewise, the UN specialized agencies, international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and bilateral assistance agencies are all coordinating or participating in special programmes related to water resources.
The message highlighted by all these efforts is that water is an increasingly scarce and valuable resource. Of principal concern is the failure to recognize and accept that there is a finite or even diminishing supply of water. The consensus is that the growing water scarcity and misuse of fresh water pose serious threats to sustainable development.
Purpose of the guide
The ultimate responsibility for formulating water policies rests with national authorities. Although professionals and specialists are drawn into policy reviews and decisions, politicians and senior officials, as well as professionals from outside the water sector, have a crucial influence. Hence it is important that the message is disseminated widely. This Guide is intended to:
· indicate the wide range, and ramifications, of water management, and the relationship between the 'water sector' and other parts of the economy;
· identify the principal issues involved in managing water resources, for the guidance of policy-makers;
· set out principles and criteria by which water resources can be managed;
· introduce some of the methods and processes entailed in a water policy review;
· illustrate how different countries have carried out such reviews, and how they have gone about implementing their findings; and, by means of the above,
· promote national policy and legislative reform, planning, and institutional development in the water sector.
Target readership
The Guide is addressed to all those likely to be involved in national water policy reviews. This includes ministers, their advisers, senior administrators and managers, and specialists and professionals. It should be read by those active in the water sector in its widest sense, as described above, not just those in directly water-related undertakings.
Some of its contents, addressed to a wider readership, will be familiar to water specialists. At the same time, it is intended that the latter would benefit from the introduction to the wider issues and principles at stake. Water is too important to be left to the specialists, so the reader is likely to become involved in a range of issues, such as:
· coping with growing water shortages both nationally and locally;
· establishing principles, or developing legal or negotiating frameworks, for defusing conflicts among water users;
· allocating scarce supplies between different uses, regions, and types of consumer;
· raising finance for investment in new water sources and recovering costs to meet recurrent operation and maintenance;
· dealing with the threats to public health from groundwater contamination and the pollution of surface water bodies;
· planning national food security involving irrigated farming;
· conducting international negotiations over the use and pollution of international rivers, lakes, and coastal waters;
· extending water, sanitation and wastewater disposal services to populations currently lacking adequate facilities;
· setting affordable and appropriate water quality standards;
· planning flood control and mitigating the harmful effects of floods;
· devising institutional reforms in this sector, such as commercialization and privatization; and
· drawing up appropriate environmental policies and standards as they affect water.
It is intended that the Guide would have some relevance to all such matters.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2 - Problems
Growing water problems: the concept of vulnerability
Agriculture - Key to the problem
Checklist of critical issues
Reasons for policy review
This chapter begins by illustrating the scale of problems in the water sector worldwide, drawing on recent work on vulnerability. The problems of agriculture are specifically dealt with, since this sector, because of the scale of its water demands, is crucial to any solution. A general checklist is proposed to help in identifying the critical issues facing governments in this sector.
Some country case material is summarized to indicate circumstances in which various countries decided to undertake policy reviews.
Growing water problems: the concept of vulnerability
Competition among agriculture, industry and cities for limited water supplies is already constraining development efforts in many countries. As populations expand and economies grow, competition for limited supplies will intensify and so will conflicts among water users.
The extent to which a region or country is vulnerable to water depends on the quantity of water, temporal distribution, quality, and the extent of its use and requirements. While climate is the principal factor in water quantity and its inter-temporal distribution, population and economic development are the main influences on quality and demand.
Although water quality and its inter-temporal distribution are difficult factors to measure for the purposes of international comparisons, the supply and demand for water can be calibrated both between countries and over time, and conclusions drawn about the vulnerability of the region concerned. Care should, however, be taken in the interpretation of data when making comparisons between countries in different climatic zones and different agricultural practices - for instance, a temperate country relying on rain-fed agriculture compared to one using irrigation.
The main factors affecting the supply and demand for water are depicted in Figure 1 (Kulshreshtha, 1993).
Figure 1 - Inter-relationships among forces determining a region's vulnerability to water resources. Water quality effects are excluded.
When annual internal renewable water resources are less than 1000 m^3 per caput, water availability is considered a severe constraint on socio-economic development and environmental protection. Table 1 lists the countries where per caput internal renewable water availability is expected to fall below 1000 m^3 by the end of the century. Most countries facing chronic water scarcity problems are in North Africa, the Near East and sub-Saharan Africa. Countries with less than 2000 m^3 per caput face a serious marginal water scarcity situation, with major problems occurring in drought years. By the end of the 1990s, water availability is expected to fall below 2000 m^3 per caput in more than 40 countries (FAO, 1993a).
In many countries, while scarcity is less of a problem at a national level, serious water shortages are causing difficulties in specific regions and catchment areas. Notable examples include northern China, western and southern India, and parts of Mexico, the United States of America, the United Kingdom and Italy.
TABLE 1 - Water-scarce countries in 2000
COUNTRY^1
WATER AVAILABILITY
m^3 person
POPULATION
millions
Internal renewable water resources
Including river flows from other countries
Egypt
Saudi Arabia
Libya
United Arab Emirates
Jordan
Mauritania
Yemen
Tunisia
Syria
Kenya
Burundi
Algeria
Hungary
Rwanda
Botswana
Malawi
Oman
Sudan
Morocco
Somalia
Notes: ^1 A number of countries with smaller populations, including Barbados, Cape Verde, Djibouti, Malta, Qatar and Singapore, are also included in the water-scarce category.
Source: FAO calculations based on World Bank and other data.
Despite water shortages, misuse of water is widespread. Small communities and large cities, farmers and industries, developing countries and industrialized economies - all are mismanaging water resources. Surface water quality is deteriorating in key basins due to urban and industrial wastes. Groundwater is polluted from surface sources and irreversibly damaged by the intrusion of salt water. Overexploited aquifers are losing their capacity to hold water and land is subsiding. Cities are unable to provide adequate drinking-water and sanitation facilities. Waterlogging and salinization are diminishing the productivity of irrigated lands. Decreasing water flows due to catchment area degradation are reducing hydro-electric power generation, pollution assimilation and fish and wildlife habitats.
Agriculture - Key to the problem
At first glance, many of these water problems do not appear to be directly related to the agricultural sector. Yet, by far the largest demand for the world's water comes from agriculture. More than two-thirds (up to 90 percent by some estimates) of the water withdrawn from the earth's rivers, lakes and aquifers is used for irrigation. With the growth of competition, conflicts, shortages, waste, overuse and degradation of water resources, policy-makers look increasingly to agriculture as the system's safety valve.
Agriculture is not only the world's largest water user in terms of volume, it is also a relatively low-value, low-efficiency and highly subsidized water user. The facts are forcing governments and donors to re-think the economic, social and environmental implications of large, publicly funded and operated, irrigation projects. In the past, domestic spending for irrigation dominated agricultural budgets in countries throughout the world. For instance, since 1940, 80 percent of Mexico's public expenditures in agriculture have been for irrigation projects. In China, Pakistan and Indonesia, irrigation has absorbed over half of all agricultural investment, and about 30 percent of all public investment in India.
A significant portion of international development assistance has also been used to establish irrigation systems. Irrigation received nearly 30 percent of World Bank agricultural lending during the 1980s. Spending commitments for irrigation by all aid agencies exceeded $US 2 thousand million annually in the past decade.
Once established, irrigation projects become some of the most heavily subsidized economic activities in the world, both directly and indirectly (taking account of low energy costs for pumping). In the mid-1980s, it was estimated that average subsidies to irrigation in six Asian countries covered 90 percent of the total operating and maintenance costs (Repetto, 1986). Case-studies indicate that irrigation fees are, on average, less than 8 percent of the value of benefits derived from irrigation.
Despite these huge investments and subsidies, irrigation performance indicators are falling short of expectations for yield increases, area irrigated and technical efficiency in water use. As much as 60 percent of the water diverted or pumped for irrigation is wasted (FAO, 1990). Although some losses are inevitable, in too many cases this excess water seeps back into the ground, causing waterlogging and salinity. As much as one-quarter of all irrigated land in developing countries suffers from varying degrees of salinization. Moreover, stagnant water and poor irrigation drainage escalate the incidence of water-related diseases, resulting in human suffering and increased health costs.
At the same time, irrigated agriculture is expected to produce much more in the future while using less water than it uses today. At present, 2.4 thousand million people depend on irrigated agriculture for jobs, food and income (some 55 percent of all wheat and rice output is from irrigated land). Over the next 30 years, an estimated 80 percent of the additional food supplies required to feed the world will depend on irrigation (IIMI, 1992).
However, agriculture is often unable to compete economically for scarce water. Cities and industries can afford to pay more for water and earn a higher economic rate of return from a unit of water than does agriculture. For the first time in many countries, agriculture is being obliged to give up water for higher-value uses in cities and industries. Irrigators in some areas are now asked to pay for the water they receive, including the full cost of water delivery.
This water dilemma - to produce more in a sustainable way with less water - implies a need for demand-management mechanisms to re-allocate existing supplies, encourage more efficient use and promote more equitable access. Policy-makers need to establish a structure of incentives, regulations, permits, restrictions and penalties to help guide, influence and coordinate how people use water, while encouraging innovations in water-saving technologies.
In the past, supply-side approaches dominated water resource management practices. Water itself was physically managed through technical and engineering means that captured, stored, delivered and treated water. However, the era of meeting growing demand by developing new supplies is ending. In the present-day water economy, resource management is shifting away from the goal of capturing more water towards that of designing demand-and user-focused approaches that influence behaviour. FAO has identified the following as some of the leading emerging issues (FAO, 1993a):
· National water politics are shifting from projects to policies - this trend is likely to continue and even accelerate.
· Water may become a test bed for economic reform, liberalization and accountability.
· Given water's scarcity and its value to cities and industry, the water subsector will be less dominated by irrigation, and its multipurpose uses will be more widely acknowledged.
· Irrigation is a service with customers and users; it is not a production industry.
· At the level of the irrigation scheme, the process of water policy formulation, assessment and appraisal needs to include more open groups that are representative of political, technical, managerial and (most important) water user associations.
· These policy groups would be consulted before policy selection and then provide feedback and adjustment in the light of experience.
· The policy groups would identify options consistent with the national policy framework, as opposed to measures to protect and satisfy special irrigation interests.
· The goal is to identify a broader range of wate