<title>Quality and quality changes in fresh fish. Quality and changes in fresh fish</title>
<section>1</section>
Preparation of this document
Fresh fish is a central point in fish as food utilization. First, it is in itself the most important item both on local and international fish markets, second because it is not possible to obtain a safe and quality fish product unless fresh fish is used as the primary raw material. FAO understands that these are the basic concepts on which it is necessary to insist in order to provide fish markets with safe fish and fishery products of improved quality, and to contribute to the reduction of post-harvest losses.
In 1988, FAO published "Fresh fish - quality and quality changes" (FAO Collection: Fisheries, No. 29), authored by Professor Hans H. Huss. It has been published by FAO in English, French and Spanish, and apart from the original Danish version, it has been translated and published by FAO field projects into Arabic, Chinese and Vietnamese. It has served for the training of thousands of fish technologists throughout the world, in particular during the development of the FAO/DANIDA Training Project on Fish Technology and Quality Control.
The broad experience gained during the training activities has been extremely useful to improve, update and enlarge whenever necessary the above-mentioned document.
After seven years, the need became apparent for a new publication on the subject.
Professor Huss prepared the new document with the assistance and contribution of colleagues and experts in the various subject fields involved, as acknowledged below:
Section
Torger Børresen^1) Muscle anatomy and function
Chemical composition part of 3.2
Paw Dalgaard^1) The effect of storage temperature
The effect of anaerobic conditions and carbon dioxide 6.1
Lone Gram^1) Bacteriological changes
The effect of fish species, fishing ground and season
Microbiological methods 5.3
Benny Jensen^1) Measurements of oxidative rancidity part of 8.2
Bo Jorgensen^1) Lipid oxidation and hydrolysis 5.4
Jette Nielsen^1) Sensory changes
Sensory methods 5.1
Karsten Back Olsen^1) Improved catch handling in industrial fisheries 7.3
Tom Gill^2) Autolytic changes
Biochemical and chemical methods 5.2
Hector M. Lupin^3) Basics of fresh fish handling and use of ice
Fish handling in artisanal fisheries 7.1
Addresses: ^1) Technological Laboratory, Danish Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Technical University, Building 221, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
^2) Canadian Institute of Fisheries Technology, Technical University of Nova Scotia, P.O. Box 1000, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3J 2X4
^3) Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN, Fish Utilization and Marketing Service, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
The preparation, editing and printing of this document has been financed by the FAO Regular Programme (Fish Utilization and Marketing Service, FIIU) and the FAO/DANIDA Training Project on Fish Technology and Quality Control (GCP/INT/609/DEN).
Distribution
FAO Fisheries Department FAO Regional and
Sub-Regional Fisheries Officers FAO
Representatives FAO Fisheries Field Projects
DANIDA
Authors
Huss, H.H. (ed.). Quality and quality changes in fresh fish. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper. No.
348. Rome, FAO. 1995. 195p.
<section>2</section>
Summary
This document is an update of the state of the art of quality and quality changes in fresh fish. After a brief introduction and review of aquatic resources and their utilization, it analyses the biological aspects and chemical composition that can influence fish quality. Particular attention is given to post mortem changes and their important role in early quality changes.
The effect of storage temperature, hygiene during handling, gutting, fish species, fishing ground and season, anaerobic condition and carbon dioxide, on quality and keeping time of fish is discussed in detail. A complete chapter is devoted to improved fish handling and chilling methods both at artisanal and industrial levels.
Methods to assess fish quality (sensory, biochemical and chemical, physical and microbiological) are reviewed, and six appendixes contain practical information on how to conduct assessment tests and tables currently used in sensory quality assessment of fish in Europe.
The manual is complemented with an introduction into the assurance of fresh fish quality, a vital issue in view of the current trend to introduce HACCP (Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point) and HACCP-based methods into the fishery industry.
As far as possible, data referring to marine and freshwater fish species both of developed and developing countries, have been utilized in examples and tables. The document includes a subject index and more than 350 references. The aim of this document is to serve as a training manual and reference textbook.
<section>3</section>
Acknowledgements
The Editor thanks all colleagues, who, despite heavy workloads, have contributed in revising and updating this document, Without their understanding and support this project would have been difficult to finalize.
Special thanks go to Mr I. Kollavik-Jensen for this tireless effort in reading proofs and assisting in the preparation of the final document, and to Mrs. D. Spencer-Di Napoli for improving the English.
Thanks are also due to Mrs. Lene Jensen and Mrs. Inge Andersen for their patience, care and diligence in the typing and layout of the manuscript.
<section>4</section>
1. Introduction
World catches of fish have increased in the 1970s and 1980s but seem to have stabilized since 1988 to just under 100 million t. As the human population is ever increasing, it means that less fish will be available per caput every year. Nevertheless, a large part of this valuable commodity is wasted: it has been estimated by FAO that post-harvest losses (discards at sea and losses due to deterioration) remain at a staggering 25 % of the total catch. Better utilization of the aquatic resources should therefore aim primarily at reducing these enormous losses by improving the quality and preservation of fish and fish products and by upgrading discarded low value fish to food products. Very often, ignorance and lack of skill in fish handling or in the administration of fisheries are among the causes for lack of progress in this direction.
FAO has long recognized the need for training in fish technology, and since 1971 a series of training courses, financed by the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), has been conducted in the developing countries. In 1988 a training manual entitled "Fresh fish - quality and quality changes" was published. This book has been extensively used and is now out of print. This present book is a revised and updated version of the first publication. It still only deals with fresh fish, as it is felt that a solid background knowledge of the raw material is essential for further development in preservation of and adding value to the product. In the context of this book, fresh fish is either fish kept alive until it is consumed, or dead fish preserved only by cold water or ice.
The book describes fundamentals in fish biology, chemical composition of fish and post mortem changes, with a view to explaining the rationale for optimal catch handling procedures and obtaining maximum shelf life. The effect of various factors (temperature, atmosphere, etc.) on fresh fish quality is discussed as are the various sensory, chemical and micro-biological methods for assessing fish quality. Wherever possible, data on tropical fish have been included.
Two new chapters, not included in the first publication, have been added. One is a description of the practical application of new and improved fish handling methods (Chapter 7) and the other is the application of the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system in a quality assurance programme for fresh and frozen fish (Chapter 9).
Fresh fish handling procedures encompass all the operations aimed at maintaining food safety and quality characteristics from the time fish is caught until it is consumed. In practice, it means reducing the spoilage rate as much as possible, preventing contamination with undesirable microorganisms, substances and foreign bodies and avoiding physical damage of edible parts.
The immediate effect of fish handling procedures (e.g., washing, gutting, chilling) on quality can easily be assessed by sensory methods. Fish quality, in terms of safety and keeping time, is highly influenced by non-visible factors such as autolysis and contamination and growth of microorganisms. These effects can only be assessed long after the damage has occurred, and the proper procedures must thus be based on knowledge about the effects of the many different factors involved. Large or small improvements are usually feasible when analysing current fish handling methods.
It is hoped that the reading of this book, combined with practical training, will be helpful in providing the stimulus which is often necessary to promote development in fisheries.
<section>5</section>
2. Aquatic resources and their utilization
More than two-thirds of the world's surface is covered by water and the total yearly production of organic material in the aquatic environment has been estimated at about 40 000 million t (Moeller Christensen, 1968). Tiny microscopic plants, the phytoplankton, are the primary producers of organic material using the energy supplied by the sun (see Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1 The annual aquatic production of organic material is estimated at 40 000 million t (Moeller Christensen, 1968)
This enormous primary production is the first link in the food chain and forms the basis for all life in the sea. How much harvestable fish results from this primary production has been the subject of much speculation. However, there are great difficulties in estimating the ecological efficiency, i.e., the ratio of total production at each successive trophic level. Gulland (1971) reports a range from 10 to 25 % but suggests 25 % as the absolute upper limit of ecological efficiency; for example, not all of the production at one trophic level is consumed by the next. Ecological efficiency also varies between levels, being higher at the lower levels of the food chain with smaller organisms using proportionally more of their food intake for growth rather than for maintenance.
Diseases, mortality, pollution, etc. may also influence ecological efficiency. As an example, the conditions in the North Sea, an area with very rich fishing waters, are shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2 Annual production (in million t) in the North Sea, one of the richest fishing grounds in the world (Moeller Christensen and Nystroem, 1977)
Since production is greater in the early stages of the food chain, the potential catch is also greater if harvesting is carried out at these stages.
Up to 1970, the world catch of marine fish continued to rise at an overall rate of 6 percent per year, according to FAO statistics. Great optimism was expressed by various authors who estimated the potential world catch to be somewhere between 200 million t/year to 2 thousand t/year (Gulland, 1971); most of this wide variation being due to uncertainties concerning the trophic level at which the harvest would be taken.
The world fish catch since 1970 is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3 Total world fish catch from 1970 to 1992 (FAO, 1994 a)
It is clear from Figure 2.3 that the yearly increase in catches has slowed down since 1970, and the total catch reached a peak of 100 million t in 1989. Since then it has started to drop as a number of fish stocks have begun to collapse, in many cases due to overfishing. However, a slight upward trend is noticed for 1992 and for 1993 world catch is estimated to reach 101 million t. While total catch has started to decline since the peak in 1989, the catch from developing countries as a group is still increasing and since 1985 has exceeded that from developed countries. Thus in 1992 little more than 60 % of the total world catch was taken by developing countries, and it is estimated that this figure will increase to 66% in 1993. This also means that an increasing part of the world fish catch is taken from warm tropical waters.
Are we then reaching the limits of production from "wild" aquatic resources now or do the optimistic predictions from the 1970s still hold? The answer to this question is not only in the affirmative, but for many resources the limit was reached decades earlier than the peak in global landings (FAO, 1993 a). A combination of factors has helped to mark the depletion of many conventional resources. One of these is that continued investments in fishing fleets throughout the world has meant that although catch rates and abundance of high value fish species have often declined, the overall level of fishing effort has increased so that roughly similar levels of landings are being taken at much greater cost to many fishing nations.
The real problems with decreasing fish stocks are familiar. First there is "the tragedy of the commons" - whatever lacks a known owner, whether buffalo or fish which everyone will race to exploit and ultimately destroy.
The next problem which can be identified is the exceptionally poor management of the aquatic resources. What has been done has been too late and too little. The 1982 Law of the Sea, which extended the territorial seas from 12 to 200 miles, gave the coastal States an opportunity to take a protective interest in their fishing grounds. Instead, many of them rushed to plunder the resources by offering generous subsidies and tax relief for new vessels. Also, the much used quota-system is subject to severe criticism. Often, the net result is increased fishing and increased waste, as perfectly good fish are thrown overboard if quotas are already reached. Many fish stocks (such as pollack, haddock and halibut off New England) are now considered "commercially extinct"; that is, there are now too few fish to warrant catching.
The typical history of the use of a single fish stock has been illustrated as shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4 Schematic changes in stock abundance, catch and fishing effort in situations of development, overexploitation and management of fisheries. (SOURCE: Danish International Development Agency, DANIDA, 1989)
From an initial stage of under-utilization the fishing passes through a phase of rapid expansion until the limit of the resource is reached. This is then followed by a period of overfishing with high fishing effort, but reduced catches until finally - and hopefully a phase of proper management is reached. Details on resource management are beyond the scope of this book, but should include the concept of sustainability, environmental aspects and responsible fishing. However, in an FAO publication (FAO, 1994) it is stated that change from a focus on short-term development of fishing fleets to proper management is a necessary, but insufficient condition for sustainable development. In the same report it is further stated that "Sustainable Development" as promoted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in 1992 cannot be achieved under open-access regimes, whether these are within or outside national territorial waters.
In contrast, the world aquaculture production inclusive of aquatic plants has steadily increased over the last decade totalling 19.3 million t in 1992, almost half of this (49%) is produced in marine aquaculture, 44% in inland aquaculture, and the rest in brackish environment. About 49% of world aquaculture production is fish. Production of aquatic plants is increasing rapidly and reached 5.4 million t in 1992, while smaller increases in production of molluscs and crustaceans are seen (Figure 2.5). The total value of the aquaculture production is estimated to more than $US 32.5 billion in 1992.
To summarize, it can be said that further increases in supply of fish can be expected from better utilization/reduction of losses and further expansion of aquaculture.
Table 2.1 shows the breakdown of world fish production.
Table 2.1 Breakdown of world fish production (percentage of world total in live weight) (FAO, 1993 a)
Year 
For human consumption
Other purposes
Animal Feed
Total Fresh Freezing Curing Canning
Table 2.1 shows relatively modest differences in the breakdown of the fish production during the decade 1982-92. However, there was a significant increase in fresh fish consumption. Total fish for human consumption increased by 1.2% while fish used for curing and canning continued to decrease.
Figure 2.5 World Aquaculture Production by species category, 1984-91 (FAO, 1993 c)
In value terms, fishery exports reached an estimated $US 40.1 billion in 1993 (FISHDAB, 1994). Exports of fish and fishery products from developing countries continued to increase reaching a total value of $US 19.4 billion in 1993. In the same year exports from developed countries dropped by 5% to an estimated total value of $US 20.7 billion. Developing countries recorded an increasingly positive trade balance in fish trade, which reached $US 12.7 billion in 1993 (FISHDAB, 1994).
It should be noted that Table 2.1 does not give a true picture of the amount of fish available for human food. An enormous amount of fish is wasted due to discards on board or post-harvest losses during processing and distribution. It has been estimated that the global amount of discards is in the range of 17-39 million t/year with an average of 27 million t/year (Alverson et al., 1994). It has been further estimated that the total post-harvest losses in fish products are about 10 % (James, D., personal communication 1994). These high losses are mainly due to problems of fisheries management, and lack of proper technology and of economic incentives.
<section>6</section>
3. Biological aspects
3.1 Classification
3.2 Anatomy and physiology
3.3 Growth and reproduction
3.1 Classification
Fish are generally defined as aquatic vertebrates that use gills to obtain oxygen from water and have fins with variable number of skeletal elements called fin rays (Thurman and Webber, 1984).
Five vertebrate classes have species which could be called fish, but only two of these groups - the sharks and rays, and the bonyfish - are generally important and widely distributed in the aquatic environment. The evolutionary relationship between the various groups of fish is shown in Figure 3.1.
Fish are the most numerous of the vertebrates, with at least 20 000 known species, and more than half (58 %) are found in the marine environment. They are most common in the warm and temperate waters of the continental shelves (some 8 000 species). In the cold polar waters about 1 100 species are found. In the oceanic pelagic environment well away from the effect of land, there are only some 225 species. Surprisingly, in the deeper mesopelagic zone of the pelagic environment (between 100 and 1 000 m depth) the number of species increases. There are some 1000 species of so-called mid-water fish (Thurman and Webber, 1984).
Classifying all these organisms into a system is not an easy task, but the taxonomist groups organisms into natural units that reflect evolutionary relationships. The smallest unit is the species. Each species is identified by a scientific name which has two parts the genus and the specific epithet (binominal nomenclature). The genus name is always capitalized and both are italicized. As an example, the scientific (species) name of the common dolphin is Delphinus delphis. The genus is a category that contains one or more species, while the next step in the hierarchy is the family which may contain one or more genus. Thus the total hierarchical system is: Kingdom: Phylum: Class: Order: Family: Genus: Species.
The use of common or local names often creates confusion since the same species may have different names in different regions or, conversely, the same name is ascribed to several different species, sometimes with different technological properties. As a point of reference the scientific name should, therefore, be given in any kind of publication or report the first time a particular species is referred to by its common name. For further information see the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea "List of names of Fish and Shellfish" (ICES, 1966); the "Multilingual Dictionary of Fish and Fish Products" prepared by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 1990) and the "Multilingual Illustrated Dictionary of Aquatic Animals and Plants" (Commission of the European Communities, 1993).
The classification of fish into cartilaginous and bony (the jawless fish are of minor importance) is important from a practical viewpoint, since these groups of fish spoil differently (section 5) and vary with regard to chemical composition (section 4).
Figure 3.1 Simplified phylogenetic tree of the fishes. (Examples of food-fish, using common English names, are shown in parentheses). (SOURCE: N. Bonde (1994), Geological Inst., Copenhagen)
Furthermore, fish can be divided into fatty and lean species, but this type of classification is based on biological and technological characteristics as shown in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Classification of fish
Scientific grouping Biological
characteristics Technological
characteristics Examples
Cylcostomes jawless fish lampreys, slime-eels
Chondrichthyes cartilaginous fish high urea content in
muscle sharks, skate,
rays
Teleostei or
bony fish pelagic fish fatty fish (store lipids
in body tissue) herring, mackerel,
sardine tuna, sprat
demersal fish lean (white) fish (store
lipids in liver only) cod, haddock, hake
grouper, seabass
3.2 Anatomy and physiology
The skeleton
Being vertebrates, fish have a vertebral column - the backbone - and a cranium covering the brain. The backbone runs from the head to the tail fin and is composed of segments (vertebrae). These vertebrae are extended dorsally to form neural spines, and in the trunk region they have lateral processes that bear ribs (Figure 3.2). The ribs are cartilaginous or bony structures in the connective tissue (myocommata) between the muscle segments (myotomes) (see also Figure 3.3). Usually, there is also a corresponding number of false ribs or "pin bones" extending more or less horizontally into the muscle tissue. These bones cause a great deal of trouble when fish are being filleted or otherwise prepared for food.
Figure 3.2 Skeleton of bonyfish (Eriksson and Johnson, 1979)
Muscle anatomy and function
The anatomy of fish muscle is different from the anatomy of terrestrial mammals, in that the fish lacks the tendinous system connecting muscle bundles to the skeleton of the animal. Instead, fish has muscle cells running in parallel and connected to sheaths of connective tissue (myocommata), which are anchored to the skeleton and the skin. The bundles of parallel muscle cells are called myotomes (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3 Skeletal musculature of fish (Knorr, 1974)
All muscle cells extend the full length between two myocommata, and run parallel with the longitudinal direction of the fish. The muscle mass on each side of the fish makes up the fillet, of which the upper part is termed the dorsal muscle and the lower part the ventral muscle.
The fillet is heterogenous in that the length of the muscle cells vary from the head end (anterior) to the tail end (posterior). The longest muscle cells in cod are found at about the twelfth myotome counting from the head, with an average length around 10 mm in a fish that is 60 cm long (Love, 1970). The diameter of the cells also vary, being widest in the ventral part of the fillet.
The myocommata run in an oblique, almost "plow-like" pattern perpendicular to the long axis of the fish, from the skin to the spine. This anatomy is ideally suited for the flexing muscle movements necessary for propelling the fish through the water.
As in mammals, the muscle tissue of fish is composed of striated muscle. The functional unit, i.e., the muscle cell, consists of sarcoplasma containing nuclei, glycogen grains, mitochondria, etc., and a number (up to 1 000) of myofibrils. The cell is surrounded by a sheath of connective tissue called the sarcolemma. The myofibrils contain the contractile proteins, actin and myosin. These proteins or filaments are arranged in a characteristic alternating system making the muscle appear striated upon microscopic examination (Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4 Section of a cell showing various structures including the myofibrils (Bell et al., 1976)
Most fish muscle tissue is white but, depending on the species, many fish will have a certain amount of dark tissue of a brown or reddish colour. The dark muscle is located just under the skin along the side of the body.
The proportion of dark to light muscle varies with the activity of the fish. In pelagic fish, i.e., species such as herring and mackerel which swim more or less continuously, up to 48 % of the body weight may consist of dark muscle (Love, 1970). In demersal fish, i.e., species which feed on the bottom and only move periodically, the amount of dark muscle is very small.
There are many differences in the chemical composition of the two muscle types, some of the more noteworthy being higher levels of lipids and myoglobin in the dark muscle.
From a technological point of view, the high lipid content of dark muscle is important because of problems with rancidity.
The reddish meat colour found in salmon and sea trout does not originate from myoglobin but is due to the red carotenoid, astaxanthin. The function of this pigment has not been clearly established, but it has been proposed that the carotenoid may play a role as an antioxidant.
Further, the accumulation in the muscle may function as a depot for pigment needed at the time of spawning when the male develops a strong red colour in the skin and the female transport carotenoids into the eggs. The latter seems to depend heavily on the amount of carotenoids for proper development after fertilization. It is clearly seen that the muscle colour of salmonids fades at the time of spawning.
The fish cannot synthesize astaxanthin and is thus dependent on ingestion of the pigment through the feed. Some salmonids live in waters where the natural prey does not contain much carotenoid, e.g., in the Baltic Sea, thus resulting in a muscle colour less red than salmonids from other waters. This may be taken as an indication that the proposed physiological function of astaxanthin in salmonids explained above may be less important.
In salmon aquaculture, astaxanthin is included in the feed, as the red colour of the flesh is one of the most important quality criteria for this species.
Muscle contraction starts when a nervous impulse sets off a release of Ca++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to the myofibrils. When the Ca++ concentration increases at the active enzyme site on the myosin filament, the enzyme ATP-ase is activated. This ATP-ase splits the ATP found between the actin and myosin filaments, causing a release of energy. Most of this energy is used as contractile energy making the actin filaments slide in between the myosin filaments in a telescopic fashion, thereby contracting the muscle fibre. When the reaction is reversed (i.e., when the Ca++ is pumped back, the contractile ATP-ase activity stops and the filaments are allowed to slip passively past each other), the muscle is relaxed.
The energy source for ATP generation in the light muscle is glycogen, whereas the dark muscle may also use lipids. A major difference is, further, that the dark muscle contains much more mitochondria than light muscle, thus enabling the dark muscle to operate an extensive aerobic energy metabolism resulting in CO[2] and H[2]O as the end products. The light muscle, mostly generating energy by the anaerobic metabolism, accumulates lactic acid which has to be transported to the liver for further metabolization. In addition, the dark muscle is reported to possess functions similar to those are found in the liver.
The different metabolic patterns found in the two muscle types makes the light muscle excellently fitted for strong, short muscle bursts, whereas the dark muscle is designed for continual, although not so strong muscle movements.
Post mortem the biochemical and physiological regulatory functions operating in vivo ceases, and the energy resources in the muscle are depleted. When the level of ATP reaches its minimum, myosin and actin are interconnected irreversibly, resulting in rigor mortis. This phenomenon is further described in section 5.
The cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular system is of considerable interest to the fish technologist since it is important in some species to bleed the fish (i.e., remove most of the blood) after capture.
The fish heart is constructed for single circulation (Figure 3.5). In bony fish it consists of two consecutive chambers pumping venous blood toward the gills via the ventral aorta.
Figure 3.5 Blood circulation in fish (Eriksson and Johnson, 1979)
Notes:
1. The heart pumps blood toward the gills.
2. The blood is aerated in the gills.
3. Arterial blood is dispersed into the capillaries where the transfer of oxygen and nutrients to the surrounding tissue takes place.
4. The nutrients from ingested food are absorbed from the intestines, then transported to the liver and later dispersed in the blood throughout the body.
5. In the kidneys the blood is "purified" and waste products are excreted via the urine.
After being aerated in the gills, the arterial blood is collected in the dorsal aorta running just beneath the vertebral column and from here it is dispersed into the different tissues via the capillaries. The venous blood returns to the heart, flowing in veins of increasingly larger size (the biggest is the dorsal vein which is also located beneath the vertebral column). The veins all gather into one blood vessel before entering the heart. The total volume of the blood in fish ranges from 1.5 to 3.0 % of the body weight. Most of it is located in the internal organs while the muscular tissues, constituting two-thirds of the body weight, contain only 20 % of the blood volume. This distribution is not changed during exercise since the light muscle in particular is not very vascularized.
During blood circulation the blood pressure drops from around 30 mg Hg in the ventral aorta to 0 when entering the heart (Randall, 1970). After the blood has passed through the gills, the blood pressure derived from the pumping activity of the heart is already greatly decreased. Muscle contractions are important in pumping the blood back to the heart and counterflow is prevented by a system of paired valves inside the veins.
Clearly, the single circulation of fish is fundamentally different from the system in mammals (Figure 3.6), where the blood passes through the heart twice and is propelled out into the body under high pressure due to the contractions of the heart.
Figure 3.6 Blood circulation in fish and mammals (Eriksson and Johnson, 1979)
In fish, the heart does not play an important role in the transportation of blood from the capillaries back to the heart. This has been confirmed in an experiment where the impact of different bleeding procedures on the colour of cod fillets was examined. No difference could be found regardless of whether the fish had been bled by means of cutting the throat in front of or behind the heart before gutting, or had not been cut at all before slaughter.
In some fisheries, bleeding of the fish is very important as a uniform white fillet is desirable. In order to obtain this, a number of countries have recommended that fish are bled for a period (15-20 min) prior to being gutted. This means that throat cutting and gutting must be carried out in two separate operations and that special arrangements (bleeding tanks) must be provided on deck. This complicates the working process (two operations instead of one), time-consuming for the fishermen and increases the time-lag before the fish is chilled. Furthermore it requires extra space on an otherwise crowded working deck.
Several researchers have questioned the necessity of handling the fish in a two- step procedure involving a special bleeding period (Botta et al., 1986; Huss and Asenjo, 1977 a; Valdimarsson et al. 1984). There seems to be general agreement about the following:
- bleeding is more affected by time onboard prior to bleeding/gutting than by the actual bleeding/gutting procedure.
- best bleeding is obtained if live fish are handled, but it is of major importance to cut the fish before it enters rigor mortis since it is the muscle contractions tha