<section>e</section>
Previous Contents Next
The problem of obsolete pesticides
1.1 When are pesticides obsolete?
Obsolete pesticides are defined as stocked pesticides that can no longer be used for their original purpose or any other purpose and therefore require disposal. Common causes of this situation include the following:
* the product has been withdrawn for health or environmental reasons (e.g. through banning; withdrawal of registration; policy decision by the Ministry of Agriculture);
* the product has deteriorated as a result of improper or prolonged storage and can no longer be used according to its label specifications and use instructions, nor can it easily be reformulated to become usable again;
* the product is not suitable for its original use and cannot be used for another purpose, nor can it easily be modified to become usable.
A product has deteriorated when:
* it has undergone chemical and/or physical changes that result in phytotoxic effects on the target crop, or an unacceptable hazard to human health or the environment;
* the product has undergone an unacceptable loss of biological efficacy because of degradation of its active ingredient and/or other chemical or physical changes;
* its physical properties have changed to such an extent that it can no longer be applied with standard or stipulated application equipment.
In some publications, obsolete pesticides are also correctly referred to as pesticide waste. Another term used is unwanted pesticides, a broader definition than obsolete pesticides. Besides obsolete pesticides (the ones that definitely cannot be used any longer and require disposal), it also covers pesticides that, in principle, could still be used, but are not being used and are regarded as unwanted by their owner because there is a surplus stock in excess of requirements; the pest problem has passed; there are logistical constraints concerning distribution; the formulation is not suitable for the application equipment, etc. Although there is no immediate use for these products, they may still be in good condition and may be potentially usable without compromising environmental or occupational safety. Such products should not be regarded as obsolete so long as it has not been established that there are no solutions to the impediments hindering their use (such as more
effective distribution, repackaging, procurement of different application equipment or reformulation of the product to make it usable with available application equipment, or alternative use). Therefore, unwanted pesticides are not necessarily obsolete. However, stocks that in principle are still usable, but are not being used, run a high risk of becoming obsolete as a result of prolonged storage.
Figure 1 represents a decision tree to determine whether pesticides are obsolete.
FIGURE 1 - Decision tree to determine whether pesticides are obsolete
It is not always easy to establish whether old stocks have deteriorated to a level at which they have become unusable. If not stated otherwise on the label, products normally have a shelf-life of two years from the date of release, during which the manufacturer guarantees the quality of the product, provided that it is stored according to instructions precisely stated on the label. Such instructions may for instance refer to temperature, humidity and light/exposure to direct sunlight. Storage periods beyond two years, or beyond the shelf-life indicated on the label, do not automatically imply that such products have degraded beyond usability. Pesticides can often be stored for much longer than their indicated shelf-life. On several occasions, analytical results showed that five- to seven-year-old stocks of organophosphates, with an indicated shelf-life of two years, were still usable. However, the opposite may also occur. Storage under extremely high temperatures may
accelerate deterioration to such an extent that the product becomes unusable before expiry of its shelf-life. For example, a temperature rise of 10°C may increase the decomposition rate by a factor of two or three (GIFAP, 1985). Temperatures inside shipping containers or in poorly ventilated stores may easily reach 40°C or higher when exposed to direct sunlight in tropical environments. High humidity, direct exposure to sunlight and strong temperature fluctuations may also shorten the actual shelf-life. This will depend on a number of factors that cannot always be controlled, monitored or predicted, which is why labels normally state the date of manufacture/release, instead of an expiry date. Labels may also state a "date of test", a date when analytical results confirmed that the product has not deviated from its original specifications, or that deviations are within an acceptable range.
FIGURE 2 - Abandoned pesticide containers (barrels) blown close to disintegration by the high pressure of
obsolete pesticides kept in them for years
Products that have deteriorated as a result of physical changes may be identified without difficulty: originally clear liquid formulations may have formed flakes, crystals or an emulsion; emulsions may have precipitated and solidified against the container's inside wall; powders may have solidified after becoming damp. More difficult to identify are products whose chemical properties have changed, while the visible physical properties remain unchanged. In such cases, it is often necessary to conduct chemical analysis in a laboratory to establish whether the product is still usable. The FAO specifications for plant protection products provide guidance on permitted tolerances for active ingredient contents, impurities and physical properties (FAOa, in preparation).
In some cases, a decline in active ingredient concentration may be compensated by a proportional increase in application volume, provided that the decomposition products of the active ingredient do not increase the product's toxicity beyond acceptable margins.
The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, 1989 (UNEP/SBC, 1994) defines "wastes"as "substances or objects which are disposed of, or are intended to be disposed of, or are required to be disposed of by the provisions of national law". Obsolete pesticides fall into this category. International transport of obsolete pesticides is therefore governed by this Convention. In addition, obsolete pesticides are subject to several international conventions regulating the transport of dangerous goods^1, which are all based on the UN's Recommendations on the transport of dangerous goods (UN, 1991). National regulations governing the transport and handling of hazardous substances may be more strict on hazardous waste than on pesticides.
1.2 Occurrence and state of obsolete pesticide stock
Obsolete pesticide stocks are present in the majority of developing countries. Quantities in individual countries range from a few tonnes to several thousands. In 1994, FAO conducted an inventory of obsolete pesticide stocks in Africa and the Near East. Results of this inventory indicate that the total of obsolete pesticides in Africa probably exceeds 15,000 tonnes^2. In 1993, at least three Asian countries were known to have quantities of obsolete pesticides within the range of 5,000-10,000 tonnes each. Unconfirmed figures from Eastern European countries suggest that several countries hold very large quantities. The total in non-OECD countries may be well in excess of 100,000 tonnes. In addition, there are large quantities of heavily contaminated soils that should be regarded as hazardous waste.
Common types of obsolete pesticides include organochlorine compounds such as DDT, dieldrin and HCH, which have been withdrawn or banned for human health and/or environmental reasons. Countries in the migratory locust zone often still have large quantities of these compounds remaining from old strategic stocks for locust control. Several of these stocks were acquired over 20 years ago.
Another large group is organophosphates and carbamates that have deteriorated as a result of prolonged or improper storage. Examples of commonly found products that have deteriorated beyond usability include: dimethoate, fenitrothion, malathion, carbaryl and propoxur.
In many cases, obsolete pesticides are stored under conditions that do not meet the basic standards for safe and responsible storage of such hazardous materials. Stores are often poorly ventilated or do not have concrete floors. At many locations, obsolete pesticides have even been stored in the open. Bags are often torn or deteriorated. Drums are often corroded or have ballooned as a result of heat and leaking drums are a common feature. In some cases leakage has been so bad that floors of stores are completely covered with pesticides. Many stores lack basic provisions to deal safely and adequately with leakage or other emergencies.
1.3 Causes of accumulation of obsolete pesticides
There are many factors that have contributed to the formation of the present stockpiles of obsolete pesticides. These factors can be grouped roughly into the following categories:
* Banning of products
* Inadequate stores and poor stock management
* Unsuitable products or packaging
* Donations or purchases in excess of requirements
* Inadequate coordination among and within aid agencies
* Commercial interests of the pesticide industry and hidden factors
A detailed analysis of the causes of accumulation of obsolete pesticide stocks is provided in Chapter 2.
1.4 Hazards connected to obsolete pesticides
Leaking drums and torn bags can seriously affect the occupational health of staff working at the storage site and of others who happen to come in contact with the pesticides. They often pose a broader general danger to public health and the environment. Factors determining the level of hazard include:
* the quantity of pesticides, the condition of containers and packaging and the degree of leakage;
* the place of storage (inside or outside a store) and the floor material of the storage site (degree of impermeability);
* the toxicity of the products;
* the behaviour of the product in the environment (persistence, mobility in soil, solubility in water, volatility);
* the location of the storage site (some are located in or near urban areas);
* the groundwater level and proximity of the storage site to water bodies (some stores are located on irrigation schemes, near rivers or in ports).
Contamination of groundwater or soil can occur through seepage of leaked pesticides into the ground or runoff during heavy rains. Poisoning of people or animals can occur through direct contact with the product, inhalation of vapours, drinking of contaminated water, or eating of contaminated food. Other hazards include:
* fire hazard. Several examples are known of pesticide stores that have caught fire as a result of poor maintenance of stores and/or stocks. The environmental contamination caused by fires can be widespread;
* unauthorized use of pesticides. Examples are known of obsolete stocks that gradually decreased as a result of pilfering. Unauthorized or inappropriate use of pesticides is a notable cause of accidents or contamination;
* improvised disposal. In several cases pesticides have been disposed of by burying or open burning, which may cause severe environmental contamination.
1.5 Disposal of obsolete pesticides
Disposal options
Products that can no longer be used are to be disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound manner. In most cases, the recommended method will be high-temperature incineration. Developing countries do not generally have appropriate high-temperature incineration facilities for hazardous waste. This means that obsolete products may have to be shipped to special hazardous waste incineration plants in countries that are willing to accept the waste. The costs of repackaging, shipment and incineration are high and the administrative procedures to comply with international conventions concerning the shipment of hazardous waste may be complicated and time-consuming. Alternative high-temperature incineration methods such as the use of a mobile incinerator or a local cement kiln have their limitations and are often not applicable in a safe and/or cost-effective manner^3.
FIGURE 3 - A cocktail of obsolete, banned and unwanted pesticides. Powder pesticides spill from torn jute and
paper bags, blowing into the environment or mixing with heavily leaking liquid pesticides kept in tin cans,
barrels, etc. in the background. Since pesticides are in the open, accessible to passers-by, handlers and staff,
exposure casualties are always common and widespread
Methods such as chemical treatment or landfilling after solidification may sometimes offer solutions for relatively small quantities of specific groups of pesticides. Other methods are not recommended. Pesticides should never be disposed of by burying or open burning.
For detailed information concerning disposal options, reference should be made to the Guidelines on disposal of bulk quantities of pesticides in developing countries (UNEP/FAO/WHOa, in preparation).
Safe and environmentally sound disposal of pesticides can be very expensive. Costs depend on the disposal method, the total quantity of pesticides to be disposed of, the type and variety of products, the number of locations from where pesticides are to be removed, the distance to a port of exit, the degree of contamination, and so on. In 1993, the cost of a complete clean-up operation comprising repackaging, shipment and incineration of a bulk quantity of a single product from one location in a landlocked African country was in the order of US$4,000 per tonne. Costs of removing a variety of products that are to be collected from several locations will be even higher.Donor assistance to disposal operations
Aid agencies may be willing to provide technical and financial assistance for the environmentally sound disposal of obsolete pesticides. The following considerations may give justification for providing such assistance:
* most of the present stocks of obsolete pesticides have accumulated over a long period of time, while the existence of such stocks has only recently been recognized as a major environmental issue. In addition, accumulation often occurred outside the control of the present authorities responsible for pesticide management;
* a substantial part of these stocks was provided under aid arrangements;
* stocks of obsolete pesticides are posing a serious threat to human health and the environment. Environmental contamination caused by obsolete pesticides may have wider environmental implications (e.g. contamination of international waters);
* environmental contamination caused by stocks of obsolete pesticides may be an impediment to the development of certain areas.
Nevertheless, even though aid agencies may be prepared to assist countries with a one-time intervention to dispose of old stocks, it is unlikely that they will be prepared to support the same countries in any subsequent disposal activities. Developing countries and aid agencies should therefore take the necessary precautions to ensure that present and future stocks of pesticides do not become obsolete.
The following three conventions are based on the UN's Recommendations on the transport of dangerous goods, which cover principles of classification, general packaging requirements, testing procedures, marking, labelling or placarding, and shipping documents: The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) and the accompanying International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code, which provides standards for the shipment of dangerous goods by sea; The Convention on International Civic Aviation (Chicago Convention) and the accompanying Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air; The Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail. Go back
2^ At the time of publication of these guidelines, 18 African countries had submitted completed inventories. Extrapolation of the figures from these countries provides an overall estimate for Africa of 15,000-20,000 tonnes of obsolete pesticides (excluding heavily contaminated soils). Go back
3^ Many of the older types of cement kilns are not suitable. Only a few of the cement kilns in developing countries meet the technical requirements that, in principle, would make them suitable for incineration of certain groups of pesticides. Expert advice is needed to assess whether kilns can be used and special equipment is required to inject the pesticides into the kiln. Such equipment is expensive and should only be installed and used under expert supervision. The use of mobile incinerators requires advanced road infrastructure, reliable and continuous supplies (fuel, electricity and chemicals) and expert supervision. In most cases, the use of mobile incinerators is unlikely to be cost-effective for quantities of fewer than 1,000 tonnes. Go back
Previous Contents Next
<title>Prevention of accumulation of obsolete pesticide stocks</title>
<section>1</section>
Previous Contents Next
Analysis of causes of accumulation of obsolete pesticides
It is important to identify and understand the factors that have contributed to the formation of the present stockpiles of obsolete pesticides in order to formulate preventive measures. This chapter provides a further analysis of the categories of causes of accumulation as listed earlier in section 1.3.
2.1 Banning of products
In many countries, where a range of products has been banned or withdrawn for health or environmental reasons, the fate of existing stocks in the country is often given scare consideration. Stocks remain where they are stored and eventually deteriorate. This particularly applies to organochlorine compounds that are part of strategic stocks for locust control.
2.2 Inadequate stores and poor stock management
Insufficient storage capacity for pesticides
The government authority responsible for national pesticide stocks often does not have sufficient storage capacity to store all its pesticides safely. Many stores are poorly constructed, have insufficient ventilation, are too hot and/or do not have concrete floors. Because of space constraints, pesticides are often not properly stacked, thereby reducing access to products and making it difficult to monitor the condition of containers. At several locations, pesticides are even stored in the open for prolonged periods of time. Poor storage conditions accelerate the degradation of pesticides and their containers. New products are sometimes stored inappropriately because obsolete products are occupying the limited storage space.
Staff not trained in stock management
Storekeepers of major stores and those responsible for national stocks are often not familiar with the rules for good stock management (proper stacking, product segregation, principle of "first in - first out", etc.). Leakage and spills may not be cleaned up immediately because staff have not been trained how to handle them, or because the necessary materials and protective gear are not available. Contamination and improper stacking may affect the condition of other products and may impede a consistent application of the principle of "first in - first out". Stock records may not be regularly updated and communicated to the central authority responsible for establishing the country's pesticide requirements.
Inappropriate handling during transport
Drums and other packaging materials are often damaged through rough handling or in transport. When drums are battered, their inner and outer coatings may be damaged, which will accelerate corrosion and shorten their life. Unnecessarily long periods of exposure to direct sun during transit is another important factor that affects both the container and its contents.
Unavailability of analytical facilities
Because laboratory facilities for pesticide quality control are not available in most developing countries, it may be difficult to determine whether a pesticide may still be used after its indicated shelf-life has expired. Inadequate labelling and the absence of a date of manufacture/release on labels or on the container may complicate the matter. For this reason, there is often an understandable tendency to deviate from the principle of "first in - first out" and to use a newer product to be certain of its effectiveness; this practice leads to prolonged storage of older products.
2.3 Unsuitable products and packaging
Products may have been donated that were unsuitable for their intended use and have therefore remained in store and deteriorated.
Inappropriate active ingredient or formulation
Examples of cases where products have been considered unsuitable include the following:
* The active ingredient of a donated product was not evaluated in the recipient country and field trials were required before it could be approved for use. This took time and the product started to deteriorate.
* The product was not effective against the target pest or against the weed it was supposed to destroy; or it had unacceptable side-effects (e.g. it appeared to have phytotoxic effects on the crop itself).
* The formulation was not stable under tropical conditions and the product rapidly degraded.
* The formulation could not be used with locally available application equipment (e.g. ULV formulation for use by small-scale farmers who only have knapsack-sprayers).
Impractical package size or poor container quality
Bulk quantities of pesticides are commonly supplied in 200-litre metal drums. For countries without good repackaging facilities this may create problems if the pesticides are intended for use by plant protection staff, extension staff or small-scale farmers. In order to transfer the contents of large drums into smaller packages, large quantities of small empty containers, a pump, labels, etc. are needed. These are often not available, or are insufficient, at the repackaging location. Consequently, pesticides may remain unused or improvised measures may be taken that are dangerous to handlers or users.
Pesticides are sometimes delivered in containers of poor durability that soon start leaking. Once drums have corroded or leak, they can no longer be transported, which makes it considerably more difficult to use their contents. The same applies to torn bags and other damaged packaging.
If the container quality is not specified in tender documents, bidders may be tempted to reduce their price by compromising on the quality of containers.
Missing or incomplete labels
In some cases, pesticides are not used because the potential user does not know the specifications of the product, or how to apply it, since labels are missing or incomplete, are illegible (as a result of rain, sunlight, leakage), or are in a language alien to the user.
Insufficient communication between aid agency and recipient country
In several cases, the quantity, active ingredient, formulation or packaging of donated pesticides are inappropriate for the intended use. Such mistakes occur because of a lack of detailed specifications in requests for pesticide donations and/or a lack of background information and justification. On their part, aid agencies often make insufficient efforts to obtain such information before processing requests for pesticide donations.
Fraudulent practices of unreliable suppliers
Examples are also known of consignments that have not been used because the product had been adulterated by an unreliable supplier in order to increase profits and was no longer suitable for the intended purpose.
2.4 Donations or purchases in excess of requirements
Inaccurate assessment of requirements
An assessment of the necessary quantities of pesticides is generally based on approximate estimates of the area to be treated. Insufficient consideration is often given to the actual agro-ecological conditions (e.g. variations in intensity of pest outbreaks, economic thresholds, etc.) and to factors that may limit the use of pesticides such as the local application capacity (availability of spraying equipment, protective clothing and trained staff), storage facilities and the effectiveness of distribution systems. The ability of the envisaged users to pay for the product is another factor that is sometimes overlooked. In addition, there is a tendency to overestimate requirements in order to avoid any shortages.
Centralized and up-to-date information on existing in-country stocks is sometimes not readily available or is incomplete, which complicates the assessment of additional requirements. In this case, the national authority responsible for the assessment of the country's yearly requirement of pesticides may not rely on these stocks and will keep them out of the equation when drawing up a list of products to be procured or requested from donors.
Lower than expected pest incidence
The possible extent of an expected pest outbreak is sometimes difficult to forecast. A lower pest incidence than expected may result in unused pesticide stocks.
In the past, this was particularly true for outbreaks or invasions of migratory pests. Countries that established large strategic pesticide stocks in preparation for possible upsurges or invasions often ended up with large quantities of unused products. The risk was further increased by decentralizing such stocks.
Monitoring of locust outbreaks has greatly improved with the FAO Emergency Centre for Locust Operations programme. Internationally coordinated control strategies based on the monitoring of developments in locust outbreaks have demonstrated that pesticides can be flown in on time and that large strategic stocks are therefore no longer necessary.
Overstocking of products with a short shelf-life
Most currently used pesticides have a two-year shelf-life. Tropical conditions characterized by excessive heat, high humidity and/or strong fluctuations in temperature may reduce this already short life span. During medium- or longer-term storage periods, these products degrade and become unusable. Overstocking of such products is a common cause of pesticides becoming obsolete.
Excessive donations
Aid agencies have sometimes provided pesticide donations far in excess of requirements. In several cases this has involved products manufactured in the home country of the aid agency or funding government (see also section 2.6).
Under some agricultural input supply programmes that last for a number of years, the provision of pesticides is automatic until notice is given to stop. This system, depending on feedback, does not always work effectively. In some cases, it has led to an accumulation of pesticides when demand dropped and supply was not adjusted.
Some examples are known of unsolicited pesticide donations.
Removal of subsidies
Many countries are reducing or removing subsidies from pesticides. The rationale behind the adjustment of pricing policies is both technical and economic. Direct and indirect subsidies on pesticides are not desirable because they stimulate overuse and over-reliance on pesticides and frustrate the introduction of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). Moreover, structural adjustment programmes require the removal of subsidies from agricultural inputs to establish rational market mechanisms. This often causes a temporary or structural drop in demand. As a result, stocks may remain in store longer than planned and are at increased risk of becoming obsolete.
FIGURE 4 - A partial view of a consignment of malathion pesticides donated from a donor to a recipient country
and now obsolete. Some have leaked and seeped into the ground, while others have caused high-pressure buildup
that has distended the tops of the barrels
2.5 Inadequate coordination among and within aid agencies
Poor coordination among aid agencies
Insufficient coordination among aid agencies providing pesticides, especially for locust and other migratory pest control operations, has been a major factor in causing excess donations of pesticides. Recipient governments do not usually have any guarantee that the required pesticides will be provided by the donor agency they first contact. In emergency situations, this may lead to simultaneous requests for assistance being made to various agencies, with the hope that at least one will react in time. In the end, the requested amount may be received from more than one donor. Given this undesirable situation, FAO is enhancing donor coordination in emergency situations, both at the international level and the national level in recipient countries.
Administrative procedures within aid agencies
Slow processing of requests for pesticides, in some cases, has meant that the pesticides have arrived too late.
Project or programme funds are often allocated for spending within a certain period. Consequently, timing for the procurement of pesticides is sometimes determined by budgetary factors, rather than by actual requirements. This means that recipient countries may be pressed to accept pesticide supplies on a "now or never" basis, which in many cases conflicts with the principle of providing pesticides only when they are actually needed.
Several aid agencies have not yet assigned responsibility for the appraisal and processing of requests for pesticides to a specific technical office within the agency. Instead, such requests are processed by the country desk concerned. There may be little coordination among country desks themselves, or among country desks, technical departments and procurement departments. Without a specifically designated technical office to appraise requests for pesticides, it may be difficult to build up an institutional memory to avoid repetition of mistakes.
2.6 Commercial interests and hidden factors
Agrochemical companies, or their local agents, often take the initiative to advise plant protection services and other large-scale users on their pesticide requirements. Sometimes such advice forms the basis for requests to donors. However, companies may not always put the public interest above their own commercial interest and assessments may be in excess of actual requirements. Moreover, the recommended product will probably be one the company supplies and therefore may not necessarily be the most appropriate.
Large sums of money are involved in pesticide supplies. As a result, a variety of hidden interests may play a role in decisions concerning pesticide procurement or donations. Often these interests are not strictly related to the best technical solution to pest problems. Companies may use a range of aggressive marketing methods that result in procurement of quantities in excess of actual requirements, or of low-quality products. Some individuals involved in pesticide procurement may have personal interests. Donor countries may place increased emphasis on supply of pesticides because of the spin-off for the national pesticide industry, thereby increasing the risk of donations being supply- rather than demand-based. Supply-based donations of pesticides are more likely to become obsolete. Tied aid may restrict the range from which products can be selected.
Such hidden factors often complicate a sound technical approach to pest and pesticide management and should be identified and addressed in policy decisions.
Previous Contents Next
<section>2</section>
Previous Contents Next
Preventing the accumulation of obsolete pesticides
3.1 Why prevention is necessary
In the absence of safe and environmentally sound local disposal facilities, and in view of the high cost of shipping pesticides out to an incinerator, which most countries cannot afford, obsolete pesticides often remain in store until containers corrode and the contents leak. If no action is taken, large quantities of concentrated pesticides will eventually leak into the environment, with severe consequences for public and animal health, and the environment itself. Contamination of groundwater may be irreversible. Stocks of obsolete pesticides should therefore be regarded as chemical time-bombs that can cause environmental and human disasters.
Donor assistance may be available for the disposal of obsolete stocks, but will always be considered a one-time option, with the understanding that the country concerned will take the necessary measures to avoid further accumulation of obsolete pesticides. It is highly unlikely that aid agencies will be prepared to help dispose of newly accumulated pesticides if old stocks have already been disposed of with their assistance.
Large sums of mainly hard-currency capital are involved when pesticides are allowed to become obsolete. Costs include those for the origin