<title>Water sector policy review and strategy formulation A general framework</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Many countries have reached a state where the quantity or quality of fresh water resources is imposing limits on present use of the resource and on economic development. Others are rapidly approaching a similar critical situation. All these countries face the common problem that existing policies and strategies, and the institutions to implement them, are inadequate to meet water use needs and sustainable development.
In response to the problem, and to meet the challenge of the future, UN organizations, the World Bank and national governments have joined forces to promote reviews of water policies. The World Bank policy paper Water Resources Management, published in 1993, provides a conceptual framework and stresses the importance of a holistic approach to water resources management. Specific guidelines for processes and methods for water policy reforms and the formulation of water resources strategies were suggested in the subsequent joint UNDP-World Bank technical paper A Guide to the Formulation of Water Resources Strategy, published in 1994, and in Reforming Water Resources Policy: A Guide to Methods, Processes and Practices, published by FAO in 1995.
In September 1994, The Sub-committee on Water Resources of the UN Administrative Committee for Coordination (ACC-SWR) requested UNDP, FAO and the World Bank to prepare a joint guide on water resources policy review and reform and on strategy formulation. These agencies merged their respective publications, and FAO organized an expert consultation in January 1995 to review the joint document. The expert consultation included representatives of several UN agencies, the World Bank and several selected countries.
The framework presented here incorporates the recommendations of the expert consultation and makes the case for a systematic water policy review in two stages:
o Review and adaption of water policy, and
o Formulation of strategies.
Recognizing that policies and their implementation are the prerogatives of national governments, the focus of this guide is the approach and the process for formulating strategies and implementing water sector policies.
It is the hope that this guide will assist countries in their effort to review national water policies and re-assess national institutional capacity to implement the required strategic reforms, with the objective of sustainable resource management and rational water use.
Wim Sombroek
Director,
Land and Water Development Division,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Frank Hartvelt
Deputy Director.
Division for Science,
Technology and Private Sector
United Nations Development Programme
Guy Le Moigne
Senior Adviser, Water Resources
The World Bank
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This document integrates the two documents mentioned in the Foreword and that have already been published: one prepared by FAO and the other by the World Bank and UNDP.
The FAO document was prepared by Mr James Winpenny of the Overseas Development Institute, London, and incorporates original material on policy analysis by Mr B.G. Appelgren, on legal aspects by Mr S. Burchi, and on economic analysis by Mr R. Stringer.
The World Bank/UNDP document was prepared by Ashok Subramanian, Mel Xie and Sandra Giltner, under the leadership of Guy Le Moigne (Senior Adviser, Water Resources, World Bank) and Frank Hartvelt (Deputy Director, Division of Science, Technology and the Private Sector, UNDP).
The synthesis of the two documents, undertaken by Hugh Turral, of the Overseas Development Institute, London, benefited substantially from the comments made by the experts participating in the Expert Consultation on Methodology for Water Policy Review and Reform, held in FAO, Rome, in January 1995.
Final editing for style and consistency and preparation for printing was by Thorgeir Lawrence, under the technical guidance of B.G. Appelgren.
<section>3</section>
Executive summary
The Expert Consultation on Water Policy Review and Reform (Rome, 25-27 January 1995), concluded, with some exceptions, that methodology for water policy development do not generally exist at the country level, but that there is a need for individual countries to formulate, debate and adopt appropriate, national, provincial and basin-wide policies for rational water resources management.
The general framework presented in this document is based on elaboration of the strategic planning process outlined below, focusing on policy review and strategy formulation for water resources management. Policy review is intended to re-assess objectives, existing policy and status of the water sector, and to provide new goals and policies on which a detailed strategy can be based. The process of strategy formulation is concerned with the detail of how to put policy into practice at successively national, regional (basin) and local levels. It is, in one sense, between policies and programmes or projects, although it may indicate projects without formulating their details.
Water policy review and strategy formulation have many overlapping elements and are closely related, and the intent is to offer the different elements that together make up a review or strategy formulation process. It is for the countries to choose those elements that are applicable and most likely to develop a unique process that matches their unique needs. Hence the framework concentrates on elements.
Strategic planning is a continuous process and involves feedback and cross-over between monitoring and assessment (according to established criteria) of the results of implementation of strategy and the resulting programmes and projects. Reality is far more complex and is complicated by simultaneous strategic and shorter-term horizons and the strong likelihood of changing circumstances, plus changing interactions with other aspects of public policy and economic development. Thus the process of policy review and strategy formulation is also modified by political processes and human behaviour and has strong long-term evolutionary characteristics, as demonstrated in the ongoing reforms in water resources management in such countries as the United States of America, Spain and Australia.
The importance of capacity building is stressed when addressing the differences between the ideal and reality, and in particular the somewhat artificial phasing of activities of any framework. Capacity building involves:
o Creating an enabling environment with appropriate policy and legal frameworks.
o Institutional development, including community participation.
o Human resources development and strengthening of managerial systems.
The background, problems and principles of water resources management are discussed and provide a breakdown of sectorial activities, the social and economic characteristics of water and explain the reasons for extensive public intervention in the development, allocation, regulation and management of water resources. International meetings (ICWE, Dublin, and UNCED, Rio di Janiero, both in 1992) on water and the environment have focused popular attention on the increasingly limited availability of water resources and the need for improved management and conservation as a corollary to development. Rising population and the rapid rate of urbanization continue to increase demand for the basic services of potable water and sanitation and the need for secure food supplies. Irrigation is the dominant water user in many developing countries and faces increasing competition from other sectors, raising severe localized problems of re-allocation in some cases.
Counter-balancing these basic needs is the increasingly more expensive cost of developing new water supply infrastructure; consideration of the environmental needs for water and mitigation of the impact of water development; and the recovery of part or all of the operational costs of supply. Public expenditure by governments is increasingly burdensome and the worldwide pressure to minimize recurrent expenditure, recover costs and balance budgets is strongly evident in the water sector. The need for massive levels of new investment has also prompted renewed interest in attracting private sector finance to augment or relieve state commitments.
Component parts of the policy review include determining the importance of water in specific national and regional contexts, conducting a comprehensive water resources assessment and thereby generating a matrix of problems and critical issues, set against old and emerging objectives for water policy. Broad options, based on defined principles, are evaluated and set the scene for detailed strategy formulation, which establishes critical elements such as oversight bodies and expert teams and identifies all the interested parties (stakeholders). Extensive use of public consultation and participation is envisaged, although realistic assessments of the time, effort, cost and logistical feasibility of appropriate stakeholder participation is called for. The end point of the strategy formulation exercise is the definition of an action programme and implementation schedule.
The principle elements and key issues in strategy formulation are introduced with consideration of the need for a holistic and integrated approach to assessment, development and management of freshwater resources. Categories of actions determined in the policy analysis matrix are elaborated with consideration of data requirements and information management and the role of modelling in assessing options. Institutional and legal reforms are a major part of strategy formulation, encompassing specification, allocation and recognition of water rights, changes in organizational and ownership arrangements, and decentralization and devolution of responsibility in public sector management. The role of economic tools and incentives and technological innovation are also introduced before more detailed consideration of the following key issues:
o institutions and human resources;
o stakeholder participation;
o information systems and management;
o the role of economics;
o environmental and health considerations; and
o international issues.
The final section draws together recent experience in water resources reform in Yemen, France, Mexico, England and Wales (United Kingdom), Victoria (Australia), Chile, Indonesia and Turkey, and attempts to emphasise the process of policy review and strategy formulation in practice. It highlights the outcomes of policy reform under the headings of water rights; privatization and corporatization; the promotion of price and market mechanisms; and reforms in planning and management.
<section>4</section>
Glossary of technical terms and abbreviations used
Aquifer A water-bearing stratum of permeable rock or soil able to hold or transmit much water.
Assessment (water resources) An examination of the aspects of the supply and demand for water and of the factors affecting the management of water resources.
Capacity building The process of building organizations, human resources and the legal and regulatory framework needed for effective and efficient water resources management.
Catchment area The area from which rainfall flows into a river, reservoir, etc.
CBA cost-benefit analysis
CEA cost-effectiveness analysis
Comprehensive water resources management Water resources planning, development and control that incorporates physical, social, economic and environmental inter- dependencies.
Cost recovery Fee structures that cover the cost of providing the service or investment.
De-centralization The distribution of responsibilities for decision making and operations to lower levels of government, community organizations, the private sector, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Delft Declaration Declaration on Capacity Building, agreed at the UNDP Symposium A Strategy for Water Resources Capacity Building, held in Delft, the Netherlands, June 1991.
Demand management The use of price, quantitative restrictions and other devices to limit the demand for water.
Dublin Statement The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development, adopted at the International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE).
Ecosystem A complex system formed by the interaction of a community of organisms with its environment.
EIA environmental impact assessment
Externality The unintended real (generally non-monetary) side effect of one party's actions on another party.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GNP gross national product
Helsinki Rules Helsinki rules on the Uses of the Waters of International Rivers, agreed in 1966, and since extended to include groundwater
HRD Human resources development, i.e., the enhancement of knowledge and skills, plus the creation of optimum development conditions to use these
IAP-WASAD International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development (FAO)
ICID International Commission for Irrigation and Drainage
ICWE International Conference on Water and the Environment, attended by over 500 participants from over 100 countries and over 80 international governmental organizations and NGOs, and held in Dublin, Ireland, 26-31 January 1992. It resulted in the Dublin Statement.
IHE International Institute for Hydraulic and Environmental Engineering
Institutions Organizational arrangements and the legal and regulatory framework - the 'enabling environment' - in which organizations operate. More broadly, institutions include entities, processes and linkages between individual entities.
ILA International Law Association
ILC International Law Commission
IPTRID International Programme on Technology and Research in Irrigation and Drainage
ITN International Training Network (UNDP)
IWRA International Water Resources Association
Market failure A divergence between the market outcome, without intervention, and the economically efficient solution.
NGO non-governmental organization
O&M operation and maintenance
Opportunity cost The value of goods or services foregone, including environmental goods and services, when a scarce resource is used for one purpose instead of for its next best alternative use
Policy A declared intention and course of action adopted by government, party, etc., for the achievement of a goal.
Programme A definite plan of intended procedure.
Project A scheme or undertaking.
Ramsar Convention Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat, done at Ramsar on 2 February 1971 and signed by 22 European States. It came into force on 21 December 1975.
RBO river basin organization
Riparian state A state through or along which a portion of a river flows or a lake lies
River basin A geographical area (catchment area) determined by the watershed limits of a water system, including surface and underground water, flowing into a common terminus.
Sensitivity analysis Assessment of the response of some factors as a result of changes in others
Sewage Liquid refuse or waste matter carried off by sewers.
Sewerage The removal and disposal of sewage and surface water by sewer systems.
Stakeholder An organization or individual that is concerned with or has an interest in water resources and that would be affected by decisions about water resources management.
Strategy A set of chosen short-, medium- and long-term actions to support the achievement of development goals and to implement water-related policies.
UFW un-accounted-for water, i.e., the volume of water lost through leakage or irregular practices between entering a distribution system and reaching the users.
UN United Nations
UN/ACC UN Administrative Committee for Coordination
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1992). Also known as The Earth Summit.
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNDDSMS United Nations Department of Development Support and Management Services
Watercourse A system of surface and underground waters that constitute, by virtue of their physical relationship, a unitary whole and that flow into a common terminus
Watershed The line separating waters flowing into different rivers, basins or seas. Often used to mean catchment area or river basin.
WDR World Development Report
Wetlands Areas of marsh, fen, peatland, or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water less than six metres deep at low tide.
WHO World Health Organization
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WRD water resources development
<section>5</section>
Part I Background and principles
Introduction
Problems and principles
Introduction
Special attributes of water
The case for public intervention
The water sector and its outreach
The international debate
Target readership
The chapter begins by noting some of the special characteristics of water physical, social and economic - which make it special, and which make a high degree of government involvement in the sector inevitable. Particular emphasis is placed on the size and scope of the sector, marring the point that water involves many other sectors and its use has widespread repercussions. Since some of the results of water use transcend international boundaries, the chapter includes an account of recent international events, notably the Dublin Conference and UNCED, at which governments accepted the need to review policies in the water sector, recognizing in particular its growing scarcity value.
Special attributes of water
It is commonly accepted that access to water is a basic human right. The Dublin Conference in 1992 asserted that "... it is vital to recognize first the basic right of all human beings to have access to clean water and sanitation at an affordable price." (ICWE, 1992)
Many societies believe that water has special cultural, religious and social values, which marks it off from other economic goods. In many cultures, goals other than economic efficiency influence the choice of water management institutions. Some religions (e.g., Islam) even prohibit water allocation by market forces. However, the focus on water's special status tends to obscure the fact that, in most societies, only a tiny fraction of water consumption is actually for drinking and preserving life. A large portion of urban water is used for convenience and comfort. In the arid western United States, per caput water withdrawal by households frequently exceeds 400 litres per day, about half of which is used to irrigate lawns and gardens. Most of the remainder is for flushing toilets, bathing and washing cars.
The value of water to particular users depends crucially on its location, quality and timing. Its location determines its accessibility and cost. Its quality affects whether it can be used at all, and at what treatment cost. The time when it is available governs its reliability and its relative value for power, irrigation, environmental or potable uses.
In addition, the value of water, especially in agriculture, is inseparable from the type of land to which it is applied, the nature of the soil, its drainage possibilities, etc. Saline water is, for instance, unusable on some soils, but viable on others.
Water has two features that further complicate management efforts: bulkiness and mobility. The value per unit weight tends to be low. Transporting and storing water is costly relative to its economic value at the point of use. In crop irrigation, the water applied may yield additional economic values of less than $US 0.04 per tonne of water. Furthermore it has a long-term value to the sustainability of life and economic activity, over periods that dwarf those considered in conventional cost-benefit analysis: this instrumental value could be thought of as the value to future generations which is hard to quantify and define simply, but includes considerations of quantity, quality, timing and accessibility.
Water is also difficult to identify and measure because it is a fugitive resource - it flows, evaporates, seeps and is transpired. This evasive nature means that exclusive property rights, which are the basis of a market economy, are hard to establish and enforce.
Water projects that attempt to compensate for extreme seasonal variations such as floods and droughts frequently require enormous investments. The economies of scale are such that a single supplying entity is often the most economically efficient organizational arrangement. This is a classic 'natural monopoly.' At the other extreme, most economies of size for pumping groundwater are achieved at relatively small outputs, and multiple suppliers can therefore operate efficiently.
Aquifer management is often complicated by the aggregate impact of the actions of many individuals. Even though each individual may have a negligible impact when taken alone, the sum total can be of major importance. One tube-well has little effect on the total water supply, but thousands of tube-wells can quickly deplete an aquifer. Establishing effective policies to regulate water abstraction by these many small-scale, scattered decision-makers is exceedingly difficult.
The case for public intervention
The above characteristics of water make a large measure of public intervention inevitable. Economies of scale in the collection and distribution of water tend towards natural monopolies, which need to be regulated to serve the public interest. The fact that many investments are huge, and have a long time horizon, often discourages private capital, and requires large amounts of public investment.
Water uses in a river basin or aquifer are interdependent, which is to say that users impose 'externalities' on others that they ignore in their own decisions (e.g., discharging polluting effluent into a river causes harm, inconvenience and costs to other river users). In some respects water is a 'public good' in the sense that it is impractical to exclude users or beneficiaries, and therefore impossible to charge for (e.g., improved navigation, flood control, reduced river pollution, etc.). Where this is the case, private investment will not be forthcoming. In both these respects, water is prone to 'market failure,' which implies that some public involvement is called for.
Ultimately, water is vital to life, and certain water systems are of national strategic importance. Governments have a responsibility to manage water for the national welfare. This does not imply that the water system needs to be 100% in public ownership. It does, however, mean that appropriate laws, regulations, institutions and incentives should be in place to guard the public interest, and that governments stand ready to invest where the market will not.
Governments are, unfortunately, subject to shortcomings of their own, and it cannot be assumed that they are always efficient servants of the public good. 'Policy failures' are the public twin of 'market failures', although the sense might be different in the case where, for instance, government applies subsidies to drinking water for public health objectives. The management of water is often fragmented between different agencies and parties, leading to conflict, confusion and mutually damaging tactics.
Water authorities and service agencies are often overextended and inefficient. They often fail to recover enough funds to cover essential operations, and there is often a growing backlog of unserviced consumers. Publicly owned companies and utilities are usually among the worst water polluters, whatever legislation is formally in place.
In short, a well managed water sector needs a balance of public and private involvement, recognizing the limits of both the market and government, and building on what each seems to do best.
The water sector and its outreach
The water sector embraces direct consumption and use of water, land drainage, flood relief, farm irrigation, fisheries, industrial and other abstraction, hydropower, in-stream use of water for navigation, recreation, amenity, wildlife, etc., environmental protection, and disposal and treatment of sewage and industrial effluent.
It follows that decisions about water concern many interested parties - 'stakeholders' - in the sector. The decision to use more water in agriculture, for instance, could have implications for power generation, for municipal use, for industrial offtake, for instream uses such as fishing, navigation and recreation, and for the environment, including wetlands, deltas and game parks. These decisions could also entail major public health risks, such as the spread of malaria and bilharzia.
Apart from being the largest worldwide consumer of water, agriculture is also a major water polluter. Saline irrigation off-flows or drainage containing agrochemical residues are serious contaminants for downstream water users. Agricultural nitrate is contaminating groundwater in a number of areas. The disposal of liquid animal wastes pollutes surface and groundwater and is the main environmental problem in some intensively farmed regions.
Conversely, natural resources sectors such as agriculture, forestry and nature conservation can hold the key to improving the management of water resources. Certain kinds of farm practices, for instance terracing and agroforestry, can help to preserve and improve the functions of watersheds. Afforestation and sustainable management of standing forests also have a vital part to play in protecting upland water sources. The more careful use of water by irrigators can release supplies for growing cities, or for hydropower or environmental purposes, while more careful use of agrochemicals and better drainage practices would improve the quality of water for downstream users.
Water has an international dimension where countries share a river, lake, coast or aquifer. The issues are similar to those arising where the resource is of purely national concern, except that sovereignty is involved, international law is applicable, aid is often at stake, and countries may be willing to go to war to defend their interests. There is a serious risk of water becoming a casus belli in some of the arid parts of the world.
The international debate
Water, waste management and related environmental issues have been the subject of increasing international concern and debate. The UNDP global consultation on Safe Water and Sanitation for the 1990s, held in New Delhi (1990), appealed for concerted action to enable people to obtain two of the most basic human needs - safe drinking water and environmental sanitation. Its guiding principles included protection of the environment and health, institutional reforms, community management, financial strategies and appropriate technologies. The UNDP symposium A Strategy for Water Sector Capacity Building (1991, Delft, The Netherlands), defined the three basic elements of capacity building as creating an enabling environment with appropriate policy and legal frameworks, institutional development including community participation, and human resources development. The international water agenda was broadened further at two landmark conferences in 1992, sponsored by the UN system: the
International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE) in Dublin, and the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Those two conferences highlighted a number of principles: water must be managed in a holistic way; institutional arrangements need to be adjusted to allow stakeholder participation in all aspects of policy formulation and implementation, including devolution of management to the lowest appropriate level; the central role of women; and the management of water as an economic resource as well as a resource for meeting basic needs.
In 1993, the World Bank (1993a) issued a comprehensive policy paper defining its new objectives for the water sector. FAO recently established an International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development (IAP-WASAD). Likewise, the UN Specialized Agencies, international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and bilateral assistance agencies are all coordinating or participating in special programmes related to water resources. The Ministerial Conference on Drinking Water and Environmental Sanitation (at Nordwijk, the Netherlands, in March 1994) called for strategies for drinking water and sanitation to be developed in the context of broader strategies for sustainable water resources management and environmental protection.
The message highlighted by all these efforts is that water availability is increasingly limited -to the extent that there is no room for sub-optimal management if sustainable economic development is to be achieved. Of principal concern is the failure to recognize and accept that there is a finite supply of water and value it accordingly. The consensus is that the growing water scarcity and misuse of freshwater pose serious threats to sustainable development.
Target readership
This framework is addressed to all those who become involved with reform in water resources management. Some of its contents are addressed to a broad readership, and so will be familiar to water specialists, but is believed that the latter could benefit from the wider introduction placing the water sector in its holistic context.
Problems and principles
Growing water problems: the concept of vulnerability
Water use and management
Agriculture - a key to the problem
Checklist of critical issues
Reasons for policy review
Water as a limited resource
Principles for water planning and allocation
Effectiveness
Efficiency
Equity and distributional effects
Public health
Environmental impact
Fiscal impact
Political and public acceptability
Sustainability
Administrative feasibility
Policy reform in agriculture
Strategic choices and trade-offs
This chapter begins by illustrating the scale of problems in the water sector worldwide, drawing on recent work on vulnerability. The problems of agriculture are specifically dealt with, since this sector is crucial to any solution due to the magnitude of its water demands. A general checklist is introduced to help identify some of the common critical issues facing governments in this sector. Some country case material is summarized to indicate the circumstances which prompted various countries to undertake policy reviews.
The chapter continues by expounding the concept of water as a limited resource - one which is increasingly argued to have the characteristics of an economic good, together with some of the reasons why it is not treated as such. The economically efficient use of water is one of the basic principles recommended for policy review, together with the criteria of efficacy, distributional impact, environmental impact, fiscal implications, acceptability, sustainability and feasibility. Some implications of these criteria for policy reform are discussed, both generally, and for the agricultural sector. The thrust of policy reforms is in line with existing trends in agricultural policy. Some strategic choices and trade-offs are then described, such as inter-sectorial priorities, food self-sufficiency, and international diplomatic issues. Finally, the choices of centralized or de-centralized; of public or private management styles; and of supply-oriented or demand management policies
are examined.
Growing water problems: the concept of vulnerability
Competition among agriculture, industry and cities for limited water supplies is already constraining development efforts in many countries. As populations expand and economies grow, the competition for limited supplies will intensify and so will conflicts among water users. Whilst the scale of emerging mismatch in demand and supply is unprecedented, societies and cultures have historically often been vulnerable to water with respect to quantity, quality and timing of availability, and in some instances to capture by enemies. Thus competition for and conflicts over water are not new.
While climate is the principal factor in water quantity and its inter-temporal distribution, population and economic development are the main influences on quality and demand.
Although water quality and its inter-temporal distribution are difficult factors to measure for the purposes of international comparisons, the supply and demand for water can be calibrated both between countries and over time, and conclusions drawn about the vulnerab