<title>Impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Uruguay Round marks a significant turning point in world agriculture. For the first time agriculture has featured in a major way in one of GATT's rounds of multilateral trade negotiations. It changes the way in which national agricultural policies will be undertaken by most countries and, though representing only a partial liberalization, its effects will be felt for years to come.
In order to assess the impact of the Uruguay Round on the markets for the principal agricultural commodities, the FAO Secretariat has modified its recent projections to the year 2000 to allow for the effects of the Uruguay Round agreements. These effects include the boost to world income deriving not only from agriculture but also concessions in other sectors as well as the reduction in agricultural tariffs, the establishment of minimum access in some markets and the cut in export subsidies.
The resulting impact on world agricultural markets suggests a positive effect on prices and rather smaller impacts on the quantities produced, consumed and traded. Based on the pattern of agricultural imports and exports as well as the responsiveness of the agricultural sector to these price changes, the study estimates the impact on agricultural trade balances of the main regions.
The study also examines a number of special issues that are of concern to countries. These include an estimate of the loss of potential value from preferential agreements; the impact of taking a much higher (double) income assumption; the effect of the Uruguay Round on world market price stability and the effect on tariff escalation for selected commodities.
While the study is not exhaustive it provides the basis for a number of policy conclusions for countries to consider, in particular the need to review national food policies with a view to profiting from potentially higher world food prices and to offsetting the increase in food import bills that is one of the most likely consequences for most countries.
This is the first of the Secretariat's detailed analyses of the impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture. It is planned to extend this work to cover other agricultural commodities in the future. We would welcome comments by readers on this study.
R.J. Perkins Director Commodities and Trade Division FAO
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
After seven years of negotiations the Uruguay Round Multilateral Trade Negotiations were concluded on December 15, 1993. The Final Act of the Uruguay Round, signed at Marrakesh in April 1994, is wider in scope than any of its predecessors. The tariff cuts are deeper; non-tariff barriers are tackled more comprehensively; and for the first time two major sectors, services and agriculture, have been included in the negotiated agreement. While the Final Act covers agreements, decisions and declarations on a wide variety of subjects several of which will be of great economic significance to the world economy and to the economies of the developing countries, this study focuses mainly on the impact of the Agreement on Agriculture on trade flows and prices for the main agricultural commodities.
The approach to the assessment has been to re-run FAO projections for most of the main agricultural commodities to take into account important changes in national policies that have taken place since the projections were last done^1 together with the Uruguay Round changes to be accomplished by the year 2000 (the great bulk of developed countries and over 60 percent of the concessions of the developing countries making reduction commitments). These new projections confirm earlier conclusions that prices in international markets will be 4 to 10 percent higher and point to significant changes in trade patterns. These are analyzed in Section III of the study. Section IV of the paper considers the impact of these changes on the four developing regions. Some special issues are covered in Section V. The methodology is briefly outlined in Annex I.
<section>3</section>
II. A brief review of the agreement on agriculture
The implementation of the Agreement on Agriculture will start in 1995, and the reduction commitments of the developed countries should be completed within six years, i.e. by the year 2000, whereas the commitments of the developing countries should be completed within ten years, i.e. by the year 2004. The least developed countries are not required to make any reductions. The commodities included are most of the products normally considered as part of agriculture (i.e. it excludes fishery and forest products) except that it also excludes rubber, jute, sisal, abaca and coir, which were covered in the normal GATT tariff negotiations on goods.
There are three elements in the commitment on market access: tariffication, tariff reduction and access opportunities. Tariffication means that specific non-tariff barriers (quotas, variable levies, minimum import prices, discretionary licensing, state trading measures, voluntary restraint agreements and similar border measures) need to be abolished and converted into an equivalent tariff. Ordinary tariffs, including those resulting from tariffication, are to be reduced by an average of 36 percent (24 percent by developing countries), with a minimum rate of reduction of 15 percent for each tariff item. Special safeguard provisions allow the imposition of additional duties when there are either import surges or particularly low prices (both compared with 1986-88 levels). Where there are no significant imports, minimum access equal to 3 percent of domestic consumption in 1986-88 will be established for 1995 rising to 5 percent of base year consumption at the end of the
implementation period.
For domestic support policies, subject to reduction commitments, the total support given in 1986-88, measured by the Total Aggregate Measure of Support (Total AMS)^2, should be reduced by about 20 percent in developed countries (13.3 percent in developing countries). Reduction commitments refer to total levels of support and not to individual commodities. Policies which amount to a small percentage transfer value to producers (less than 5 percent of the value of production for developed countries, less than 10 percent for developing countries) are also excluded under the de minimis rule. Policies which meet certain criteria of decoupled support together with production restraint have been excluded. Policies which have minimal or no effect on production or trade distorting effects (Green Box") are excluded. The list of exempted "Green Box" policies includes such policies as general services to agriculture, food security stocks, domestic food aid, and certain decoupled
payments to producers, including direct payments to production-limiting programmes, providing certain conditions are met.
As regards developing countries, which have been given special and differential treatment in the Agreement on Agriculture, purchases for and sales from food security stocks could be at administered prices provided that the subsidy to producers is included in the AMS. As regards domestic food aid, developing countries are allowed untargeted subsidized food distribution to meet requirements of the urban and rural poor on a regular basis. Also excluded for developing countries are investment subsidies that are generally available to agriculture and agricultural input subsidies generally available to poor farmers in these countries. Developing countries were allowed to offer ceiling bindings instead of tariffication.
Perhaps the most important provision is the commitment to reduce export subsidies. The volume of exports benefiting from such subsidies must be reduced by 21 percent and the expenditure on export subsidies by 36 percent. Unlike the reduction commitments in market access and domestic support, reductions in export subsidies will be implemented on a product-specific basis. However, exporters have in certain cases been allowed to maintain a higher level of subsidized exports in the years up to 1999, by availing themselves of a special option (the higher of the subsidized levels of 1991-92 and 1986-90) from which to make reductions to the same final level by the year 2000. The Final Act also has some provisions for prevention of circumvention of export subsidy commitments, including inter alia disciplines on use of export credit and credit guarantees as well as food aid (i.e. food aid should not be tied, it should be carried out in accordance with the FAO Principles of Surplus
Disposal, and it should be provided to the extent possible in fully grant form).
Finally, in addition to the special and differential provisions mentioned above, there are special provisions for developing countries contained in the Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least -Developed and Net Food Importing Countries. The idea behind the Decision is that agricultural trade liberalization is likely to lead to higher world prices for food while a reduction in export subsidies will also raise the effective price paid by importers. There is also some concern that the volume of food aid, which historically has been closely linked to the level of surplus stocks, could be more limited in future as the surplus stocks are run down. The Decision recognizes these issues and provides for some redress, via food aid, technical assistance to raise agricultural productivity and possibly short term assistance to help in financing normal commercial imports.
The Agreement on Agriculture, although rather comprehensive and going well beyond tariffs and border measures, still represents only a partial liberalization agreement. The quantitative cuts in support to agriculture are relatively small and spread over a number of years. Overall, a large degree of distortion in the world market of agricultural commodities will still remain even after the complete implementation of the reduction commitments. However, the dimensions of the commitments are still impressive. Aggregate domestic support will be cut from US$198 billion to US$162 billion, export subsidies will be cut from US$21.3 billion to US$13.8 billion. Virtually all agricultural tariffs will in future be bound, i.e. ceiling rates have been established, which adds greater security to trade.
The impact on income growth is hard to estimate as considerable liberalization has occurred in the services sector for which at present it is not possible to quantify the effects, The GATT has made a number of estimates ranging from gains of US$109-510 billion^3. The World Bank/OECD has estimated gains of around US$213 billion^4.
The question of the impetus to world income deriving from the Uruguay Round is of great importance in assessing the impact; for the purposes of this study the World Bank/OECD figure was taken for the main scenario while double this amount was taken for the higher income assumption. However, as the main thrust of this paper is the revised outlook for world agricultural markets in the year 2000, it must be noted that the assumed effect is well below one year's growth in world income.
Before turning to the commodity detail however, a word is in order on some of the methodological assumptions lying behind these projections. In all cases models have been developed which simultaneously determine production, consumption, imports, exports and world prices. All countries are covered. The existing "baseline" projections to the year 2000 are driven by income growth, productivity changes and demographic trends. The prices in each country are linked to world market prices by tariffs and other policy effects and natural forms of protection. For the "Uruguay Round scenario" the reduction in tariffs changes these price linkages. The meddling has been done in terms of the primary commodity (e.g. wheat) so that the tariff changes for the derived products (e.g. wheat flour) have been aggregated into an average wheat-equivalent tariff. It has usually been assumed that tariff changes will reflect changes in the bound, ceiling, tariffs. The reduction in export subsidies has
been reflected in an increase in the consumer price of the recipient country in addition to any change in world prices due to trade liberalization. For exporters that use subsidies for all their exports, a maximum has been introduced on the volume of their exports. For those exporters which only subsidize a part of their exports, no such constraint has been modelled but it is still assumed that this will erode part of their competitiveness and hence influence the volume of their exports. Minimum access has been introduced in all cases where the model did not generate a sufficient volume of imports to meet the national commitments. The value of trade has been calculated by multiplying the volume of trade by an estimated world average export unit value for the year 2000, which in turn was projected as the product of the index of world prices and the base year export unit value. Adjustments were made to take into account the decline in export subsidies and to some extent the
loss of preferential margins.
<section>4</section>
III. Impact on selected agricultural markets
Overview
Wheat
Rice
Coarse grains
Oils and fats and oilmeals
Sugar
Meat
Milk and milk products
Coffee
Cocoa
Tea
Bananas
Hides and skins
Overview
As previously reported, the overall growth in the production of the selected commodities is projected to decline slightly compared with the 1980s (Tables la to 1g). The decrease in growth rates is greatest in rice, meat other than bovine, dairy products, coffee and cocoa. By contrast some increases are envisaged for tea and bananas. The impact of the Uruguay Round is negligible on world agricultural production.
The growth rate for global consumption of the agricultural commodities covered by this study is also projected to decrease, with the exception of bananas. Allowing for population growth at 1. 7 percent a year, per caput consumption is expected to decrease for dairy products, grains, beef and coffee, while per caput consumption of vegetable oils, some meat, tea, bananas, cocoa and rubber should rise. On balance, the Agreement will slightly slow consumption growth in the Low-Income, Food-Deficit Countries.
The Uruguay Round is not seen as arresting the slowdown in the growth rate of world agricultural trade, despite a positive effect on the growth in trade for rice, fats and oils and bovine meat and to a lesser extent most of the other commodities. It is possible that the commodities not covered by this study, accounting for 41 percent of the total value of agricultural trade, will enjoy greater benefits, including cotton and some horticultural products.
For the developing countries, the import growth rate is expected to decline for cereals, the oilseed sector, dairy, some meat and tropical products. The growth rate of their bovine meat and banana imports are seen as accelerating. By contrast the exports of the developing countries are expected to expand more rapidly than in the eighties for rice, coarse grains, dairy, tea, sugar and bananas. Their slight net surplus in 1987-89 for the commodities studied is unlikely to change by 2000.
For the developed countries, the growth rates of both imports and exports are expected to weaken. In the case of imports, there is expected to be a sharp decrease in growth of virtually all the main temperate zone products but export growth is also expected to fade. Overall the developed countries would remain large net exporters of temperate zone commodities in 2000 but close to balance in the main agricultural commodities covered in this study. In all these commodities, however, some countries will gain and others lose, while each commodity has some particular characteristics that cannot be captured in these overall summary statistics. In what follows, therefore, the detailed analysis of the revised projections to the year 2000 are described together with some observations on the impact of the Uruguay Round which, it is worth emphasizing, is usually rather small compared with all the other changes taking place between the base period and the year 2000.
Table 1a - Growth of Production of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1b - Growth of Consumption of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1c - Growth of Imports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1d - Growth of Exports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1e - World: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Table 1f - Developing countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to tile year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Table 1g . Developed countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Wheat
Production. Global wheat production is projected to increase by 1.6 percent annually during the 1990s, reaching 631 million tonnes by the year 2000, compared with a volume of 520 million tonnes during the base period (1987-89). However, these projection results indicate somewhat slower growth in production than would have been the case without the Uruguay Round. The global output of wheat is expected to shrink by 2 million tonnes due to the Uruguay Round, which is the net result of an almost 7 million tonne decline in the developed countries and a 5 million tonne gain in the developing countries.
The growth expected among the developing countries largely stems from yield advances, but higher relative wheat prices are also assumed to improve production incentives in many developing countries. In particular, some 80 percent of the increase in the wheat output due to the Uruguay Round is likely to be accounted for by four countries: Argentina, China, India and Pakistan. The gains for Argentina are driven primarily by export demand as other major wheat exporters are expected to reduce their production and cut subsidized exports. The significant gains in outputs for China, India and Pakistan are largely explained by increased producer prices.
At the same time, restrictions on production support and limits on export subsidies under the Uruguay Round are forecast to reduce the output in most developed countries, in particular in the member countries of the EC and the United States, compared to the base projections. By comparison, output will expand in Australia due to higher prices. Wheat production could also increase by over half a million tonnes in the area of the former USSR. One expected result of the Uruguay Round, therefore, is a partial shift in grain production away from some traditional developed producing countries toward developing countries with the overall net effect of somewhat smaller global wheat output in 2000.
Demand. In both projection scenarios, i.e. with and without the impact of the Uruguay Round, wheat consumption is forecast to grow less during the 1990s compared to the previous decade. Rising real wheat prices, assumed to result from the Uruguay Round, are likely to have an additional dampening effect compared to the baseline projection which showed falling real prices. As a result of the Uruguay Round, aggregate utilization of wheat at the global level is expected to shrink by about 2 million tonnes to 630 million tonnes, most of it occurring in the developing countries, largely in the Far East and Latin America. These reductions in consumption are mainly due to widespread increases in domestic prices of wheat. Most of the slowdown is expected in feed use as wheat is expected to become more expensive compared to alternative grains. The growth in the demand for feed use of wheat is also likely to diminish in those countries which have heavily subsidized such use in the past
but are not likely to do so during the 1990s, in particular in the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe. By contrast, utilization of wheat as feed is likely to expand in the developed countries, mainly in North America, Oceania and the Republic of South Africa. Growth in food consumption of wheat is also forecast to slow under the Uruguay Round. Although per caput food consumption should continue to increase in the developing countries of Africa under the Uruguay Round, it may show little or no change among other developing regions and the developed countries compared to the baseline projections.
The projection results suggest that income gains due to the Uruguay Round may not be adequate to offset the dampening effects of higher prices on the demand for wheat. In the case of the Far East, for example, lower wheat use is associated with increased consumption of rice, whose domestic price is projected to rise on average by less than one percent compared to almost 4 percent for wheat.
Prices. FAO's World Food Model (WFM) shows that the implementation of the Uruguay Round is projected to raise international wheat prices by 7 percent in real terms by the year 2000, compared with a scenario without the Round when prices would have fallen by 3 percent (Table 2). The impact of the Uruguay Round on wheat prices is more than for most other grains due in part to the greater degree of subsidization of wheat in the past. Regional price changes resulting from the Uruguay Round scenario show that the average domestic prices of wheat are expected to be highest in Latin America, the Far East and Oceania, whereas they would be lower for western Europe and North America, where subsidies were the highest. On the other hand, prices of grains are not likely to change much in the Near East, Africa, eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR.
Trade. The projections of production and consumption for world wheat trade point to slower growth during the 1990s, compared to the previous decade. Global wheat trade by the year 2000 is projected to show little change from the average base period (1987-89) volume of 114 million tonnes. However, this volume would still be considerably above the current annual range of 92-94 million tonnes to which trade had fallen in recent years. The greatest effects are expected for the developed countries, in particular the EC, where, following CAP reform, feed demand is expected to increase, thus reducing export availabilities. In the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe, feed use is likely to be reduced sharply, and thus imports, due to lower livestock numbers.
The effect of the Uruguay Round on trade is likely to be a lower volume of wheat imports of about 3 million tonnes when compared the baseline projections. In particular, some countries of Asia and Latin America are likely to produce more grains for their own requirements, leading to a slow-down of growth in their import demand for wheat. Most of the projected reduction in imports is likely to occur in four developing countries, i.e. Brazil, China, India and Pakistan, mainly due to gains in production. On the other hand, most of the projected rise in imports is likely to be accounted for by the EC, Poland and the Republic of South Africa. Furthermore, the increase in the minimum access volume for wheat by the end of the implementation period amounts to some 300 000 tonnes over the initial quota, or 2 percent, with most of the reported increases scheduled for Canada, Hungary and Japan.
Given the increase in prices assumed under the Uruguay Round, the value of the wheat trade would increase by just under US$ 700 million compared to a projection without the Uruguay Round, despite a rather stable trade volume. The bulk of higher import costs would fall on the developed countries whose import value is likely to increase by just over US$ 700 million. The largest share of the higher import bills is predicted for the EC and South Africa. By contrast, the financial burden of importing wheat could diminish slightly under the Uruguay Round for the developing countries in aggregate since their volume of imports are projected to decline sufficiently to offset the higher prices. By far, the most substantial decline in the import costs of wheat should be in the Far East where production gains and restrained demand should contribute to smaller import requirements. Nevertheless, all other developing regions are expected to face higher import expenditures due to the
Uruguay Round, in particular, Africa and the Near East.
Among the major exporters of wheat, shipments are projected to fall markedly from both the EC and the United States (by about 3 million tonnes each), while those from Australia and Argentina would expand. While the commitments to reduce domestic support programmes are not commodity specific, and therefore were not explicitly accounted for in the projections, the commitments to reduce subsidized wheat exports are substantial, amounting to some 19 million tonnes by the end of the implementation period. Total subsidized wheat exports are scheduled to fall from 59 million tonnes in the initial year to 40 million tonnes by 2004 (a drop of 32 percent). Some three-quarters of the volume reductions are accounted for by the three largest exporters, the EC-12 (5.7 million tonnes), the United States (5.7 million tonnes) and Canada (4.7 million tonnes). Other countries making significant subsidy reduction commitments on wheat are Austria, Hungary, the Nordic countries, South Africa and
Turkey and, therefore, are also likely to reduce their export volumes in general.
Table 2 - Change in international food prices between 1987-89 and by the year 2000
Base Run Uruguay Round Effect Total^a
percent
Wheat -3 +7 +4
Rice +7 +7 +15
Maize +3 +4 +7
Millet/Sorghum +6 +4 +10
Other Grains -3 +7 +5
Fats and Oils -4 +4 0
Oilmeal Proteins +3 0 +3
Bovine Meat +6 +8 +14
Pigmeat +3 +10 +13
Sheep Meat +13 +10 +24
Poultry +5 +8 +14
Milk +32 +7 +41
a Total does not necessarily equal the sum of the two effects
Conclusions. The overall impact of the Uruguay Round agreement on global production, utilization and trade of wheat in the year 2000 should be fairly modest, although some significant effects are expected in terms of shifts in the location of production, the direction of trade flows and the share in trade volumes. The Uruguay Round projections confirm widely held expectations that wheat production and exports would shift away from countries with high production support and export subsidies towards less-subsidizing producers, including net importing countries. At the same time, smaller export subsidies could lead to increased international wheat prices, which would contribute to dampening demand.
The impact on trade resulting from the Uruguay Round depends to a large extent on the level of export subsidies that are scheduled to be reduced. The smaller trade subsidies are expected to raise international wheat prices which should stimulate production in some countries and, at the same time, dampen domestic demand, thus reducing overall global wheat imports. The degree to which the higher international prices are transmitted to domestic markets, however, will depend on the actual level of tariffs, which could be at or below the bound rates. In the case of wheat, the full effects of the higher world prices are not expected to be felt in many countries because tariffs will still be high. In addition, the relatively small minimum access commitments for wheat are not likely to offset the effects of the higher prices on imports.
The impact of the Uruguay Round on world wheat trade is attenuated by the fact that a number of the major importing countries are not members of the WTO. This group of countries account for some 22 million tonnes, or 22 percent, of recent world imports. These countries, while not contributing to the change in market conditions, are affected by it and it may be expected that several of these will eventually join the WTO.
Table 3: WHEAT - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Rice
Production. Global output of rice (milled equivalent) is projected to grow at 1.8 percent per annum to reach 404 million tonnes in 2000, a rate of growth and a level of production which is only marginally different from the baseline projections before taking into account the outcome of the Uruguay Round. The future expansion in rice production will hinge on improvements in yields and advances in plant technology. The area under rice is projected to increase only slightly, and mainly in Africa where land is more widely available and where large tracts of upland and swampland could be brought under cultivation. In both the Far East and the Near East, the possibilities for increasing the area under rice are minimal. In Latin America the rate of expansion in rice plantings is expected to slowdown due to the high production costs. In the United States, an increase in total output is likely to occur, largely from improvements in yields due to advances in plant technology.
While at the global level production is not expected to change notably due to the Uruguay Round, moderate changes would occur in some countries. Production of rice in some developing Far Eastern countries is projected to rise marginally as a result of the Round, but output in developed countries, especially Japan and the EC is likely to be significantly smaller. Japan's opening of its market is expected to stimulate exporting countries to raise production to meet the additional demand generated by Japan's commitment to buy rice in the international market.
Demand. The impact of the Round on rice demand is expected to be even less pronounced than on output. Between 198789 and 2000, world demand for milled rice is projected to increase at 1.8 percent annually to reach 402 million tonnes in 2000, a rate of growth and a level of consumption similar to that projected before the effects of the Round were considered. Per caput food consumption of rice during the period is likely to grow at a negligible rate, globally gaining just one kilogramme for the entire decade to reach 58 kilogrammes per head. In the EC and Japan, consumption of rice is unlikely to change significantly, the reduction in domestic output being compensated by increased imports of rice. Likewise, consumer prices for rice will probably be affected little by the introduction of market access. In Japan, for example, the current import mark-up of 292 yen per kilo of rice (US$2 016.2/tonne) if maintained, will keep consumer prices the highest in the world.
Trade. The effect of the Uruguay Round on trade, by contrast, would be substantially more pronounced than for production and consumption, both in terms of its impact on the volume of transactions and on international market prices. Vital to these projected developments, is the assumption of full implementation of the minimum access provisions agreed to at the Round. Under this assumption, world rice imports would increase by 3.8 percent annually, a substantially faster rate of growth than in the previous decade, to reach 18.9 million tonnes in 2000. This would be slightly over one million tonnes more than what could be achieved without the Agreement, and 6.8 million tonnes higher than in the base period.
The impact of the Round on world imports, although substantial, is expected to be highly localised. The impact of the Agreement on imports of Africa, the Near East and Latin America and the Caribbean is expected to be insignificant. Imports into Africa are forecast to rise by 3.3 percent annually to 3.8 million tonnes, which would be 1.2 million tonnes more than in 1987-89, but only marginally higher than the present day level. Although output of rice in Africa is projected to increase by over 4 percent per annum, demand for rice would rise at an almost equal pace. As a result, it is likely to continue to rely on imports to meet over 30 percent of its total demand irrespective of the effects of the Round. Likewise, imports into the Near East, projected to rise by 4.8 percent per annum, would reach 4.3 million tonnes. The Near East's relatively rapid growth as a major importing region would not be so much the result of the Uruguay Round, than of the demand of its immigrant
Asian work force and the limited possibilities for raising production to keep pace with consumption growth. Latin America's imports would increase, to account for nearly 10 percent of the world market largely because of production constraints not connected with the Uruguay Round.
In the Far East, however, the Round is expected to have a more noticeable impact. Imports into the developing countries of the region could expand at a much faster rate th