<title>Fact sheet: Benin - Women, agriculture and rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Role of women in agriculture
Role of women in agriculture
About 70% of the female population live in rural areas, where they carry out 60-80% of the agricultural work and provide up to 44% of the work necessary to feed their families.
Division of Labour by Gender. Women are responsible for all household tasks, including water fetching, firewood gathering, food processing and preparation. Traditionally excluded from statistics, this work is not calculated in the GDP. In agricultural production, women work with men in the family field, planting, weeding and harvesting. In addition, women cultivate their own plots to complement the household food supply and to earn an income. In areas of male migration, women heads of household bear the entire responsibility for cultivating the family plot. Women are also responsible for the post-harvest storage and processing of food products for both domestic consumption and for the market, and are traditionally responsible for marketing agricultural products.
Gender Relations in Decision-making in Farming Activities. Data collection is needed on the gender relations in decision-making in farming activities at the household level.
<section>2</section>
Sharing of power and decision-making
Sharing of power and decision-making
Members and Officers of Agricultural/Rural Organizations. While women carry out the majority of agricultural work, they are not represented in a similar proportion in agricultural and rural organizations. Initially, there were practically no women in cooperatives and pre-cooperatives promoted by the State in the late 1970s. In 1985, women's membership represented 4.6% of the total, dropping to 3% in 1988 during the economic crisis, and rising to 35.1 % in 1992. One explanation given for this situation is the loss of confidence in these structures.
Women in Decision-making Positions in Ministries and Government Bodies. The percentage of women in decision-making positions in ministries and government bodies is low. Women's representation is highest in the Ministry of Health, where they occupy 35% of the positions. in the Ministry of Rural Development, women comprise 7.3% of the decision-making and technical staff. Overall, women hold only 2.5% of the highest decision-making positions and comprise less than 19% of higher level administrative and management staff in public office.
<section>3</section>
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
National Machinery. The National Commission on the Integration of Women in Development (CN/IFD) was established in 1993 in the Ministry of Planning and Economic Reconstruction (MPRE), with the mandate to develop and implement a national policy for the promotion of women in development, and to coordinate all initiatives by national and international structures for the advancement of women.
WID Units or Focal Points in Technical Ministries. There are focal points in each of the technical ministries who are responsible for ensuring that the gender dimension is taken into consideration in the implementation of programmes within their respective Ministries. In addition, within the Ministry of Rural Development, the Office for the Promotion of Rural Women's Activities (SPAFR) works primarily in the area of data collection. However, it is hampered by insufficient financial and human resources and lack of strong links with the planning processes in the Ministry.
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). There has been an increase in both the number of women's associations and NGOs concerned with the promotion of women, particularly in the areas of income-generation, savings and credit, literacy, mother and child health, - and environmental protection. Other NGOs focus on women's legal rights and carry out activities in the area of legal reform and legal literacy. Although these organizations are relatively new and lack adequate financial resources to attain their objectives, these structures constitute potential agents for implementing a programme for the advancement of women in development.
<section>4</section>
Women's rights
Women's rights
Benin is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
The Constitution of 1990 recognizes equal rights of men and women. However, discriminatory legislative measures persist in the social, economic and political domains. Social and civil legislation is strongly influenced by tradition and customs, particularly in regard to the family, women and children. Women have very limited land rights and require their husbands' authorization for certain decisions, including access to family planning services.
A new family code has been drawn up and its adoption should introduce a more equitable relationship between men and women.
<section>5</section>
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
The economic crisis of the 1980s and Structural Adjustment Programmes have contributed to the rising unemployment of women. Women in particular suffer from landlessness and a poorer quality of agricultural land. Environmental degradation is increasing due to population pressure and over-exploitation of natural resources. The increasing number of female-headed households (18.6% in 1992), due to male migration, leaves many households with a shortage of labour for productive activities. There is a high level of malnutrition in rural areas, particularly among children.
<section>6</section>
Access to agricultural resources and services
Access to agricultural resources and services
Land. Landlessness is more acute among women than men. Moreover, when women do have access to land, their holdings tend to be less productive and located at greater distances from the household. Women's landholdings are also generally smaller than those of men. Although recent data is not available, in 1976 the average size of men's holdings was 1.76 ha while that of women's was only 0.98 ha. Women's access to land is limited by discriminatory laws and inheritance rights.
Livestock. Data collection needed.
Forestry. Data collection needed.
Water. Data collection needed.
Credit. Women have little access to formal credit institutions. In recent years Local and Regional Funds for Agricultural Credit have increased the access of the rural population to credit. Women comprise approximately 25% of the members and 13% of the office holders of credit associations and receive 24.4% of loans. There has also been a resurgence of traditional savings and credit groups, the 'totines'. In addition, many international development institutions and NGOs include savings and credit components in their projects targeted toward women.
Extension services and agricultural training. While data is not available on the numbers of women farmers reached by extension, it can be assumed that the number is low, as extension concentrates on farmers who are organized into cooperatives. The small number of women extension agents also hampers women's access to extension, as custom makes it difficult for women to have contact with male extensionists.
Agricultural Extension Staff by Position and Gender, 1989
* Not all the data is gender-disaggregated; therefore, the total number for the category may be greater than the total of the male and female columns.
Source: Agricultural Extension and Farm Women in the 1980s, FAO, 1993
Women's participation in agricultural courses and programmes is also very low, although there has been a slight increase from 4% in 1986 to 8% in 1991 at the secondary level, and from 3.6% in 1986 to 4.6% at higher levels. There are very few women extensionists, and the majority of which work in the area of home economics.
<section>7</section>
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Policy Planning and Research.
· A Platform for Action for women has been drawn up.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services.
· A number of projects or project components are giving women more access to credit and other resources and services.
<section>8</section>
Strategies and objectives
Strategies and objectives
Policy Planning and Research.
· The National Commission for the Integration of Women in Development needs to be strengthened with sufficient resources to enable it to develop a WID policy in order to ensure that gender issues are taken into account by policymakers and planners, and to coordinate efforts at all levels for the integration of women in development.
· Networks of governmental and non-governmental organizations should be encouraged and strengthened to promote the integration of gender issues into development activities.
· The national report prepared for the Fourth World Conference on Women should be widely disseminated.
· A gender-disaggregated data base should be established.
· Research is needed on the problems faced by female headed-households and on women's participation in decision-making
· The gender dimension should be taken into consideration in all Ministries.
Legal and Policy Reform.
· Resources and energy should be mobilized to facilitate the adoption of the new family code.
· Reforms should be promoted to remove restrictions to women's access to land, and to guarantee their access to the means of production.
· Discriminatory legislation in respect to wages should be removed.
· Legal literacy should be promoted.
· An inventory should be made of international and national documents which protect women's legal rights, and these should be translated into the national languages.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services.
· Measures are needed to increase women's access to credit, household and production technologies, and land.
· Access to sustainable agricultural systems should be promoted.
· Mutual aid associations of women should be strengthened.
Source: Rapport national sur les femmes, l'agriculture et le developpement rural, 1994.
Prepared by:
Integration of Women in Development Service
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel:+(39)6 52256135
<section>e</section>
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Agriculture accounts for 40% of the GDP and 70% of the economically active population. The agricultural sector is comprised predominantly of subsistence farmers who account for 95% of agricultural production. Principal cash crops are cotton (63.7% of export earnings in 1989) and oil palm. Food crops include yams, cassava and maize.
Sectoral Contributions to GDP and Employment, 1991
Source: Europa World Yearbook, 1994
