<title>Planning for sustainable use of land resources: towards a new approach</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The increasing human population in developing countries is putting pressure on their finite land resources and causing land degradation. Sectoral approaches to planning for the alleviation of this situation have frequently not been effective, and an integrated approach is required that involves all stakeholders from the outset, accommodates the qualities and limitations of each land unit component, and produces viable land use options. Concepts and definitions relating to such a holistic approach are given, in support of the overriding need to create negotiating platforms for decision making at all levels of planning.
Current land use issues, which require a resolution formulated with the aid of this approach in the rural and pert-urban spheres, are frequently derived from environmental versus developmental conflicts. Those discussed include decision making on whether it is preferable to use scarce resources to rehabilitate degraded land or to improve prime agricultural land, whether smallholder settlements or large-scale mechanized farming will better support the expanding population, the encroachment of urban development onto high quality agricultural land, the correct uses of scarce water resources, and the particular requirement for integrated as opposed to sectoral planning of coastal zones.
The execution of the integrated approach, as described in Agenda 21, will depend on policies that support planning for the use and sustainable management of land resources, on the strengthening of implementing institutions and on ensuring the active involvement and participation of stakeholders in the decision-making process. These actions will in turn be supported by a variety of databases on natural resources and their uses, which are combined through the use of a geographical information system. Social and economic tools are also described, which when used will ensure the inclusion of the contributions from stakeholders in land use negotiations.
The text of this Bulletin was first published in the form of a discussion paper which was intended to amplify and provide a background to FAO's draft report as Task Manager for the UN System for the implementation of Chapter 10 (Integrated Planning and Management of Land Resources) of Agenda 21. An extract from the final report on the review of Chapter 10 at the Third Session of the Commission on Sustainable Development in April 1995, is reproduced as Appendix I of the present document. The United Nations Environment Programme has since provided funds for a workshop in June 1995 which is intended to result in a first version of a new integrated approach.
The original discussion paper provided part of the basis for discussion at the International Workshop on Chapter 10 issues held at Wageningen, The Netherlands, on 20 to 22 February 1995. The conclusions and recommendations of that meeting are also included here as Appendix II.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The present text was prepared by W.G. Sombroek and D. Sims, with inputs by a wide range of specialists with FAO and from cooperating UN agencies and several NGOs.
Correspondence to:
Director
Land and Water Development Division
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
as focal point for FAO's Task Managership for Chapter 10 of Agenda 21.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction
"people are entitled to a healthy and productive life in harmony with nature" (Rio declaration)
An integrated approach to planning the use and management of land resources entails the involvement of all stakeholders in the process of decision making on the future of the land, and the identification and evaluation of all biophysical and socio-economic attributes of land units. This requires the identification and establishment of a use or non-use of each land unit that is technically appropriate, economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally non-degrading.
A purely sectoral approach to the planning of land resources should be avoided, as this may lead to their irreversible degradation. Concern about the environment has been highlighted by the recent rapid growth of the world's human population, the increasing socio-economic interdependence of countries and regions, the growing awareness of the value of natural ecosystems, and the perception that current land use practices may influence the global climatic system. An integrated rather than sectoral approach is a means to prevent or resolve conflicts related to land and water use, as it optimizes the planning process and creates an enabling environment for mediation between, and decision making by, all stakeholders at early stages.
The medium, or most likely, projection of population growth implies a near doubling of world population to about 10 thousand million by the year 2050 (UNFPA, 1992). Most experts agree that through full and judicious application of modern agricultural technology, the world's land resources can, in theory, provide sufficient food, fibre, animal feed, biofuel and timber for such a doubling. In practice, there will be acute land shortages in many countries, especially many developing ones.
A recent FAO study (Alexandratos, 1995) estimates that 92% of the 1800 million ha of land in developing countries (excluding China) with rainfed crop potential, but not yet used for this purpose, is in Sub-Saharan Africa (44%) and in Latin America and the Caribbean (48%). Two-thirds of these 1800 million ha are concentrated in a small number of countries, e.g. 27% in Brazil, 9% in Zaire and 30% in 12 other countries. A good part of this land "reserve" is, however, under forest (at least 45%), or in protected areas, and should therefore not be considered as a readily-available reserve for agricultural production. A significant part (72% in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America) suffers from soil and terrain constraints.
Overall some 50% of the 1800 million ha of land "reserve" is classified in the categories "humid" (i.e. too wet for most crops and rather unhealthy for human settlement) or as "marginally suitable for crop production". The possibilities for expansion of land for crop production are therefore limited. Consequently, much of the perceived increased need for food, etc. will have to come from intensification of production with high-yielding crop varieties in high-potential areas. These are lands with good soil and terrain conditions, with favourable temperature and rainfall conditions or a supply of irrigation water, and with easy access to mineral or organic fertilizers.
FAO estimates (Yudelman, 1994) that, though arable land may expand by 90 million ha by the year 2010, the harvested area could increase by 124 million ha because cropping intensities would rise, with irrigated land in developing countries expanding by 23.5 million ha from the present 186 million ha.
More detailed studies are under way on the irrigation potential in developing countries, and Africa in particular. These focus on areas combining suitable soil and terrain conditions that are under command, and with surface and groundwater freshwater resources that can be harnessed without excessive costs or damage to environmental values. At the same time FAO is cooperating with a number of UN Agencies and the Stockholm Environmental institute in assessing the global freshwater resources, with the aim of identifying where water crises may be imminent.
As the result of intensification of land use in areas that are naturally well-endowed, or can be made so by economically-viable human interventions such as irrigation and drainage development, there will in the near future be a significant decrease in the land per rural household. Per caput availability of arable land in developing countries is projected by FAO to nearly halve between the late 1980s and 2010, from 0.65 to about 0.4 ha. This figure is likely to become even smaller toward 2050.
In contrast to this sketched situation in developing countries, the per caput amount of arable land may increase in developed countries with their stagnant population growth. This could lead to the more marginal arable lands being taken out of production as "set-side" lands for nature "development", cultural landscape conservation or recreational purposes (Van de Klundert, et al., 1994). The situation in countries-in-transition is more difficult to project because of the current process of transfer of state-owned arable land to private ownership.
The FAO predictions are limited in time scale to 2010, when any global climatic change is expected to be still of negligible influence. This may be different by the year 2050 or beyond. The consensus among climate change modellers is that in developing countries the effects on food security may be negative rather than positive (Norse and Sombroek, 1995).
The above discussion has concentrated on the amount of land available for the production of food and fibre. Land has, however, many functions (see also ESCAP, 1994):
o It is the basis for many life support systems, through the production of biomass that provides food, fodder, fibre, fuel. timber and other biotic materials for human use, either directly or through animal husbandry including aquaculture and inland and coastal fishery (the production function).
o Land is the basis of terrestrial biodiversity by providing the biological habitats and gene reserves for plants, animals and micro-organisms, above and below ground (the biotic environmental function).
o Land and its use are a source and sink of greenhouse gases and form a co-determinant of the global energy balance - reflection, absorption and transformation of radiative energy of the sun, and of the global hydrological cycle (the climate regulative function).
o Land regulates the storage and flow of surface and groundwater resources, and influences their quality (the hydrologic function)
o Land is a storehouse of raw materials and minerals for human use (the storage function).
o Land has a receptive, filtering, buffering and transforming function of hazardous compounds (the waste and pollution control function).
o Land provides the physical basis for human settlements, industrial plants and social activities such as sports and recreation (the living space function).
o Land is a medium to store and protect the evidence of the cultural history of mankind, and a source of information on past climatic conditions and past land uses (the archive or heritage function).
o Land provides space for the transport of people, inputs and produce, and for the movement of plants and animals between discrete areas of natural ecosystems (the connective space function).
The suitability of the land for these functions varies greatly over the world. Landscape units, as natural resources units, have a dynamism of their own, but human influences affect this dynamism to a great extent, in space and time. The qualities of the land for one or more functions may be improved (for instance, through erosion control measures), but more often than not the land has been or is being degraded by human action.
Human-induced land degradation has taken place all through history, such as during the Mediterranean and Middle East civilizations, around or before O AD, and during the time of European expansion in the Americas, Australia, Asia and Africa. During this century, however, land degradation, including desertification, has increased enormously in extent and severity, by direct action of a strongly growing world population and its increased livelihood expectations and demands (ISRIC, 1990).
The rate of land degradation may continue unabated or even increase under conditions of any human-induced global climatic changes, but this cannot be automatically assumed. Land degradation can be controlled, redressed or even reversed if the land is used wisely, if all the functions of the land are taken into account, and if short-term vested interests of privileged groups are replaced by long-term enlightened interests of all segments of humankind, globally, nationally and locally.
Land degradation has been exacerbated where there has been an absence of any land use planning, or of its orderly execution, or the existence of financial or legal incentives that have led to the wrong land use decisions, or one-sided central planning leading to over-utilization of the land resources - for instance for immediate production at all costs. As a consequence the result has often been misery for large segments of the local population and destruction of valuable ecosystems. Such narrow approaches should be replaced by a technique for the planning and management of land resources that is integrated and holistic and where land users are central. This will ensure the long-term quality of the land for human use, the prevention or resolution of social conflicts related to land use, and the conservation of ecosystems of high biodiversity value.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2: Concepts, definitions and links
Land and land resources
Environmental resources and natural resources
Land use planning and physical planning
Planning and management
Zoning, resource management domains, allocation
Links between rural, pert-urban and urban land use planning
An integrated approach
The integrated approach to the planning and management of land resources has been identified as a separate programme area of UNCED's Agenda 21 (UNCED, 1993). The relevant text (Chapter 10) is quite short and will benefit from elaboration, to ensure appropriate action is taken by governments and international organizations such as the UN specialized agencies, of which FAO is assigned as Task Manager.
The responsibilities of the Task Manager for each chapter are firstly to prepare periodic reports for the UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) on progress towards implementation. Secondly, the Task Manager will work with UN Agencies, national governments and NGOs, to develop a more effective and combined approach to the problems identified in the chapter.
This background paper to the Task Manager's report is intended to provide a basis for a more in-depth discussion on these issues, considering that there have not been major preparatory conferences as in the case of desertification (Chapter 12), forests (Chapter 11), sustainable agricultural development (Chapter 14) and water resources (Chapter 18). In a sense, the present text endeavours to provide a commentary on Chapter 10, supported by explanations of a number of definitions, examples of issues to be solved through an integrated approach, and tools available when planning the use and management of land resources.
The text of Chapter 10 deals with the reorganization and strengthening of decision-making structures and not with the operational aspects of planning and management. The latter figure more prominently as detailed sectoral plans in other programme areas^1 of Agenda 21. Thus this paper concentrates on concepts, principles and decision making within an overall framework for sustainable land management. However, as the discussion develops, it may not be possible to avoid some reference to operational or implementation aspects.
^1 For instance, paragraphs 5.16-5.66, 7.27-7.29, 12.28-12.29, 13.13-13.17, 14.34-14.38, 14.44-14.47, 18.6-18.12. 18.76. Since Chapter 10 does not deal with the actual management of land, a more appropriate title might be "An integrated approach to planning the use and management of land resources" - denoting the guiding, and in a way overarching, principles for the more sectoral-oriented management of land as discussed in the other chapters.
The need for a separate programme area is brought out in the following extracts from the text (paragraph. 10.1): "the ever-increasing pressures on land resources, creating competition and conflicts and resulting in sub-optimal use of both land and land resources". "Integrated physical and land use planning and management is an eminently practical way to achieve" the resolving of such conflicts and "to move towards more effective and efficient use of the land and its natural resources". Also (paragraph. 10.3), "It is recognized that such integration should take place at two levels, considering on the one hand all environmental, social and economic factors and on the other all environmental and resources components together (i.e. air, water, biota, land and geological and natural resources)".
As shown by these quotations, Chapter 10 makes distinctions between land and land resources, between land use planning and physical planning, between environmental, geological and natural resources, and between planning and management. For each of these, detailed definitions are required.
Land and land resources
As stated in the introduction of Chapter 10, the definition of land used to be: "a physical entity in terms of its topography and spatial nature"; this is often associated with an economic value, expressed in price per hectare at ownership transfer. The broader, integrative or holistic view takes into account the physio-biotic and socio-economic resources of the physical entity as well, and this is obviously the guiding principle of Chapter 10 as a whole. A complete definition^2 may therefore be the following one (already used in the documentation for the Convention to Combat Desertification) (UN, 1994):
"Land is a delineable area of the earth's terrestrial surface, encompassing all attributes of the biosphere immediately above or below this surface including those of the near-surface climate the soil and terrain forms, the surface hydrology (including shallow lakes, rivers, marshes, and swamps), the near-surface sedimentary layers and associated groundwater reserve, the plant and animal populations, the human settlement pattern and physical results of past and present human activity (terracing, water storage or drainage structures, roads, buildings, etc.)."
^2 (l) This definition conforms to land system units. landscape-ecological units or unites de terroir, as building blocks of a watershed (catchment area) or a phytogeographic unit (biome). The repeated reference to 'land and land resources' of Chapter 10 may be taken to mean: land as well as its individual land components.
(2) The definition of a natural land unit as defined above is distinctive from an administrative unit of land (territoire) which can be of any size (individual holding, municipality, province, state, etc.) and which normally encompasses a number of natural units or parts of them.
(3) The components of the natural land unit can be termed land resources, including physical, bionic, environmental, infrastructural, social and economic components, inasmuch as they are fixed to the land unit.
(4) Included in the land resources are surface and near-surface freshwater resources. Part of these move through successive land units, but then the local flow characteristics can be considered as part of the land unit. The linkages between water and land are so intimate at the management level that the water element cannot be excluded (land as a unit intermixed with water, with its land use in part depending on access to that water, and the unit at the same time affecting the quality and quantity of the passing water). Only the freshwater harnessed in major reservoirs outside the natural land unit, or pumped from rivers at upstream sites, can be considered as a separate resource.
(5) Underground geological resources (oil, gas, ores, precious metals), and deeper geohydrological resources that normally bear no relation to the surface topography such as confined aquifers, are excluded from the group of components of the natural land unit, although it is recognized that some countries consider them as part of individual land ownership (and hence with rights to exploit or sell them).
In this holistic approach, a natural unit of land has both a vertical aspect - from atmospheric climate down to groundwater resources, and a horizontal aspect - an identifiable repetitive sequence of soil, terrain, hydrological, and vegetative or land use elements.
Environmental resources and natural resources
Natural resources, in the context of "land" as defined above, are taken to be those components of land units that are of direct economic use for human population groups living in the area, or expected to move into the area: near-surface climatic conditions; soil and terrain conditions; freshwater conditions; and vegetational and animal conditions in so far as they provide produce. To a large degree, these resources can be quantified in economic terms. This can be done irrespective of their location (intrinsic value) or in relation to their proximity to human settlements (situational value).
Environmental resources are taken to be those components of the land that have an intrinsic value of their own, or are of value for the longer-term sustainability of the use of the land by human populations, either in loco or regional and global. They include biodiversity of plant and animal populations; scenic, educational or research value of landscapes; protective value of vegetation in relation to soil and water resources either in loco or downstream; the functions of the vegetation as a regulator of the local and regional climate and of the composition of the atmosphere; water and soil conditions as regulators of nutrient cycles (C, N. P. K, S), as influencing human health and as a long-term buffer against extreme weather events; occurrence of vectors of human or animal diseases (mosquitoes, tsetse flies, blackflies, etc.). Environmental resources are to a large degree "non-tangible" in strictly economic terms.
In the framework of an integrated, holistic approach to land use planning, the distinction is somewhat artificial, as environmental resources are part of the set of natural resources. However, it still serves to group the tangible from the non-tangible components, and the directly beneficial at local level from the indirectly beneficial components of human life support systems. In the context of Chapter 10, both groups should receive equal attention.
Accepting the broad definition of land as including "human settlement patterns", a third important set of resources has to be taken into account. The set of social or human resources should be defined in terms of density of population groups, their occupational activities, their land rights, their sources of income, the standard of living of households, gender aspects, etc.
Land use planning and physical planning
For the purposes of this discussion physical planning is the designing of the optimal physical infrastructure of an administrative land unit, such as transport facilities - roads, railways, airports, harbours; industrial plants and storage of produce; mining and power generation, and facilities for towns and other human settlements - in anticipation of population increase and socio-economic development, and taking into account the outcome of land use zoning and planning. It has both rural and urban development aspects, though the latter usually predominates.
Physical planning is normally carried out by the state, or by local government organizations for the general good of the community. The purpose is to take a more nearly holistic or overall view of the development of an area than can or would be taken by individuals. Physical planning has two main functions: to develop a rational infrastructure, and to restrain the excesses of individuals in the interests of the community as a whole. This latter function usually leads to physical planning being associated with a system of laws and regulations.
Land use planning should be a decision-making process that "facilitates the allocation of land to the uses that provide the greatest sustainable benefits" (Agenda 21, paragraph 10.5). It is based on the socio-economic conditions and expected developments of the population in and around a natural land unit. These are matched through a multiple goal analysis and assessment of the intrinsic value of the various environmental and natural resources of the land unit. The result is an indication of a preferred future land use, or combination of uses. Through a negotiation process with all stakeholders, the outcome is decisions on the concrete allocation of land for specific uses (or non-uses) through legal and administrative measures, which will lead eventually to implementation of the plan.
As considered in Chapter 10, land use planning is mainly related to rural areas, concentrating on the use of the land in the broadest agricultural context (crop production, animal husbandry, forest management/silviculture, inland fisheries, safeguarding of protective vegetation and biodiversity values). However. pert-urban areas are also included where they directly impinge on rural areas, through expansion of building construction onto valuable agricultural land and the consequent modification of land uses in the adjoining rural areas.
Planning and management
As stated before, land resources planning is the process of evaluation of options and subsequent decision-making which precedes implementation of a decision or plan.
Land resources management, in its narrow sense is the actual practice of using the land by the local human population, which should be sustainable (FAO/Netherlands, 1991; see Box 1). The detailed operational aspects of such sustainable management are dealt within other chapters of Agenda 21: Chapters 7, 12, 13, 14, 18, etc.
In a broader sense - as obviously meant in Chapter 10 - land resources management is the implementation of land use planning, as agreed between and with the direct participation of stakeholders. It is achieved through political decisions; legal, administrative and institutional execution; demarcation on the ground; inspection and control of adherence to the decisions; solving of land tenure issues; settling of water rights; issuing of concessions for plant and animal extraction (timber, fuel wood, charcoal and peat, non-wood products, hunting); promotion of the role of women and other disadvantaged groups in agriculture and rural development in the area, and the safeguarding of traditional rights of early indigenous peoples.
Zoning, resource management domains, allocation
The term "zoning" is not mentioned in Chapter 10, yet it is one of the products of land resources planning used in the Task Manager's Report as well as in a number of national approaches. It therefore warrants a definition.
Sustainable agriculture and rural has been defined by, FAO as "....the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations. Such sustainable development (in agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable, and socially acceptable".
Box 1: Definition of sustainability (FAO/Netherlands Den Bosch Conference (1991))
For many years zoning has been used for ensuring land use control in urban and pert-urban areas. More recently it has also become associated with delineation of rural ecological units, as in FAO's Agro-Ecological Zones (AEZ) Project (see Box 2).
In the urban planning sphere the word is commonly used in a prescriptive sense; for example, the allocation of pert-urban land for specific uses such as housing, light industry, recreation, horticulture or animal big-industry, in each case with the appropriate legal restrictions to land markets.
In the original agro-ecologic zoning concept the word denotes an earlier stage of rural planning. It is a subdivision of the rural lands on the basis of physical and biological characteristics (climate, soils, terrain forms, land cover, and to a degree the water resources), and is used as a tool for agricultural land use planning. At regional inter-country level, it was one of the tools to assess the potential human population supporting (or "carrying") capacity of a country. This is inasmuch as it depends on the producing capacity of the land at different levels of input and technology, discounting industrial, trade or mining activities. In this sense also the zoning was adopted by the CGIAR system of international agricultural research for its new ecoregional approach.
The AEZ methodology has been refined by FAO for within-country level zoning applications (Mozambique, Bangladesh, Kenya, Nigeria, and currently China and the Amazon region), where socio-economic conditions have also been taken into account. These conditions figure even more prominently in the programmes for (agro-)Ecological and (socio-)Economic Zoning EEZ - of whole and mainly natural ecosystems, such as the Amazon forest region or "biome" (Sombroek, 1994). In these latter two cases, the zoning sensu strictu is a delineation of areas of rural lands, which could be earmarked for one or another use or non-use, based on identical physio-biotic conditions and prevailing socio-economic infrastructure. The resulting units can be defined as Resource Management Domains, RMDs, defined as areas within a broad physio-biotic zone that have at present the same socio-economic conditions.
The above zoning does not include legal or administrative decisions on future land use, which is the subject of land use allocation. It consists of a series of processes that take place after the zoning sensu strictu. Important procedures will involve political decisions connected with choosing between alternative options presented in a plan after negotiation with all stakeholders; identification of land rights and solving any resulting conflicts; legal, administrative and institutional execution; demarcation on the ground; and effective control of adherence to the decisions taken.
From very early times, for example in China, and in the nineteenth century in several European countries land owners were taxed on the value of their land, based upon its productivity anal agricultural value. This value was assessed on the basis of experience, which in turn was based on such factors as quantity and distribution of rainfall, slope, and depth and type of soil. In 1961 the US Department of Agriculture published the Land Capability Classification, which divides land into eight Classes on the basis of soil and climatic limitations. Suitability in this case meant that the land could be safely used for the purposes listed without permanent damage. The system was widely adopted in many countries for land evaluation purposes.
In 1976 FAO published A Framework For Land Evaluation. The Framework defines land units in terms of their characteristics (measurable factors such as slope, soil texture; rainfall, etc.), and qualities (effects such as temperature regime, moisture availability, which result from a combination of characteristics), matches them with potential uses defined in terms of the requirements of such uses, and then rates the land in terms of suitability for the use. A use could not be rated as suitable unless it was sustainable. The Framework, and a number of subsequent publications, provide fairly exhaustive lists of land characteristics and land qualities.
The initial Agro-Ecological Zones project and population supporting capacity study was carried out between 1978 and 1982 and covered Africa, Asia, and South America. Since then the method has been considerably developed, and applied at country level, for example in Kenya and China. Training workshops have recently been arranged in Nigeria, Syria and Thailand.
The first step in the AEZ procedure is the preparation of a digitized land resources map on which is superimposed agroclimatic information, in particular rainfall, temperature and potential evapo-transpiration. The combined data is then used to identify individual land/climate units on basis of length of growing season determined by moisture availability. Potential yields for crops are then calculated, taking into account temperature, day length, and other climatic limitations, and site and soil limitations, at different levels of input. The result is predicted yield as a percentage of potential yield.
The method has been elaborated to cover a wide range of crops, tree and grass species, and animal production types, using different production systems. Predicted soil loss has been modelled for each use and production system combination. Human population supporting capacities of the land, on the basis o