<title>Environmental impact assessment of irrigation and drainage projects</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The importance of environmental protection and conservation measures has been increasingly recognized during the past two decades. It is now generally accepted that economic development strategies must be compatible with environmental goals. This requires the incorporation of environmental dimensions into the process of development. It is important to make choices and decisions that will eventually promote sound development by understanding the environment functions. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in its Agenda 21, Chapter 18: Protection of the Quality and Supply of Freshwater, underscored the importance of environmental protection and conservation of the natural resource base in the context of water resources development for agriculture and rural development.
Much of the land currently under agriculture is deteriorating due to inappropriate planning, implementation and management. Natural resources, particularly soil and water, are being seriously affected. Soil erosion, desertification, salinization and waterlogging reduce productivity and jeopardize long-term sustainability. Agricultural expansion programmes have often encompassed marginal land in many parts of the world. Wise management of the environment requires an ability to forecast, monitor, measure and analyse environmental trends and assess the capabilities of land and water at different levels, ranging from a small irrigated plot to a catchment. Adoption of environmental impact assessments (EIAs) will enable countries to plan water and land use in an integrated manner, avoiding irreversible environmental damage. Contrary to common perceptions, this would lead to higher economic benefits and sustainable resource use.
Irrigation and drainage projects invariably result in many far-reaching ecological changes. Some of these benefit human population, while others threaten the long-term productivity of the irrigation and drainage projects themselves as well as the natural resource base. The undesirable changes are not solely restricted to increasing pollution or loss of habitat for native plants and animals; they cover the entire range of environmental components, such as soil, water, air, energy, and the socioeconomic system.
A increasing number of developing countries are accepting the principle of environmental screening of development projects at the planning stage and hence are looking for guidelines to environmental impact assessments. Many multi- and bilateral agencies stipulate environmental impact assessments of proposed developments as a condition for lending, technical assistance and development support. FAO has, for quite some time now, been emphasizing the environmental impacts of irrigation and drainage projects, and provided technical assistance to a few countries in evaluating environmental impacts.
The challenge now is to provide the appropriate tools to those who wish to undertake environmental impact assessment in irrigation and drainage projects; a guide to a systematic approach to developing a basic understanding of the environmental problems and a methodology to assess the scope and magnitude of environmental damage that may be caused by irrigation and drainage. Despite many publications in recent times, it is felt that an appropriate guide is still lacking. The need for an objective EIA guide with focus on methodology that is applicable to developing countries is indeed great. It was in this context that action was taken, jointly by FAO and the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the United Kingdom, to develop a guide to undertake environmental impact assessment of irrigation and drainage projects in developing countries. The guide is a follow-up to the ICID environmental checklist. It takes advantage of some existing guidelines as well as country
studies in environmental impact assessments.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the considerable assistance provided by Dr Arumugam Kandiah of the Land and Water Development Division of FAO, Random Dubois of the FAO Investment Centre and their colleagues at FAO. Also Robert Bos, Executive Secretary of PEEM, made a major contribution, in particular to the section Human health. Other notable contributors include Peter Furu (Danish Bilharzia Laboratory), Alfred Heuperman (Institute of Sustainable Irrigated Agriculture, Victoria, Australia), Dr A Mauderli and Martin Fritsch (Institute for Land Improvement and Water Management (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland), and Wolfram Dirksen (German National Committee of the ICID). The publication was reformatted and prepared for printing by Han Kamphuis and Chrissi Redfern. The authors wish to thank the above, and others too numerous to mention, for their contributions to this Guide.
<section>3</section>
List of abbreviations
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AfDB
African Development Bank
CWC
Central Water Commission of India
EA, EIA
Environmental Assessment, Environmental Impact Assessment.
EAP/EMP
Environmental Action/Management Plan
EBRD
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EC
Electrical Conductivity
EIRR
Economic Internal Rate of Return
EIS
Environmental Impact Statement
EOP
Effect on Production
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
ERL
Environmental Resources Limited
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GIS
Geographic Information System
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German development agency)
ICID
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage
ICOLD
International Commission on Large Dams
IEE
Initial Environmental Examination/Evaluation
ILO
International Labour Organization
IPCS
International Programme on Chemical Safety
IUCN
International Union for the Conservation of Nature
IWRA
International Water Research Association
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
ODA
Overseas Development Administration of the UK
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
PEEM
Panel of Experts on Environmental Management for vector control. (A joint activity of WHO, FAO, UNEP and UNCHS).
PE/RC
Preventative Expenditure/Replacement Costs
SAR
Sodium Adsorption Ratio
TOR
Terms of Reference
UNCHS
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
UNECE
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
USA
United States of America
WHO
World Health Organization
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction
The need for environmental assessment
Objective
Using the guide
The need for environmental assessment
Economic, social and environmental change is inherent to development. Whilst development aims to bring about positive change it can lead to conflicts. In the past, the promotion of economic growth as the motor for increased well-being was the main development thrust with little sensitivity to adverse social or environmental impacts. The need to avoid adverse impacts and to ensure long term benefits led to the concept of sustainability. This has become accepted as an essential feature of development if the aim of increased well-being and greater equity in fulfilling basic needs is to be met for this and future generations.
In order to predict environmental impacts of any development activity and to provide an opportunity to mitigate against negative impacts and enhance positive impacts, the environmental impact assessment (EIA) procedure was developed in the 1970s. An EIA may be defined as:
a formal process to predict the environmental consequences of human development activities and to plan appropriate measures to eliminate or reduce adverse effects and to augment positive effects.
EIA thus has three main functions:
o to predict problems,
o to find ways to avoid them, and
o to enhance positive effects.
The third function is of particular importance. The EIA provides a unique opportunity to demonstrate ways in which the environment may be improved as part of the development process. The EIA also predicts the conflicts and constraints between the proposed project, programme or sectoral plan and its environment. It provides an opportunity for mitigation measures to be incorporated to minimize problems. It enables monitoring programmes to be established to assess future impacts and provide data on which managers can take informed decisions to avoid environmental damage.
EIA is a management tool for planners and decision makers and complements other project studies on engineering and economics. Environmental assessment is now accepted as an essential part of development planning and management. It should become as familiar and important as economic analysis in project evaluation.
The aim of any EIA should be to facilitate sustainable development. Beneficial environmental effects are maximized while adverse effects are ameliorated or avoided to the greatest extent possible. EIA will help select and design projects, programmes or plans with long term viability and therefore improve cost effectiveness.
It is important that an EIA is not just considered as part of the approval process. Volumes of reports produced for such a purpose, which are neither read nor acted upon, will devalue the process. A key output of the EIA should be an action plan to be followed during implementation and after implementation during the monitoring phase. To enable the action plan to be effective the EIA may also recommend changes to laws and institutional structures.
Initially EIA was seen by some project promoters as a constraint to development but this view is gradually disappearing. It can, however, be a useful constraint to unsustainable development. It is now well understood that environment and development are complementary and interdependent and EIA is a technique for ensuring that the two are mutually reinforcing. A study carried out by the Environmental Protection Agency (USA) in 1980 showed that there were significant changes to projects during the EIA process, marked improvements in environmental protection measures and net financial benefits. The costs of EIA preparation and any delays were more than covered by savings accruing from modifications, (Wathern, 1988).
Irrigated agriculture is crucial to the economy, health and welfare of a very large part of the developing world. It is too important to be marginalized as it is vital for world food security. However, irrigated agriculture often radically changes land use and is a major consumer of freshwater. Irrigation development thus has a major impact on the environment. All new irrigation and drainage development results in some form of degradation. It is necessary to determine the acceptable level and to compensate for the degradation. This degradation may extend both upstream and downstream of the irrigated area. The impacts may be both to the natural, physical environment and to the human environment. All major donors consider large irrigation and drainage developments to be environmentally sensitive.
An EIA is concerned both with impacts of irrigation and drainage on the environment and with the sustainability of irrigation and drainage itself. Clearly an EIA will not resolve all problems. There will be trade-offs between economic development and environmental protection as in all development activities. However, without an objective EIA, informed decision making would be impossible.
Objective
This guide aims to assist staff in developing countries from various disciplines and backgrounds (government officials, consultants, planners) to incorporate environmental considerations into planning, designing, implementing and regulating irrigation and drainage programmes, plans and projects, thus leading to sustainable projects. The guide aims to be of general use throughout the developing world and has three main functions:
o to describe the methodology and output of an EIA;
o to provide inter-disciplinary advice related to irrigation and drainage to those engaged in preparing EIAs; and,
o to enhance institutional capacity for carrying out an EIA.
In developing countries irrigation development is mainly the responsibility of the public sector. This document therefore concentrates on public sector irrigation projects. Whilst national irrigation authorities will not usually carry out EIAs, they will commission them, either as part of a feasibility study or separately. They must therefore be familiar with EIA in order to formulate the terms of reference and to appraise the impact statement. Private developers should also be required to demonstrate that their proposals are environmentally sound.
The objective has been to produce a brief reference text that will be of most benefit to non-specialists in developing countries who are perhaps facing the need to carry out an environmental assessment for the first time. To ensure brevity, and accessibility to all readers, technical, scientific or engineering content has been kept to a minimum. It is assumed that this information is readily available in other textbooks or manuals and that many readers will already be familiar with some technical aspects.
Similarly, no detailed explanation of the philosophy of EIA is given as this is available in standard general texts. Throughout the guide the terms EIA and environmental assessment have been used synonymously. A glossary of terms and abbreviations used in the text are included in Annex 1. Chapter 6 provides a guide to other publications considered of most use that are also widely available. Recommended texts, which are considered particularly useful, are reviewed at the start of Chapter 6.
Using the guide
Environmental assessment is appropriate for both site specific projects and wider programmes or plans covering projects or sectoral activities over a wide geographic area. In this document the term "project" is used interchangeably for both the site specific and wider meaning. Rehabilitation or modernization programmes are more common than new green field projects and raise special issues which need to be addressed by an EIA. They provide more opportunities to correct situations where the environment is adversely affected and they are usually richer in available data, (Tiffen, 1989). Also, operation and maintenance reforms for regions or basins will benefit greatly from an EIA. As this guide has been specifically prepared to address irrigation and drainage projects, plans and programmes, it is not sufficiently comprehensive to be used to carry out environmental impact assessments of other water resources projects.
Initially EIA was used for specific, particularly large scale, projects such as dams, which have obvious long-term consequences. Now, however, greater attention is given to the wider relationship between development and the environment. The relatively insignificant actions of many individual people may cumulatively have a much greater impact on the environment than a single construction project. For example a programme to support small-holder development, through agricultural credit schemes to Water User Groups, may not warrant an EIA if each scheme is considered in isolation. However, the impact within a river basin or in the water sector in a region can be significant. A sectoral or basin-wide EIA would enable an assessment of the collective impact of the programme. In a further example from Tamil Nadu, India, a decision was made to provide free electricity to farmers to pump water for irrigation. Whilst this increased agricultural production it also led to groundwater
mining: the reduction in the groundwater level in some areas has resulted in severe environmental and economic problems.
To enable the EIA process to be of maximum benefit, it must be incorporated into the planning process of a country. The social, institutional and legal issues concerned with the effective use of EIA are covered in Chapter 2. Chapter 5, on how to prepare terms of reference, has been prepared to assist those who need to employ others to carry out EIAs on their behalf. The mechanics of carrying out an EIA together with a description of the possible environmental impacts of irrigation and drainage are described, respectively, in Chapters 3 and 4.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: The context of environmental analysis
Policy framework
Social context
Institutional framework and EIA
Legal framework for EIA
Building institutional capacity
Policy framework
Increasingly, at the national level, new environmental policies are being introduced, perhaps including a National Environmental Action Plan or National Plan for Sustainable Development. Such policies are often supported by legislation. Government policies in areas such as water, land distribution and food production, especially if supported by legislation, are likely to be highly significant for irrigation and drainage projects. An EIA should outline the policy environment relevant to the study in question. Results are also likely to be most easily understood if they are interpreted in the light of prevailing policies.
Policies and regulations are sometimes conflicting and can contribute to degradation. It is within the scope of an EIA to highlight such conflicts and detail their consequences in relation to the irrigation and drainage proposal under study. An example of conflicting policies would be an agricultural policy to subsidize agro-chemicals to increase production and an environmental policy to limit the availability of persistent chemicals. A totally laissez-faire policy will result in unsustainable development, for example through uncontrolled pollution and distortions in wealth. This creates problems which future generations have to resolve. On the other hand, excessive government control of market forces may also have negative environmental impacts. For example, free irrigation water leads to the inefficient use of this scarce and expensive resource, inequities between head and tail users and waterlogging and salinity problems.
Legal and policy issues have far-reaching consequences for the environment and are included here to illustrate the complex nature of environmental issues. The FAO Legislative Study 38, "The environmental impact of economic incentives for agricultural production: a comparative law study", is a useful reference. A forthcoming FAO/World Bank/UNDP publication, "Water Sector Policy Review and Strategy Formulation: A General Framework", will address the need for environmental issues to be integrated into water policy. If a regional, sector or basin-wide EIA is needed, such issues will form an important part.
Social context
A project or programme and its environmental impacts exist within a social framework. The context in which an EIA is carried out will be unique and stereotype solutions to environmental assessments are therefore not possible. Cultural practices, institutional structures and legal arrangements, which form the basis of social structure, vary from country to country and sometimes, within a country, from one region to another. It is a fundamental requirement to understand the social structure of the area under study as it will have a direct impact on the project and the EIA.
Local, regional and national regulations, laws and organizations are interlinked. The way in which they are interlinked needs to be explicitly understood as part of the EIA. An understanding of the institutional and legal framework concerning the environment and irrigation and drainage development is critical to the success of any project or programme. Indeed, it is likely that recommendations arising from the EIA will include restructuring or strengthening institutions, particularly at a local level, for example, ensuring adequate maintenance or effective monitoring of drain water quality. Recommendations for new legal controls or limits may also form part of the EIA output; for example, stipulating a particular flow regime in order to maintain a wetland.
At a local or regional level there may be particular regulations and customary practices which will influence environmental aspects of any project and these must be understood. The participation of local groups and the direct beneficiaries, mainly farmers, is essential to successful EIA. This may best be achieved by involving district councils. At the district level there is more interaction between sectors. Consultation with local interest groups, including non-governmental organizations (NGOs), will enable local views to be taken into account and their concerns addressed. An awareness of social and cultural problems may enable solutions to be found and conflicts to be averted before project implementation commences. Ignorance of a problem will prevent a satisfactory solution being found.
If land acquisition, economic rehabilitation (providing an alternative source of income) or resettlement of displaced people are factors in any proposed development, special care will be needed in carrying out the EIA. In most countries such issues are socially and politically sensitive and legally complex and must be identified early, during screening. They should be highlighted so that they are adequately studied by experts early in project preparation.
Poor people often find themselves in a vicious circle. They are forced by their poverty to exploit natural resources in an unsustainable manner and suffer from increasing poverty because of environmental degradation. They often inhabit fragile, marginal eco-zones in rural and, increasingly, semi-urban areas. High population growth is linked to poverty and further contributes to the dynamics of the vicious circle as ever increasing demands are made on finite natural resources. Therefore, the needs of the poor, their influence on the project and the project's impact on vulnerable groups all require particular attention in an EIA.
Institutional framework and EIA
Environmental, water and land issues involve many disciplines and many government bodies. Data will therefore have to be collected and collated from a wide range of technical ministries, other government authorities and parastatals. The interests of some bodies may not initially appear to be relevant to irrigation and drainage. However, they may hold important information about the project and surrounding area on such topics as land tenure, health, ecology and demography.
The link between different ministries and departments within ministries are often complex and the hierarchy for decision making unclear. There is a tendency for each ministry to guard "its project" and not consult or seek information from other government bodies unless forced to. This is directly contrary to the needs of an EIA. Even if formal structures exist there may be a lack of coordination between different organizations. Informal links may have been established in practice in order to overcome awkward bureaucratic structures. These issues must be understood and not oversimplified.
There may be conflict between government organizations, particularly between the institution promoting the development and that given the mandate for environmental protection. In countries where some planning processes are undertaken at the regional or district level, the regional or district councils make it easier for affected communities to put forward their views, which may differ from those of the central authorities. They will have different agendas and approaches. The EIA process must be interactive and be sympathetic to the differing views; not biased towards a particular organization.
One of the main conflicts arising from irrigation and drainage projects is between those responsible for agriculture and those for water. In some countries, there are several key ministries with differing responsibility, such as agriculture, public works and irrigation, plus several parastatal organizations and special authorities or commissions, some perhaps directly under the Office of the President. The institutional aspects are complex; for example in Thailand, over 15 institutions have responsibility for various aspects of soil conservation work.
Increasingly, at the national level, new institutions are being created, or existing institutions reorganized, to address environmental issues. Often a Ministry of the Environment will be created with a mandate to prepare legislation, set standards and provide a "policing" role. In addition, an Environmental Protection Agency may also be created to coordinate environmental assessment activities and to monitor follow up actions. As well as specific environmental agencies, new units or departments concerned with environmental issues are being created in technical ministries. Such units may have narrow duties related to the responsibilities of the institution. For example, several units could be concerned with various aspects of monitoring water pollution levels and setting acceptable quality standards. The responsibilities of all the relevant institutions needs to be clearly understood.
Institutional weakness is one of the major reasons for environmentally unsound development. The multiplicity of institutions may also mitigate against effective enforcement of environmental control measures. The EIA must cover such issues in depth and highlight contradictions, weak or impractical legislation and institutional conflicts. To overcome such problems an EIA should propose appropriate solutions. This should include institutional strengthening.
Legal framework for EIA
Environmental policy without appropriate legislation will be ineffective as, in turn, will be legislation without enforcement. Economic and financial pressures will tend to dominate other concerns. In many developing countries legislation on environmental issues has been in existence for many years. For example, laws exist in most countries for the prevention of water pollution, the protection of cultural heritage and for minimum compensation flows. Much of the existing legislation or regulations have not been considered "environmental". Recently, much specific new environmental legislation has been enacted. This may be as a response to major disasters, or may result from government policy, public pressure or the general increased international awareness of the environmental dangers that now exist in the world. Relevant water and land law as well as environmental protection legislation needs stating, understanding and analysing as part of an EIA.
New legislation may include a statutory requirement for an EIA to be done in a prescribed manner for specific development activities. When carrying out an EIA it is thus essential to be fully aware of the statutory requirements and the legal responsibilities of the concerned institutions. These are best given as an annex to the terms of reference. The legal requirements of the country must be satisfied. New laws can impose an enormous burden on the responsible agencies. The statutory requirement to carry out an EIA for specific projects will, for example, require expert staff to carry out the study, as well as officials to review the EIA and approve the project.
Laws designating what projects require EIA should, ideally, limit the statutory requirements to prevent EIA merely becoming a hurdle in the approval process. This will prevent large volumes of work being carried out for little purpose. Most legislation lists projects for which EIA is a discretionary requirement. The discretionary authority is usually the same body that approves an EIA. This arrangement allows limited resources to be allocated most effectively. However, it is essential that the discretionary authority is publicly accountable.
When external financial support is required it will also be necessary to satisfy the obligations of the donor organization. Most major donors now require an EIA for projects relating to irrigation and drainage. Chapter 6 gives details of publications outlining the requirements of the main donors.
The function of environmental legislation can vary. It is not easy to give a precise definition of when an EIA is needed. Therefore the statutory requirement for an EIA is not particularly well suited to law. On the other hand many of the most important environmental hazards are easily addressed by law. For example, it is straightforward to set legal limits for pollution, flow levels, compensation etc: here the problem is one of enforcement. It is normal for an EIA to assess the acceptability or severity of impacts in relation to legal limits and standards. However, it is important to highlight cases where existing standards are insufficiently stringent to prevent adverse impacts and to recommend acceptable standards. Enforcement problems can be partially addressed by changing institutional structures.
Laws relating to irrigated lands are complex and according to an FAO study of five African countries they are not generally applied (FAO, 1992). There are conflicts between modern and customary laws: the former tend to be given prominence although the latter are usually strong locally. Traditional and customary rights have often developed in very different historical and political contexts and can vary greatly over a short distance. They may also be mainly oral and imprecise. Local participation in the preparation of the EIA will help to understand important customary rights and highlight possible weaknesses in any proposed development.
Building institutional capacity
To carry out an EIA
To implement the recommendations of an EIA
To carry out an EIA
It may be desirable to have both a Ministry of the Environment (which will have responsibility for setting norms and new legislation) and an Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, (as a coordinating authority to orchestrate the cross-sectoral EIA activity). Whatever the institutional structure, the ministry promoting the development will usually be required to carry out an EIA or to commission others to carry it out on their behalf. The EIA will then be approved or otherwise by the central regulating authorities. To enable this process to function satisfactorily trained staff will be required in:
o the environmental authority for commissioning and effective review and approval of EIAs;
o the technical authority for carrying out EIAs or preparing terms of reference or guidelines for others to do the work; and,
o Universities and the private sector, should the work be put out to contract.
There is thus a clear need for skilled professional staff in a variety of organizations who are familiar and competent with EIAs.
To achieve the required skills, training should cover all educational levels. Environmental studies should be introduced in schools and universities so that future expertise is nurtured. In-service training for both professional staff and technicians is important. Senior planners and decision makers also need to attend short environmental awareness programmes so that they appreciate the issues raised in EIA reports and can make enlightened decisions.
If environmental assessment is a statutory requirement, local expertise will be needed to carry out the work that this will impose. For large projects, with external financial support, foreign expertise may be used but this would not be viable for most projects. Foreign consultants, because they are outsiders, are at a disadvantage in making recommendations that are realistic and implementable. Local expertise, for both the public and private sectors, must be developed through adequately funded training and technology transfer programmes. Training should focus on the skills needed for an intersectoral decision making process at the crucial points in the project cycle. It should not aim to make pseudo EIA specialists out of other technical specialists.
In those countries where there is no central environmental authority and no statutory regulations for EIA the need for skilled staff will be equally important but less obvious. The pressure to carry out an EIA may come from external donors, the general public or specific pressure groups. In this case those who carry out the work may come from a small pool of academics or from external consultants. Part of their remit should be to train counterparts in government service. This situation is unsatisfactory in the long-term and will tend to restrict EIA to only the largest and most controversial projects. Governments must address this problem by appropriate policies for environmental protection and adequate resources to train skilled staff to carry out the work.
EIA is not a subject in itself but a procedure which relies on ex