<title>Retail markets planning guide. Retail markets and planning guide</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Notwithstanding current developments in the establishment of integrated food marketing systems, the traditional forms of wholesale and retail markets remain as important components of the marketing chain from farm to consumer. Retailing, the last stage in this process, is the point at which economies achieved in the previous stages can be passed on to the consumer.
This Guide is a companion to that produced by FAO on wholesale market planning and design (FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 90). It has been prepared to assist those engaged in the new development or improvement of rural and urban retail markets, including market managers, planners and public administrators, and engineers preparing detailed project designs. The general focus of the manual is on markets for the trading of fresh produce, such as vegetables, fruits, grains, fresh meat, fish, eggs and poultry.
The Guide addresses the entire range of issues related to market development, from initial formulation of a plan through to its implementation. Chapter I sets the framework by considering different types of rural and urban retail markets, how they operate, their likely physical and institutional deficiencies and the benefits that might be expected if these defects are remedied. This is followed by an examination of the planning context for markets: how they function and how their role within a community will vary according to whether they are located in a rural village, a small town? a suburban area or a city centre. Chapter 3 outlines a practical methodology to undertake rapid and cost-effective surveys to understand how the present retail marketing system operates and how it may be improved. It also provides basic guidelines on how to make projections of market throughput and how to use these to estimate the size of the market area and sales space and to assess what
facilities should be provided in the market.
Chapters 4 and 5 are concerned with detailed design, including the preparation of market master plans, the zoning of specialised activities in the market, traffic circulation patterns, a market's relationship to adjacent uses and potential conflicts. The design of buildings and infrastructure is demonstrated by using drawings or illustrations of actual market projects, supplemented with general descriptions of the organization of market buildings, typical materials, structures and servicing arrangements. Chapter 6 outlines typical market equipment requirements.
Chapter 7 provides an outline of the management and institutional factors which need to be taken into account when developing proposals for a new market or for upgrading existing market facilities, including the application of market regulations. The Guide concludes with a chapter on the overall formulation and economic and financial analysis of a simple market project, whether it is to be funded locally by central or local government, by a private entrepreneur or financed by an outside donor.
This publication has been prepared by John Tracey-White. Technical and editorial advice has been provided by Andrew Shepherd and by other members of the Marketing and Rural Finance Service of the Agricultural Support Systems Division. The Guide draws heavily on an earlier draft prepared by Jean-Michel Ambrosino and on material prepared by Peter de Balogh. Illustrations have been provided by the author, by Jean-Michel Ambrosino, the FAO Photo Library and from published sources, the use of which is gratefully acknowledged.
A. Sawadogo
Assistant Director-General
Agriculture Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
This Guide has been prepared to assist those engaged in improving existing retail markets or building new markets. Users of the guide may include market staff, technicians involved with detailed project design and implementation as well as urban planners and public administrators, at national, regional or local level, concerned with the planning and operation of food marketing systems. It should also be of use to those interested in the education and training of market personnel.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS GUIDE?
The main aim of the Guide is to provide a simple step-by-step approach to developing markets. It concentrates on general principles governing planning and operational efficiency of rural and urban retail markets. It provides information on how to carry out surveys, prepare layouts and building designs, choose equipment and assess a project's technical and financial feasibility. It is not a guide to marketing in general, nor to the design of specialised facilities such as wholesale markets.
The Guide uses a systematic approach in which the design and formulation process that will need to be followed is broken down into a series of steps. These steps are summarised in Box 1 and developed in detail in the following chapters.
WHY SHOULD WE IMPROVE OR BUILD NEW MARKETS?
There is a natural wish to be able to purchase foodstuffs and other goods at one location and preferably under a single roof. Markets are an important component of the marketing chain from farm level to consumer. Efforts made in improving production and reducing post-harvest losses as well as investments in agricultural infrastructure, such as storage, have only a limited chance of providing benefits if the last stage in the marketing chain, retailing, is not able to pass on to the consumer the economies achieved in the previous stages.
BOX 1
The design process for preparing a market development project
1. FINDING OUT WHAT EXISTS
Reviewing the planning context/policies of the market and its catchment area
Collecting data on agricultural production and urban consumption
Making surveys of existing markets, retail facilities and traffic levels
2. FINDING OUT WHAT IS NEEDED
Analysing the existing throughput and market channels
Projecting future market throughput
Calculating sales space requirements and site area
Defining ancillary needs and services
Setting targets and priorities for the development
Developing a management structure and training needs
3. DESIGNING THE MARKET PROJECT
Preparing an overall master plan of the market site
Preliminary design of individual buildings and infrastructure components
Defining equipment needs
4. FORMULATING THE PROJECT
Assessing the potential benefits of the project in meeting its objectives
Preparing capital and recurrent budgets and cash flow forecasts
Calculating the project's financial and economic returns
Evaluating the legal, environmental and social impact of the project
Defining the mode of implementation, sources of finance and actions needed
5. FINALISING DESIGNS
Adjusting master plan to conform with formulation results and available financ
Final design of individual buildings and infrastructure components
Preparation of bills of quantities and other tender documents
Effective retailing, either from shops, scattered outlets such as mobile facilities, or markets, not only improves the flow of products, but can also provide an incentive to agricultural production. The retailer is directly in contact with consumers and knows their needs. By offering consumers commodities they can afford the retailer is able to both maximise profits and increase supplies from producers.
WHAT FACTORS INFLUENCE A MARKET ENVIRONMENT?
The efficient operation of retail markets is influenced by two factors. The first is the physical environment, i.e. the market premises, access, stalls, storage and equipment. Irrespective of whether it is a street market, a shop, a covered market or a mobile facility, all aspects of the development and maintenance of the physical environment have cost implications. To maximise financial returns the facility should be:
* close to the customer;
* designed according to the expected level of sales; and
* adapted to the best preservation of the product being sold.
Equally important, however, is the second factor, which is the social and managerial functioning of the market. A retail market is a mechanism for distributing goods, but it is only fully effective if it enables the retailer to operate profitably and the customer to obtain products at the most advantageous prices. This presupposes that an organization exists to forge relationships between retailers and their partners (suppliers, customers, and market authorities) and that there is a level of shared knowledge on how the market should operate in order to optimise the operation of sales, storage and handling facilities.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1. Retail markets
This chapter sets the framework for the guide by considering different types of rural and urban retail markets, how the! operate, what are their likely physical and institutional deficiencies and what benefits might be expected if these defects are remedied. The general focus of the manual is Oft markers for the trading of fresh produce, such as vegetables, fruits, grains, fresh meat, fish, eggs and poultry.
What are retail markets?
Before looking at the markets themselves it is first necessary to define what is meant by retailing. The purpose of retail shops or markets for any commodity is to provide an environment for looking at and buying merchandise that is displayed for sale. With a conventional shop, including a large-scale supermarket, there is usually a sales area where goods are displayed, a shop front used for advertising the goods and a service area where goods can be received, re-packed and stored. With a market stall these functions occur at one place.
A retail market, like any other type of market, is a location at which there is a public gathering of buyers and sellers at a known time. All retail markets involve a large number of transactions of relatively small quantities of goods on a face-to-face basis between a seller and buyer. An essential feature of a market is the opportunity it can provide to immediately and easily compare prices between different sellers of the same product.
Functions of markets
Markets provide low-cost retailing facilities based on small-scale operations and are typically found in the low and middle-income, higher density areas of cities and small towns and in the centres of villages in rural areas. The main functions of markets are:
* to provide opportunities for the exchange of goods and for sales by producers in rural areas;
* to provide, at assembly markets, opportunities for the bulking-up and export of goods and produce to outside areas;
* to provide easy access to a wide range of produce for consumers;
* to provide an important means of generating a diversity of retail outlets in towns and cities by supplying low-cost space for street vendors who use stalls or carts and do not therefore require buildings; and
* to provide an opportunity to achieve improvements in food hygiene standards and reductions in post-harvest food losses.
Evolution of retail markets
Retail marketing systems in western countries have broadly evolved from traditional street markets through to the modern regionally based hypermarket or out-of-town shopping centre. A broad review of the history of retailing and its relationship to the growth of settlements is contained in Chapter 2.
Variation in the types of market, whether rural or urban, can be broadly defined according to a number of characteristics:
by physical and spatial characteristics.
* undifferentiated open sales spaces, operated by an individual hawker or peddler, shown at its simplest and most rudimentary form in Figure 1;
* street or roadside markets (common in both rural or urban areas);
* open-air markets (typically in a paved urban square);
* covered markets (more usual in urban areas, as in Figure 2);
* small-scale retail shops associated with urban market areas; and
* markets sharing a number of the above characteristics, most commonly found in the centre of small rural towns, as shown in Figure 3.
by type of commodity traded:
* horticultural produce, such as fresh fruit, vegetables and flowers;
* freshly slaughtered meat;
* fresh and dried fish; dry foods, including grains;
* cooked food ("street food");
* household, non-perishable consumer goods and utensils;
* cloth and clothing; and, most commonly
* a heterogeneous market, trading in a wide range of goods.
FIGURE 2.Covered retail market, convertible for use for fairs, concerts, dances and sporting events, and with provision for 50 apartments to be built over the top at a later date, at Vevey, Switzerland. Source: Architectural Record, Volume 79, p. 374-379, May /936. Tarerbey, Schobinger and Getag, Architects.
by time of operation (and services that are offered):
* markets offering a wider range of trading functions than retailing, typically those which are combined retail and wholesale markets found in small towns and cities.
* buildings or areas specialising as markets on one day in the week or at a specific time of the day (the whole or part of the site may be used for different purpose at other times such as a car park, as sports facilities or as a cinema, as illustrated in Figure 2);
* weekly or seasonal markets as shown in Figure 4 (generally termed "periodic markets" in rural areas or "weekly markets" in urban areas). A specialized form of seasonal market is the assembly market where the emphasis is on the sale of goods to outside buyers rather than to local consumers; and
* markets operating every day on a permanent site, whether from a fixed building or a mobile stall such as in Figure 5 (possibly with expanded activities at weekends or on specific days).
by type of ownership and operation:
* by urban municipalities or rural local authorities:
* by government or parastatal organizations;
* by private enterprise;
* by religious or charitable foundations and other organizations, such as tracers' associations; and
* open markets operated on "common land" not owned by any individual or organization.
Justification for market developments
A market is usually located at a critical point in the overall marketing, transport and passenger movement system. In the case of rural areas, and in many urban areas, markets also form the main link between agricultural producers and consumers.
In formulating a market development programme, whether for a new or upgraded market, there is a great temptation to attempt to solve all the problems experienced at a market by adopting a radical physical solution. Responses to problems might include complete rebuilding, relocation to a new site or the separation of one function of the market (e.g. wholesaling) from the other uses. It is often found that such radical approaches may be both impractical and unnecessary. The best option may be to develop and rationalise operations on the existing site including, particularly, improving the market's management system.
First of all it is necessary to be very clear as to what are the constraints that a development programme will need to address. A survey and analysis of present market characteristics, conditions and operations is invariably required (these are elaborated in Chapter 3 and in Annexes A and B). Typical problems a market may exhibit can be broadly classified into physical problems and social and managerial problems.
Physical problems: these might include the following:
* insufficient sales space, particularly of temporary spaces at peak periods and during peak seasons, leading to produce being sold in the open, with consequent spoilage;
* the presence of poorly designed and constructed sheds, making the marketing process inefficient and inhibiting customer flow;
* a general lack of building maintenance;
* insufficient circulation space and traffic management measures, leading to vehicular and pedestrian congestion;
* lack of parking provision and areas for unloading;
* poor condition of roads and paving;
* inadequate drainage and severe flooding problems, leading to produce losses and potential health problems;
* inadequate site security and overnight storage facilities; and
* inadequate hygienic provision for meat, poultry and fish handling, including a lack of refrigeration facilities.
Social and managerial problems: these might include the following:
* difficulties in enforcing the market bye-laws and regulations;
* an inefficient use of market sales space with low sales volume per trader and low rents;
* a high demand for places in the market, reflecting either uncontrolled use of space or relatively high profit margins; and
* a market management system where there is no clear relationship between revenues and costs and, consequently, the market is underfunded, especially for repairs and maintenance.
Components of a market development project
The implementation of a market improvement programme can become a vehicle for addressing the physical and social/managerial problems outlined above. It is important to stress, however, that a project should not be artificially expanded to deal with peripheral problems unless there is an additional budget available for that purpose. With the exception of main urban covered markets, therefore, infrastructure improvements are likely to be very modest.
FIGURE 5 Street market in the 1950s, Copenhagen, Denmark Source: Salodin E. (undated). Wanderings in Copenhagen. Carit Anderson Publishers. Copenhagen.
The typical range of construction works that might be needed for the upgrading of rural markets and small-scale urban markets could include: internal access roads and parking, paving and sales pitches, surface water drainage, including perimeter drainage and outfall structures, perimeter fencing and access gates, tube wells/hand pumps, latrines and, if appropriate, the provision of a market supervisor's office. Traders themselves can contribute to the improvement of the market by, for example, improving building spaces which they rent on a long-term basis or by providing temporary shade structures.
Benefits of market development
There is little point in undertaking market development improvements unless they result in a positive socio-economic impact. To achieve such an aim effective regulation of markets is essential. Inside the market, both hygiene rules and revenue collection activities have to be enforced. Of equal Importance, however, will be the maintenance of order outside the market. Licensed traders in a market will not be willing to cooperate in raising standards if they face competition from unlicensed operators outside who do not pay any of the costs involved in providing a proper service. On the other hand, market development should not be used to artificially reinforce exploitation of traders by providing a monopoly in retail trade to an influential minority.
Existing rules should be enforced within the framework of a coherent policy on the numbers of licenses to be issued and the sites at which selling is allowed. Street hawkers, for example, can play an important role in retailing of low-cost cooked foods, but this should not be allowed to conflict with the activities of markets. One of the major goals of a market development programme should be to re-establish a framework for managing markets. Once created, a wide range of benefits might be expected from a project. These are outlined below. Such benefits may form the basis of the project formulation and economic analysis explained in Chapter 8.
Reductions in crop losses
Many projects are justified on the basis of reductions in crop losses through quicker and better handling in an improved market. However, such losses can be overestimated. Savings are sometimes quoted as being between six to ten per cent of produce by value but this would be very high in normal circumstances. Harvesting and handling at the farm and damage during transport are usually far greater sources of post-harvest loss than the limited handling that takes place in a market. A more realistic level of losses at market level is in the range of two to five per cent of the value of the produce in the case of rural markets and even less with urban markets.
With the most up-to-date facilities there will always be a certain amount of wastage that cannot be reduced and, where produce is of relatively low value, such as tomatoes in the glut season, the effort involved in loss reduction may not even be worth taking. Nevertheless, the provision of covered stalls, better storage and, in many countries, an end to flooding of markets in the rainy seasons, will all help to reduce post-harvest losses to more acceptable levels.
An important aspect of produce loss is pilferage. This can be very much more significant than other losses and may be radically improved by better fencing and security arrangements. The reduction of congestion by the improvement of access to a market will also help to reduce losses artificially created by an inability of producers or traders to sell produce.
Improved efficiency of market operations
Improved conditions in a market can result in substantial savings for market operators. The potential for greater throughput due to an improved layout and the elimination of congestion, resulting in reduced vehicle operating costs (see below) means that operating expenses for both users and management will be reduced. These savings should be reflected in higher rental levels and charges.
However, the present situation in many markets is one of very low rents. Where public facilities are charged out to users at lower than normal levels, the facilities are likely to be used inefficiently. Increasing rents and the level of charges to more realistic levels without a parallel improvement in benefits to market traders, in terms of maintenance or services available, is likely to be met with strong resistance from market users. Improvements have to lead to savings in the trader's operating costs or otherwise market prices are likely to increase to compensate for the additional costs.
Public health benefits
In the case of urban markets, health gains, while they are virtually unquantifiable in financial or economic terms, are likely to be the greatest project benefit. Markets are a major potential source of infection from food and water-borne diseases. The central location of many street markets and their relationship to the public transport system may offer a particularly rapid way for disease to spread. Such diseases can arise from a number of sources, including;
* poor sanitary conditions for the slaughter of poultry and the sale of meat and fish;
* lack of public toilet facilities, including hand washing facilities;
* inadequate market cleaning provision and solid-waste disposal practices; and
* contaminated food resulting from a lack of adequate paving and drainage, particularly critical during the rainy seasons.
The most immediate health benefit is likely to be a reduction in the more common and less threatening diseases, such as gastro-enteritis and worms. However, if only one epidemic of a more dangerous but less common diseases such as cholera, is prevented or reduced, a market programme will have been justified.
Amenity and aesthetic benefits
There can be substantial improvements in amenity and convenience for all users from market improvements and this has always been viewed as the main benefit of programmes implemented in urban areas. Traders will usually have better stalls with greater protection from the sun and rain. while consumers will be able to make their choices from produce that is more cleanly and attractively displayed.
In the case of market improvements in traditional urban areas there may also be a conservation gain, with related benefits to the tourist trade. Many markets are important public buildings (such as the Starbroek market in Georgetown, Guyana and the Old Stone Town Market in Zanzibar) and when they have been upgraded they can provide the basis of an integrated area improvement programme. Figure 6 is a typical example of such an area upgrading, where a proposal for pedestrianisation of a section of a small coastal town in Britain was developed around the improvement of its fishing port and associated market,
Time savings
Time savings can occur in two ways: for market users and for other road users. In the case of the former the savings will occur because the market improvements reduce waiting time for those delivering and collecting produce. Such savings will tend to be greatest in the case of assembly markets, where the essential function of the market is one of providing a trans-shipment point.
Time savings for other road users occur when the present arrangement of a market has an impact on the adjacent road system. For example, the fruit and vegetable assembly market at Al Husainiah in Yemen straddles the main highway between the port of Hodeidah and the city of Taiz and the whole south-central area of the Republic. This is an extremely busy road with an average daily traffic level of 2,865 vehicles travelling in both directions. During the market's peak season it takes road traffic an hour or more to get through the market area. On that basis there would be considerable benefits to other road users if the market was relocated away from the main road.
Generation of public funds
Many local authorities face severe budgetary difficulties and increased revenues from retail markets would consequently be very welcome as a useful means of generating additional income. In the case of private markets the same arguments will generally apply.
Provided that the raising of these funds takes place within the context of a general improvement in market management the additional funds can provide a significant contribution to upgrading the quality of services offered to both rural and urban residents. The profits will be available for the provision of additional market facilities and for re-investment in other markets and infrastructure. The importance of this is emphasized by the fact that unimproved markets often do not even cover the cost of the staff employed to run them, let alone operations and maintenance, the cost of capital or the rental value of the site.
Income generation is equally important with the introduction of structural adjustment programmes, where in many countries the opportunity is often taken to rationalize the operation of former centralized, state-operated food distribution facilities in order that they can operate as commercially run retail markets. An example of this process, taking place in China, utilizing the site of a state-owned facility, is shown in Figure 7.
Income from additional services
A variant of income generating benefits arises when a market is able to provide services additional to those available before. An example of this is the provision of chill stores for the storage of fruits, meat and fish, and banana ripening rooms. Grading and packing facilities are also a possibility. However, the introduction of such additional facilities needs to be approached with some caution. There is little point in raising the standards of produce presentation if there is no local demand for graded produce.
Impact on agricultural production
Market developments can stimulate increased growth in agricultural production by providing access to market opportunities arising from demographic and income changes. Such "induced" growth is particularly important for smallholder producers who may rely on markets as their sole or main outlet. With the development of an economy they may begin to face stiff competition from larger commercial operators able to afford the use of more sophisticated techniques, such as on-farm grading and packing, and direct sales to supermarkets. Raising standards in markets is likely to provide a means by which small-scale vegetable and fruit producers can improve the efficiency of their marketing in order to compete effectively in the sale of greater quantities of cheaper produce.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2. Planning context
This chapter examines the planning context for markets. How they function and what their role is within a community will vary according to whether they are located in a rural village, a small town, a suburban area or a city centre.
A brief history of settlement growth
Retailing is normally one of the main commercial activities of settlements. In many circumstances, markets provide the dominant form of retail facility and are a major land use. In understanding the context of markets, therefore, it is also necessary to comprehend their relationship to the process of urbanization.
Prior to the 19th century, the typical city or market town in Europe was based around a market square which was not only the geographical centre of the settlement but also the social and commercial heart. as well as the religious and cultural focus of the community. The open area of the market square served a wide range of functions. providing retail facilities as well as entertainment. These market squares were often planned from the outset. In many other cases, particularly in rural areas, markets have resulted from spontaneous growth. A gathering of peddlers, when they start to do this at a given location and at a regular time, will create the nucleus of a market. This pattern continues today in many countries.
The industrialization of cities in Europe led to a demand for inexpensive shopping facilities and this was often met by providing purpose-built market structures. In England, for example, some 400 private Acts of Parliament were passed during the 19th century to enable the construction of market halls to take place, both in the centre of cities and in new suburban areas. Similar developments happened elsewhere in Europe, particularly in Spain and France (see Figure 8).
Industrialization also had the effect of changing the character and organization of cities and of promoting a desire for suburban living. In the 20th century the main influence on the location of new residential areas and their associated retailing facilities has been the emergence of the automobile as the primary form of mass public transport. In the USA, for example, the population of suburban areas in the 1950s grew at 30 times that of the inner cities and distances between the suburban areas and the centre of towns and cities increased considerably. The effect of this growth has resulted in the development of suburban shopping malls and out-of-town shopping centres based around highway accessibility. However, there has been a partial reversal of this trend recently with the construction of new urban shopping centres, often including market areas, as part of downtown or central area revitalisation and conservation programmes.
Markets in rural areas
The critical issues to be examined when considering interventions in the rural marketing system are the relationship of the market facilities to the pattern of rural settlements, the location and nature of agricultural production areas, how the regional road system is evolving, the possible assembly functions of a market, the present marketing channels and the relationship of rural markets to urban areas and their wholesale markets. The types of rural markets that need to be considered are:
* existing retail markets located in traditional rural village centres;
* markets in newly planned rural settlements; and
* assembly markets.
Central place theory
One of the key concepts that needs to be understood in reviewing the functioning of markets is that they form one of the main components of rural towns and villages. In fact, they may be the main force behind the creation and economic livelihood of such settlements. They act as the "central place" in providing the population of the surrounding area with goods and services (a distribution function), and may also be the main mechanism for the assembly of local produce for the bulking-up and onward movement of the produce to urban areas.
Figures 9 illustrate how the linkage between centres might operate, with the individual settlements forming a series or "hierarchy" of "catchment areas" or "spheres of influence". The limit of a catchment area would be the result of the "range" or "threshold" for economically providing services or goods. The theoretical shape of catchment areas is circular, but it is normally represented as a series of nesting hexagons (see Figure 10). In reality, the location of centres and the shape of their related catchment areas is distorted by transport routes and other geographical features.
FIGURE 9.Trade links and general pattern of connections between village, town and regional markets. Source: Village Markets in Ghana. USAD. 1963.
FIGURE 10.A hierarchy of central places, with hexagonalshaped catchment areas, adapted 