<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Natural colourants and dyestuffs </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Natural colourants and dyestuffs are an important group of non-wood forest products. They can be of plant or insect origin. These products have various end uses. Natural colourants are employed to impart colour to food products, and natural dyestuffs are used to impart colour to textiles and other non-food products.
The number of colourants and dyestuffs found in nature are enormous. While some of them are fairly well-known, many of them are not commercially important. To provide a comprehensive coverage of all the plants and animals providing colourants and dyestuffs is a very difficult task. This publication attempts to provide only a representative selection of plants and insects yielding colourants and dyestuffs. Its purpose is to give an indication of the wide-ranging sources of natural colourants and dyestuffs and to encourage further research and studies relating to this group of products.
The draft of this document was prepared by C.L. Green of UK-ODA Natural Resources Institute (NRI). Formatting of the text and proofreading was done by Elisa Rubini. The preparation and publication of this document was guided and supervised by C. Chandrasekharan, Chief of the Non-Wood Products and Energy Branch. I record my sincere thanks to them.
It is my fervent hope that this publication will help to enhance the interest of forest resource managers to pay due attention to the development of non-wood forest products.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
*agroforestry system a mixed cropping system - involving trees, other plants and often animals - which has been created within or on the verge of a natural forest or artificially as an agricultural innovation
colour, natural a colouring material for foodstuffs, derived from a natural source, or, of synthetic origins but identical chemically to a naturally occurring compound
olour, nature identical a synthetically produced chemical compound which is identical in all respects to the compound found as a colour component of a natural source
*colourant, natural the dried part of a plant or animal (or an extract thereof) which is employed to impart a colour to foodstuffs
dye a chemical compound of natural or synthetic origin which is soluble in the medium used to impart a colour to textiles and other non-food products
*dyestuff, natural a dye obtained from a natural source (plant or animal)
E number the code number assigned by the European Community to approved food additives of natural or synthetic origin
extract, natural the product obtained by extraction of natural (vegetable) materials with water, vegetable oils or organic solvents
fastness/fast colour the ability of a dye to withstand colour fading in the dyed material on repeated exposure to light or washing
lake a chemical complex formed by the treatment of certain colourants and dyestuffs with metal salts
mordant a metallic salt which combines both with the dye and the fibre being dyed and improves colour fastness
*non-wood forest product (NWFP) a natural product, other than wood, derived from a tree or other plants or animals in a forest system
oleoresin, spice the product obtained by extraction of a spice with an organic solvent and which contains the soluble non-volatile and volatile substances originally present in the raw material
*pigment, natural the specific chemical compounds which are responsible for the visible colour in live plants
synthetic a material produced by chemical synthesis
* denotes a definition used for the specific purpose of this review; in other texts, these terms may be defined differently
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION
This review deals with natural products which find use as colourants for foodstuffs or as dyes for textiles and other non-food materials including cosmetics.
The terminology employed for these products is not uniform in commerce or in the published literature and for the purpose of this review the following definitions are used:
natural colourants natural products which are incorporated in foodstuffs to provide a specific colour in the final edible product;
natural dyes/dyestuffs natural products which are used to impart a desired colour to non-food materials (textiles, wood, leather, etc.) by a process known as "dyeing";
natural pigments the specific chemical compounds which are responsible for the visible colour in live plant parts.
(Other important terms used in the main text of this review are defined in the glossary.)
SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW
The review focuses on natural colourants and dyestuffs which are obtained from trees, shrubs, other plant forms and insects present in forestry and agroforestry systems of the tropics and sub-tropics, i.e., non-wood forest products (NWFPs). In view of the enormous number of colourants and dyestuffs found in nature as NWFPs, an exhaustive coverage was not possible and the approach taken was to provide a representative selection of product types. Examples are given of those which enjoy a current major usage and of some others which were formerly important but have suffered from technological or socio-economic developments.
The main purpose of the review, therefore, is to provide information - through the selected examples - which will assist an appraisal of the future developmental opportunities or constraints for the product group. In order to furnish a wider perspective, the review also includes some examples of major natural colourants and dyestuffs which now are mainly produced in horticultural systems; both as an indicator of comparative market demand and production economics and since some are suitable for adaptation within agroforestry systems.
The review does not cover the subject of vegetable tannins because this group of natural products are employed primarily as preserving and softening agents for leather and natural fibres rather than as dyestuffs. Moreover, tannins are an extensive and complex subject area which deserve the attention of a separate review.
FORMAT OF THE REVIEW
The main sections of the review sequentially deal with:
(a) the major natural colourants and dyestuffs which enter
international trade;
(b) other natural colourants and dyestuffs which have a significant producer
country or regional demand but are minor items of international trade;
(c) some minor natural colourants and dyestuffs;
(d) dyes derived from lichens;
(e) colourants and dyestuffs obtained from insect parasites of forest trees; and
(f) selected, natural colourants and dyestuffs which are obtained mainly from
horticultural systems or by harvesting of wild (non-forest) plants.
For each commodity, information is provided on: the botanical source; global production and trade in the primary and processed products of added-value (where reliable data are available); prospects for expansion of production, processing and trade; cultivation, processing and exporting requirements. In addition, a selected bibliography is given for each commodity.
Developmental prospects are considered in relation to the local and international markets since demand and competition are the deciding factors for the success of any new commercial venture. The ability to produce in itself is only one element in a developmental appraisal. Competition from synthetic alternatives in particular must be examined for the international market and it is frequently of considerable importance on local markets.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL MARKETPLACE: COMPETITION BETWEEN NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC PRODUCTS AND LEGISLATION ON FOOD COLOURANTS
Up to the latter part of the nineteenth century, the plant and animal kingdoms provided all the colouring materials for dyeing textiles, the preparation of cosmetics and paints, and for making foodstuffs more visually attractive. Cultivation of plants and rearing of animals or gathering the wild resource, together with processing and trading was of enormous socio-economic importance for many communities worldwide. This pattern commenced to change very rapidly following the discovery by chemists of means of synthesising dyestuffs. The initial impact was felt in the textiles sector and major natural dyes, such as indigo, lost most of their market by 1900. Progressively, a wider range of synthetic dyes was manufactured and these displaced many other natural materials in foods and cosmetics. The success achieved by synthetics resulted from a combination of factors: comparative cheapness, reliability of supply, consistency of quality and special quality attributes greater colour
fastness with textiles and superior stability in food media.
A few natural dyes have retained a significant position in the textile sector owing to their unique qualities but it must be accepted that the dominance of synthetic dyes is irreversible in the global textile industry.
The food sector, however, is now experiencing a trend back towards natural colourants. This change has not been driven by the food industry but by consumers in developed countries who are concerned over possible health risks associated with synthetic food additives. The new situation presents welcome opportunities in the natural resource sector but also it must be appreciated that there are constraints which relate to legislation on food ingredients.
A discussion of the finer details of legislation on food colourants is not attempted here but interested readers may refer to the specialist texts listed in the bibliography. However, the main points may be summarised as follows. The range of colours of natural origin permitted for use in foods is not extensive in the three major markets, the European Community (which is a different and distinct legal entity to the European Union), USA and Japan; moreover, the three lists are not identical (see Tables 1 to 3). A naturally-derived colour may be a traditional food ingredient which is generally regarded as safe in one of these markets but it can be regarded as new in another. Today, "new" food colours are required by the regulatory authorities to undergo the identical stringent toxicological testing as new synthetics and this is a very expensive process. Some case examples in the European Community are presented in the following main section of this review. Finally, it should
be noted that developments in food colour legislation are a continuing process and it is wise for both researchers and exporters to periodically gather an up-date on changes since these can profoundly influence markets.
Table 1: Natural colours (and colours of natural origin) permitted in food and drinks in the USA by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and exempt from certification
Annatto extract
â-apo-8'-carotenal^a
â-Carotene^a
Beet powder
Canthaxanthin^a
Caramel
Carrot oil
Cochineal/carmine
Cottonseed flour, toasted
Fruit juice
Grape colour extract
Grape skin extract
Paprika and paprika oleoresin
Riboflavin (NI)
Saffron
Turmeric and turmeric oleoresin
^a Nature-identical forms only (i.e., synthetically produced material which is
chemically identical in all respects to the naturally occurring compound).
Table 2: Natural colours/colours of natural origin listed as permitted for foods by the European Community
E100 Curcumin
E101 Riboflavin
E120 Cochineal/carminic acid/carmines
E140 Chlorophyll
E141 Copper complexes of chlorophyll and chlorophyllins
E150 Caramel
E153 Vegetable carbon
E160
(a) á-, â-, ã-carotene
(b) Annatto extracts, bixin, nor-bixin
(c) Paprika extract, capsanthin, capsorubin
(d) Lycopene
(e) â-apo-8'-carotenal (C30)
E161
(a) Flavoxanthin
(b) Lutein
(c) Cryptoxanthin
(d) Rubixanthin
(e) Violaxanthin
(f) Rhodoxanthin
(g) Canthaxanthin
E162 Beetroot red, betanin
E163 Anthocyanins
Table 3: Recognised ingredient classification in the European Community for natural materials and extracts with a colouring power but not presently approved for the "E" list of natural colours
Product Category
Santalin (red sandal)
Spice extract blends Spice extracts
Alfalfa
Marigold
Crocin
Saffron
Safflower
Hibiscus natural (vegetable) extracts
<section>4</section>
MAJOR COLOURANTS AND DYESTUFFS ENTERING INTERNATIONAL TRADE
ANNATTO SEED AND ITS EXTRACTS
Summary of Basic Information
Usage: (a) As ground seed for food colouring or as a condiment in many growing countries;and (b) mainly in the form of soluble extracts for food colouring in developed countries.
Common names for product andbotanical source: Annatto or bixa seed (English); urucum(Portuguese); achiote (Spanish).
Raw material source: Seeds harvested from wild and cultivated trees.
Botanical source: Bixa orellana L. (family: Bixaceae); a small tree, native to tropical Central and South America but now widely distributed throughout the tropics.
Form traded internationally: Seeds and, increasingly, as the added-value extracts.
World production: (estimated) 10,000 tonnes annually.
International trade: (estimated) 7,000 tonnes annually in seed equivalents.
Major exporters: Peru and Kenya.
Major importers: USA, Western Europe and Japan.
Availability of reliable published information: Fair to good.
Description and Colourant Uses
Annatto of commerce is the dried seed of Bixa orellana L., an evergreen shrub or small tree which is indigenous to Central and tropical South America. The tree has been introduced widely throughout the tropics as an ornamental or for commercial production of seed and it has become naturalised in many countries of Africa and Asia.
The seed is valued as a source of pigments which impart a red or orange hue, dependent upon the form of usage. In growing countries, the seed is employed directly as a condiment and as a food colourant, especially for cereals in Latin America, and prior to the introduction of fast, synthetic dyestuffs it was used also as a dye for textiles. Export-oriented production is aimed at developed country markets where annatto extracts are employed as natural colourants by the food industries and to a lesser extent in other products, such as cosmetics.
The pigments occur in the coat of the seed which displays a deep red colour. The principal pigment is bixin, the cis-form of the mono-methyl ether of a carotenoid carboxylic acid. The total pigment content of seeds (expressed as bixin) can vary widely, both between and within production areas; the best quality seeds on the market contain over 3% bixin but supplies from several major sources often have only about 2%.
International trade has historically been conducted with seeds. However, the past decade has seen the successful development of exports in added-value extracts by the two major supply sources, Peru and Kenya.
Forms of Usage in Developed Country Markets
The predominant usage of annatto in developed country markets is in the form of extracts by the food industries. The traditional major colouring applications have been in hard cheeses, butter, other dairy products and in margarine. Fish products, salad dressings, confectionery, bakery products, ice-creams, beverages and snack-foods largely account for the remainder of demand.
The particular type of extract employed is dependent on the food product and the need for the pigment to be oil- or water-soluble.
Water-soluble extracts are employed in bi-phasic or water-based food products such as hard cheeses, bakery products, soups, sauces, pickles, smoked fish, sugar and flour confectionery. The extracts contain a mixture of the sodium or potassium salts of the cis- and trans-isomers of nor-bixin, transformation products of natural bixin which are created by the extraction procedure (described later). Imports are made of aqueous pastes and of the dried, powdered product; the latter may be spray-dried on to an inert carrier. Sales to end-users are made with spray-dried material on a carrier or, more commonly, as aqueous solutions (of which the weakest contain 0.1% of bixin).
Photographs:
N. 1 : Bixa orellana tree. (Photo: G. Blaak)
N. 2 : Bixa orellana in flower. ( Photo G. Blaak)
N. 3 : Bixa orellana with fruits. ( Photo G. Blaak)
N. 4 : Close up of Bixa orellana fruits with exposed seeds. ( Photo: NRI)
Oil-soluble extracts are used in margarine, salad oils and other foodstuffs possessing a high fat content. The oil soluble products may contain bixin or nor-bixin or a combination of both, in the free-acid form. They are sold in the dried state or as ready-to-use solutions or suspensions in edible vegetable oils. Solid products may contain up to 99% bixin while vegetable oil solutions may be as low as 0.1% (described later).
Dosage levels of bixin/nor-bixin in food products usually range between 0.01 to 0.5%. The main competitor for annatto extracts in certain food applications is synthetic beta-carotene.
World Demand and Supply Trends
International Trade
Accurate computation of the scale of world trade is made difficult by the fact that trade is conducted both in seeds and in extracts; the latter being in various forms and possessing differing pigment concentrations. A conservative estimate for total world trade is 7,000 tonnes, calculated in seed equivalents. (Other researchers put the figure as high as 9,000 tonnes.)
Table 4: Major importers of annatto seed and its extracts
Annual imports of
seed plus extracts,
expressed as seed
equivalents (tonnes)
Annual imports of
extracts, expressed
as percentage of total seed equivalent usage
USA and Canada
Western Europe
Japan
Source: Natural Resources Institute (NRI) estimates (based on published trade statistics and interviews with traders).
The acceptance and growth in imports of extracts produced at source into these three major markets is recent, dating from the early 1980s; previously all imports were of seed. The most important extract traded in terms of volume is the water-soluble (nor-bixin) type, followed by vegetable oil extracts and with solvent-extracted bixin in the last place.
Demand for annatto as a colourant by the food industries in developed countries displayed growth during the 1980s in response to either the banning of certain synthetic pigments or from consumer preference for natural products. Non-traditional uses of annatto have developed recently in many countries; for example, in bakery products.
The Japanese market in particular has grown considerably in recent years since all synthetic or "nature-identical" colourings are banned in food products. Japan mainly sources annatto seed and extracts from Kenya where it has a strong involvement in the industry.
The USA is the largest single market for annatto. It sources over 60% of its requirements from Peru and the bulk of the remainder from the Caribbean region. Penetration of this market by extracts produced at source have been small when compared to those of Western Europe and Japan.
In Western Europe, the UK and the Netherlands are the largest importers of annatto seed and extracts, mainly sourced from Peru, and they jointly took the equivalent of 700 tonnes of seed in 1990. Most of the Dutch imports are re-exported to other countries in the European Community. The major consumers in Western Europe are the UK and France and they account for approximately 40% and 30%, respectively, of the total European Community demand. In both countries, annatto is predominantly used in the water-soluble (nor-bixin) form as a colouring for hard cheeses. Usage in margarine is another important outlet in the UK.
Imports by the rest of the worldare estimated as up to 1,000 tonnes in seed equivalents, of which Eastern Europe accounted for over half prior to 1990. Within Latin America, there is a substantial volume of regional trade where annatto is employed in various food applications, including use as a condiment.
The market trend in developed countries has been for a progressive increase in imports of extracts and for more stringent quality requirements (bixin content) for imported seed. Modest rather than dramatic growth in consumption may be expected in Japan and North America. In Western Europe, however, the future is dependent upon whether or not the European Community's regulatory authorities demand that very costly toxicological testing be undertaken on bixin and nor-bixin.
Production and Exports
Annatto has been traditionally grown in many Latin American and Caribbean countries, and over the past century it has achieved significance as a crop in a large number of African and Asian countries. However, there are only three major producers: Peru and Kenya, which are the major world exporters; and Brazil which is a net importer. Small volume producers and exporters include the Dominican Republic, Colombia, Ecuador, Jamaica, Costa Rica and Guatemala in the Western Hemisphere; Côte d'Ivoire and Angola in Africa; and India, Sri Lanka, Thailand and the Philippines in Asia.
Table 5: Approximate volumes of recent annual world exports
tonnes, in seed equivalents
Peru
Kenya
All others
Source: Natural Resources Institute (NRI) estimates.
In Peru, production of annatto is export-oriented and is very heavily dependent upon the harvesting of wild trees. Annual crop levels vary considerably, partly because the annatto harvest overlaps with that of coffee and also from price responsiveness. Extraction prior to export commenced on a small scale around 1980 and had developed by the early 1990s to take in over half the annual crop. Several multinational companies, based in the USA and Western Europe -Peru's traditional major markets- have established processing factories in Lima and the production and marketing are closely integrated.
Annatto is a low input, cultivated crop in some of the coastal districts of Kenya. All seed is purchased by a parastatal and the bulk is then resold to the sole extractor firm which exports to Japan under long-term contract arrangements. Owing to low farm-gate prices in recent years, seed production has fallen below the processing requirement.
By contrast, the large production of Brazil is to meet the local market demand which consumes several thousand tonnes annually. Supplies are mainly dependent upon small farmers; many large farmers were encouraged to enter into production in the mid- to late 1980s on the expectation of a major growth in world demand but withdrew upon failing to reach price expectations.
Qualities and Prices
There are no published standard specifications for annatto seed or its extract, other than the cleanliness requirements of the American Spice Trade Association (ASTA). Quality, therefore, is defined by the purchaser against in-house standards.
For seed, the content of moisture (maximum acceptable, 10%) and of extraneous matter is a quality consideration. However, the most important quality criterion is the content of bixin and the price fetched is broadly related to this pigment figure. A typical figure for "total bixinoids", expressed as bixin, is 2% on an "as received" basis ? anything greater than this is regarded as better than average and anything less as being inferior quality. Values of 2.5 to 3.5% probably represent the upper range of bixin content in traded seed. Where purchases of seed are made on a spot basis there is usually no adjustment in price made to take account of differences between sample and consignment values for bixin content. If a producer can show the ability to offer consistently good seed in terms of bixin content, then this will undoubtedly work in his favour in negotiating a price.
While some intrinsic differences in bixin content according to the origin of the seed are likely, there is an absence of documented data and it is not possible to rank producing countries in terms of the quality of their seed. Trade opinion is contradictory with regard to Peruvian vs Kenyan seed quality. However, the view seems to be shared that Indian seed is of relatively poor quality.
Table 6: Prices of Peruvian annatto seed, together with the export volumes, 1984-90
Quantity (tonnes) 1,500 1,300 1,200 650 1,450 1,650 1,500
Unit value
(US$/tonne, FOB)
Source: Peruvian Government export statistics.
Shortages of Peruvian seed in 1985 and 1986, brought about by a combination of poor harvests and increasing local demand by extract manufacturers, led to sharply increased prices of seed in 1986 and 1987. World prices declined subsequently as supplies of seed improved. There has been an upward movement in seed prices in the more recent period, partly as a result of the poor Kenyan crop. A landed UK price of US$ 800-1,000 per tonne of seed was quoted by one trade source in mid-1992 for a bixin content of 3% (i.e., top quality).
Annatto extracts entering trade consist of crude extracts in the form of water-soluble powders or pastes (of nor-bixin, containing 20-40% pigments), oil solutions, or bixin concentrates or more highly purified forms of bixin. Bixin crystals- essentially pure bixin- are available from Peru. Reliable price data for extracts are not readily available but as a guide to relative values, in 1988, when seed fetched ca US$ 1,500/tonne, bixin powder was valued at ca US$ 1,000/tonne/1% bixin, i.e., US$ 30,000/tonne for a 30% extract. Bixin crystals were valued at US$ 107,000/tonne.
Marketing Structures and Procedures
Annatto seed is mainly purchased direct from source by the major processors in the consumer centres. Very little trade is conducted through intermediate brokers or dealers. Shipments are made in containers packed entirely with the seed; a 6-m container will take about 18 tonnes. Since the pigment content of the seed deteriorates on multiple handling and from prolonged storage, shipments normally are made immediately after the harvest season ends.
Export of annatto extracts is mainly made directly to the major users but there is some trade with smaller companies which make up formulations for further onward sale. In Peru, several multinational companies have bought local processing operations and their exports are shipped to their food factories.
Prospects for New Suppliers
While there is some uncertainty over trends in usage levels of annatto in the European Community, world demand is expected to remain substantial. This, combined with recent supply problems in Kenya, suggests that prospects exist in the medium term for sales of modest quantities of seed by new sources, provided that its quality is consistent and sufficiently high (preferably a minimum of 2.4% bixin content).
In the longer term, the scale of imports by the major consumer countries of annatto seed is expected to decline further in favour of extracts. Seed producers without domestic extraction industries might then be faced with the decision of investment in processing facilities or of export to other growing countries which have established factories and a seed supply problem.
Consumption might increase in the longer term within some of the more populous developing countries which are expanding their processed food industries. If this materialises, it would provide an alternative to the developed country markets.
Cultivation, Harvesting and Primary Processing
Climate and Soil Requirements
Bixa orellana can adapt to a wide range of conditions in the tropics and in the frost-free sub-tropics. It thrives best at temperatures between 20-26-C in areas with an annual rainfall of 1,250-2,000 mm, preferably well distributed but with a dry season for seed ripening. Nutritional requirements are not high and the tree can be grown on a variety of soil types, provided that drainage is good.
Production Systems
In Peru, the bulk of the crop is obtained from harvesting wild trees, while Kenya, the other major export-oriented producer, has an extensive system of informal cultivation. Elsewhere, both mixed cropping (with other cash crops and food staples) and intensive, mono-crop plantation systems are practised. The latter involves spacings of 3 m x 3 m or 4 m x 4 m, the choice being dependent on soil conditions and the intrinsic growth characteristics of the planting stock. Intercropping can be carried out on plantations in the first year and this assists suppression of weeds.
Annatto fits well into an agroforestry system, provided that it is not shaded by other large trees; an open sunny position is necessary for good performance.
Propagation
Cuttings may be employed for propagation and this approach is preferable for initial multiplication if elite material, possessing a good combination of high seed yields and seed pigment contents, is available. Propagation is more commonly undertaken with seed, either sown directly in the field or raised in a nursery, but this can result in high variability between plants.
Husbandry
Artificial fertiliser application is not necessary on soils of medium fertility and, other than weed control in the first year, husbandry requirements are not demanding. The most important operation is pruning in order to produce a canopy which is easy to harvest (some varieties can grow untended to over 5 m in height) and to prevent disease entering broken branches. Shaping is practised at the end of the first year and pruning of branch ends is done after every harvest.
Harvesting
Under favourable conditions, the first harvest is obtained 18 months after field planting. Seed capsules appear 30 days after flowering and ripen over a further 1-2 months; their colour varies from green to deep red. Seed capsule production and harvesting patterns vary according to local climatic conditions. Hot, dry conditions compress the season, while in Kenya harvesting occurs over 7 months with two peak bearing periods.
Seed capsules should be harvested when they commence to split open but before there is a risk of rain or sunlight damage to the seeds and loss by natural dispersal. The cluster of ripe capsules at the end of a branch is removed with a knife or secateurs by cutting above the first node.
Seed Yields
Seed yields reach their peak when the trees are 4 to 5 years of age and a decline usually does not become evident until around 12 years. Productivity can continue for up to 20 years.
Considerable variability is encountered in seed yields and this is influenced by spacing, growing conditions, management practices and the variety (which also has a marked effect on the pigment content). Yields of dried seed are reported to range from 500 kg to 2,500 kg/ha/year for established plantations with 900 to 1,500 kg/ha/year being the most common. For individual trees, the dried seed yield may vary between 0.5 to 4 kg per year.
Post-Harvest Treatment of Seeds on Farm
Seed capsules must be dried as quickly as possible to prevent mould formation and seed germination. This should aim at giving a seed moisture content of 7 to 10%; overdrying results in a loss of the pigment. Over-mature, mouldy and insect-damaged capsules are removed prior to commencing the drying operation.
Traditional sun-drying of the capsules takes 3 to 10 days. Mats or concrete barbecues should be used, with frequent turning and protection from dew at night. Artificial driers, either solar or solid fuel types, have been introduced in some producing areas to speed the process and to reduce spoilage at peak harvest or during wet periods. Temperatures of 55-60 C&deg; are recommended for artificial drying and over-drying should be avoided.
The traditional method of obtaining the seed is to beat the dried capsule with a stick on the ground or in a bag. Each capsule may contain, according to the variety, between 10 to 50 seeds which are distributed between two valves. Extraneous matter is therefore removed by sieving and winnowing but care must be taken to avoid abrasion and loss of the valuable pigmented seed coat.
Various designs of machines have been developed to achieve capsule breaking, sieving and winnowing in large-scale operations.
Immediately on completion of the cleaning step, seeds must be bagged to prevent inadvertent contamination and pigment degradation by exposure to light. Sale of the crop should be made as soon as possible since the pigments deteriorate on storage.
Exporter Handling of Seeds
Exporter operations with seed involve redrying, when necessary, and mechanical cleaning (sieving and aspiration) and bagging. At all stages care must be taken to avoid abrasion damage to the seed and the period between purchase and shipment is kept as short as possible to prevent deterioration in the pigment content.
Clean double jute or hessian bags (50-70 kg capacity) are employed for export, and ocean shipment is carried out in containers which are preferably ventilated types.
Added-Value Processing to Extracts
Water-Soluble Products
The most commonly emplo