<title>Farmer-first approaches to communication:a case study from the Philippines. Farmer - First approach to communication: a case study from the Philippines</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
PREFACE
This case study, like others in the series produced by the Communication for Development Service of FAO's Research, Extension and Training Division, is intended to shed light on noteworthy examples concerning the use of communication to support rural development.
In this instance the setting is the Philippines, a country composed of 7 107 islands in South East Asia.
The case study derives from a "pure" development support communication project carried out over a period of three years, involving five of the country's 13 agricultural regions.
The project was implemented by the Applied Communication Division (ACD) of the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) and five of its Regional Applied Communication Offices (RACOs).
Once staff were trained, and equipment inventories upgraded, the over-riding goal was to take the ACD and the participating RACOs through prototype exercises in community-based technology transfer. This involved bottom-up needs assessment through rapid rural appraisals, key informant panels, and knowledge / attitude / practice surveys, as diagnostic tools for the setting of key priorities for technology transfer in five, carefully selected pilot-sites.
A variety of multi-channel communication approaches were then implemented in working toward each community's development objectives. To accelerate this process, a new lead-medium in the form of community audio-tower systems was pioneered by the project. How effective they were, the lessons learned along the way and challenges for the road ahead form the basis for this monograph.
The author, Dr Gary Coldevin of Concordia University, Montreal, wishes to acknowledge and commend all those who formed part of the team in the breaking of new ground as the project unfolded.
These included the special DSC section in ACD formed to guide and monitor the national coordination of the project, and the RAC O coordinators and staff in the five participating regions.
Special acknowledgments are extended to:
* Mr Ricardo Ramirez, Communication for Development, FAO, for technical backstopping
* Dr Teresa Stuart, Institute for Development Communication, University of the Philippines, Los Banos, who served as national consultant for FAO
* Dr Nora Quebral, national DSC process evaluation specialist
* and to the members of the Community Broadcast Associations formed in each of the five pilot-barangays who so quickly realized the potential of the powerful new medium under their control.
ABBREVIATIONS
ACD
Applied Communication Division
AKAP
Awareness, knowledge, attitudes, practices
ASEAN
Association of South East Asia Nations
CATS
Community audio tower system
CBA
Community Broadcast Association
DA
Department of Agriculture
DSC
Development Support Communication
IDC
Institute for Development Communication
IPM
Integrated pest management
KIPs
Key informant panels
LGU
Local Government Unit
NARRDN
National Agriculture and Natural Resources Research and Development Network
NIC
Newly-industrialized country
NPA
New People's Army
PCARRD
Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development
RACO
Regional Applied Communication Office
PRAs
Participatory rural appraisals
R & D
Research and development
RRAs
Rapid rural appraisals
SoA
School on the Air
UPLB
University of the Philippines at Los Banos
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
Barangay
A village which is recognised as the lowest administrative unit of the local government
Sitio
A sub-division of a village
Porok
A neighbourhood group in a village or town
Jeepney
A jeep converted into a vehicle for public transport
BACKGROUND
THE CURRENT AGRICULTURAL SCENE
Agriculture continues to be the dominant sector in the Philippine economy, accounting for 23 percent of gross national product, generating more than 25 percent of export revenues and employing about 50 percent of the labour force. Two thirds of the country's estimated 69 million people in 1994 were rural based and directly or indirectly dependent upon agriculture for their livelihood.
Notwithstanding its potential, agricultural output per capita declined in the 1980's and remained relatively stagnant during the early 1990's.
A series of natural disasters including typhoons (average of 21 per year with a high of 37 during 1993), earthquakes, and the Mt. Pinatubo eruption in 1991, have contributed to weakening productivity.
So too has political instability in the form of Muslim secessionist groups in the south and communist guerrilla armies still operating in pockets throughout the country.
A population growth rate of about 2.4 percent per annum, resulting in a relatively short "doubling" time of 29 years, has also been a major obstacle to increasing supply over demand.
When Corazon Aquino was democratically elected President in 1987, her emphasis was directed toward promoting the lot of the small farmer, who, taken as a group, constituted almost two-thirds of the 60 percent of the population falling under the poverty line. During her administration, the rallying cry became "pro-poor" with a number of initiatives taken to support rural improvement (for example, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme, or CARP, to redistribute land and allow small farmers to become land owners).
Currently, under President Ramos who came to power in 1992, the emphasis has shifted considerably with the initiation of an ambitious programme to bring the nation up to newly industrialized country (NIC) status by the year 2000.
As part of the "Philippines 2000" vision is a Medium-Term Agricultural Development Plan which calls for intensified production of rice, corn, vegetables and other commercial viable export crops in designated key production areas. It is estimated that 1.3 million hectares, or about 10 percent of the total area under cultivation, will be affected by the plan. The vast majority of farmers, who on average operate farms of less than 1.5 hectares, are largely unaffected by the plan and remain the most difficult to serve.
During the latter part of Aquino's regime, a congressional act was passed in which extension services were devolved from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior and Local Government.
Under the banner of the new Local Government Code, the full implementation of this act came into effect during April 1993. In practice this has meant that extension is now directed out of Local Government Units (LGUs) offices at the Provincial and Municipal levels.
Research, however, has remained within the Department of Agriculture at national and regional offices. This has tended to further exacerbate an already weak linkage between research and extension - and to virtually leave the farmer out of the continuum. The common result has been "a very poor fit between the technology that farmers need and the technology that is generated and hoped to be transferred" (FAO, 1994, p.20).
The timing for a farmer-first communication project designed to enhance the farmers' participation in the diagnosing of critical problems requiring technology solutions on the one hand, and as a major component in bringing back research-based training packages to rural communities on the other, was thus opportune.
DSC IN THE PHILIPPINES
The Philippines has been a particularly active player in the development support communication (DSC) scene over the past three decades, from both academic and field project perspectives.
DSC as a discipline, for example, has been taught at the University of the Philippines at Los Banos (UPLB) since 1954. Currently, the Institute for Development Communication (IDC) at UPLB has a twenty member faculty corps with more than 300 students spread throughout its undergraduate, Masters and Ph.D. programmes. IDC also serves as a DSC training centre for the Southeast Asian region.
And since 1967, through its collaboration with Radio DZLB, the rural educational radio station of UPLB, IDC has accumulated a variety of field experience with projects ranging from support for rural youth and 4H clubs to schools on-the-air covering topics spanning improved farming techniques to maternal and child care (Librero, 1990).
Communication campaigns have been widely used in the Philippines to promote a variety of development themes including health, nutrition, population issues and agriculture. Perhaps the best known of these, the "Masagana 99" campaign during 1973, catapulted the country's farmers toward adopting high yielding rice cultivation and in effect, over the space of three years, moved the nation from a net rice importer to meet domestic requirements to becoming an exporter of its excess harvest (FAO, 1985).
Another major boost to the applied use of the discipline has been the gradual building up of, and reliance on, DSC within the National Agricultural and Resources Research and Development Network (NARRDN) which comprises research centres, government agencies, and state colleges and universities.
NARRDN was created in 1975 by the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCARRD), one of five councils under the Department of Science and Technology. PCARRD's specific mandate is to develop, coordinate and monitor the national research and development programme in agriculture and natural resources.
It also serves as a national repository of research information through its Scientific Literature Service. And through PCARRD's central Applied Communication Division (ACD) outreach programme, a variety of publications are generated on its concentrated commodity areas, which currently number 32.
The bottom line of PCARRD's national mandate thus is the generation of information and technologies and their effective communication to the farmer level to ultimately improve farm productivity, income and general welfare (Stuart, 1993).
To better fulfil its role, PCARRD, from its base in Los Banos, has organised the over one hundred active research and development nodes in the NARRDN into 13 research and development (R & D) consortia and two research centres spanning the country's 13 geopolitical regions.
Within each consortium informal networks of regional government and NGO agencies are bound together through memoranda of agreement directed toward collaboration in managing an integrated research and development programme and in the sharing of resources.
A further innovative approach introduced by PCARRD within each consortium has been the organising of a sub-network of Regional Applied Communication Offices (RACOs), consisting of inter-agency communication specialists whose function is to provide communication support for field agents of the participating government departments and NGOs. The map above shows the distribution of RACOs in the country and the lead agency in each.
Network of regional applied communication offices in the Philippines
At the outset, in practice, the RACOs were to act as the development outposts of PCARRD through repackaging of ACD print materials, which presently consist of 13 publication series, into more user-friendly and localized communication formats for field workers and farmers.
Over time, photography and audio production capacities were added at both ACD and the regional consortia. As well, RACOs led by the Department of Agriculture were equipped with "agri-vans" for film and video showings at the village level.
Prior to the late 1980's, however, most operations were badly in need of equipment upgrading, particularly in video production capability, and concomitant staff training.
CONTEXT FOR DSC PROJECT
The roster of audio-visual production equipment was increased in Regions 1, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 12 through a USAID project during 1988-90. Following the USAID initiative, PCARRD began to actively seek further technical assistance for an additional five regions, 2, 4, 6, 9, and 11.
FAO, through UNDP funding support, was approached and the three year project "DSC for Selected Agricultural Technology Transfer Projects" was formally approved during late 1990.
The implementation framework for the project was built around four basic objectives:
1. To better coordinate communication activities among, and provide more effective linkages between, member agencies of NARRDN;
2. To strengthen the multimedia production capacity of PCARRD's Applied Communication Division outreach programme in preparing DSC materials and packaging recommended technologies for direct use as field agent support or for local adaptation by RACOs;
3. To improve the ability of RACOs to plan, produce, monitor and evaluate communication materials and strategies in support of government extension and NGO field activities;
4. To build up an operational capacity within the five participating RACOs to effectively assist agricultural extension and NGO field agents in conducting pilot technology transfer projects intended to serve as prototypes for expansion into longer term programmes.
As originally conceived, the four objectives constituted logical building blocks wherein the successful completion of one allowed for the development of the next.
In line with this thinking, the first 18 months of the project were primarily taken up with objectives one through three and the preparation of the RACOs, with ACD support, to undertake the pilot technology transfer projects.
Highlights of this period included the conducting of 11 in-country training workshops, ranging from a kick-off "Planning, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of DSC Technology Transfer" workshop coordinated by the UNDP's DTCP (Development Training and Communication Planning) staff in Manila, through audio-visual, video, community broadcasting, and desk-top production skills refinement to courses in community organising, processing documentation, training methods, information system development, and development journalism.
Following the completion of preparatory training, three additional workshops were conducted as the project progressed:
an on-site message design and channel strategy exercise to set the framework for the pilot-site campaigns, and midterm and summative evaluation workshops.
As well, RACO coordinators from the five principal consortia and senior staff from ACD undertook a three week ASEAN Region study tour for on-site observation and discussions with colleagues in development communication and extension media operations in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore.
Two fellowships were provided, one to the Director of ACD to attend a workshop on agricultural knowledge information systems (AKIS) at Wageningen Agricultural University in Holland, and the other to the ACD Area Coordinator for a summer workshop in DSC Planning at Cornell University in the USA.
Upon their return to PCARRD, "echo" workshops, or a summary of information acquired and skills learned, were provided to ACD staff.
Primary equipment purchases concentrated on upgrading photography, audio and desk-top publishing capability for both ACD and the five project RACOs; as well, professional video production and editing equipment (Super VHS) was installed within ACD with video production capability only being provided at the RACO level.
The rationale for this decision was that ACD would provide editing support to regional field productions. Other activities of note included the setting up of a national steering committee to provide policy guidelines to the project, quarterly meetings among ACD senior staff and RACO coordinators, an annual review wherein project activities were reported to representatives of all RACOs in the country, and a quarterly newsletter featuring project activities and accomplishments which was distributed to all members of NARRDN.
DSC Newslink quarterly publication provided regional updates throughout the project.
DSC PROCESS MODEL
The on-site workshop to set the communication objectives and delivery strategies for technology transfer support in the five pilot areas kicked-off the second year of the project.
At this juncture the DSC Process Model developed by the author for FAO was introduced and explained in detail. The chart on page 10 shows the major features of the model which was originally developed by FAO in Sierra Leone during 1984 (Coldevin, 1986) and subsequently refined in preparation for a series of agricultural communication campaigns in Lesotho during 1987 and 1988 (FAO, 1990).
While the process illustrated consists of a checklist of 11 principle operational steps or stages, detailed DSC action plans for field implementation can easily run into 40 to 50 specific activities.
As originally envisaged, the model can apply equally to top down or "push" strategies for technology transfer as well as to participatory, "demand" or "pull" approaches initiated at the farmer level.
It is also flexible enough to apply to intense, short-term communication campaigns and as a vehicle for systematic planning of sustained, longer term DSC programmes.
In the current example, the process model was essentially applied to information, motivation and training materials conforming to the bottom-up, farmer first approach, consistent with FAO's emphasis on audience involvement from the outset.
DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT COMMUNICATION PROCESS MODEL
Steps:
Key Points:
FRONT END ANALYSIS
l. Needs assessment
Establish major need-based technologies for potential transfer through a variety of methods beginning with rapid rural appraisal and proceeding to participatory community problem identification through key informant panels and elaboration of "problem trees". Consultation with field specialists and analysis of reports.
2. Development /
Project objectives
Select key development or project objectives to be addressed and prioritize technologies for transfer. Determine if communication support is needed. Analyse whether gap between existing and desired situation is resource-based (supplies and materials), or communication based (information, motivation, training) or both.
3. Situation analysis
Assess existing communication resources available, media access and preferred channels of target groups. Determine if technology transfer inputs are readily accessible.
SUPPORT COMMUNICATION PROCESS
4. Target audience analysis
Refer to existing documentation and secondary data. Conduct KAP (knowledge, attitudes, practices) survey and assess current level of income derived from technology(ies) to be transferred. Focus-group interviews may also be useful for providing qualitative data.
5. Setting DSC objectives
Select only tasks that are amenable to solution through communication. Specify objectives in terms of type of change expected from target audience(s), under what conditions the activities will take place, and what criteria will be used to measure success.
6. Message design & channel strategy
Break down content into modules or units to address gaps identified in baseline survey. Develop message design approaches and delivery mix in terms of lead and support channels (multimedia materials and interpersonal communication; individual, group or mass audience - or all three).
7. Preparation & pre- testing of prototype materials
Pre-test portions of materials under development with samples of target audience(s) for attention-getting power, comprehensibility, credibility and persuasiveness. Revise materials where warranted and re-test.
8. Final production of multimedia materials
Produce materials targeted to seasonal variation in farmers' needs. Ensure that channel strategy is systematically orchestrated to promote repetition of key messages.
9. Delivery & monitoring
Check for delivery-system constraints such as viewing and listening conditions and dependability of equipment used. Monitor how well content of materials is received and where practical, "mid-course" changes might be made to improve the system. Check appropriateness of channels selected and whether they are mutually reinforcing. Monitor feedback systems between target audience(s), field agents and media producers.
10. Summative or impact evaluation
Measure impact of DSC strategy through KAP summative evaluation procedures as well as increased productivity and incomes. Use results as input for future production decisions and channel strategies.
11. Review & replanning
Plan for continuity, adjustment and adaptation to changing audiences, project needs and opportunities.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
THE DSC PROCESS MODEL IN ACTION
PILOT SITE SELECTION
Along with the preparatory training, equipment installation, management and monitoring procedures, and facilitation of communication between ACD and the five RACOs, the selection of project sites proceeded apace.
Administratively, the Philippines is divided into regions, provinces, municipalities, barangays, porous, and sitios. Our basic unit for development was at the barangay or community level with each RACO going through a rigorous process of selecting one barangay in their region for project concentration according to pre-set criteria.
Prominent among the criteria used were the following:
* The barangay should be located in a depressed area with the income of most of its inhabitants falling under the poverty line and hence within the "pro-poor" development emphasis of the Aquino government;
* It should be readily accessible by the RACO to allow for frequent media presentations and extension support;
* There should be an active farmers' organization or cooperative and/or an active NGO programme;
* A willingness to participate on the part of the local government and agricultural extension should be ensured;
* There should be untapped economic potential present in the barangay and availability of local resources for technologies selected for transfer;
* A favourable peace and order situation should prevail.
Selection of pilot-sites was made according to specific criteria
NEEDS ASSESSMENT
With the site selection completed near the end of the first year of project implementation, the "front end" analysis of the model began in earnest.
First, in each barangay "rapid rural appraisals" (RRAs), following guidelines suggested by Lightfoot et al (1989), were conducted by an interdisciplinary team of about eight people (i.e., RACO staff, agricultural extensionists, subject matter specialists and knowledgeable community members), to provide descriptive information through transects of agro-ecological zones, maps of land use, land tenure, principal agricultural enterprises and other income generating activities, location of houses, cooperatives and other centres of agricultural produce transformation, market availability, social groupings (such as linguistic, religious, racial) and gender differentiation.
At the end of this process blue prints in the form of enterprise, social, topography and hydrology maps and a barangay transect were placed in each project site office for easy reference.
Community participation was vital in RRA mapping
Secondly, "key informant panels" (KIPs) of between 10 to 15 members were organised based on identification of suitable participants during the RRAs.
The purpose of this exercise was to elaborate and discuss priority problems faced by each community, to trace the causes of the problems, and then to illustrate the process through a "problem tree" displayed on a billboard near the barangay office.
Thus the project developed, the problem tree analysis helped set an agenda for action by the community and participating government agencies and NGOs. In the case of the FAO project, the primary agricultural problems were rank ordered in terms of priority followed by the identification and available inventory of technologies which might be transferred to solve the problems.
An important consideration in this priority ranking was that the technologies selected should represent the needs and aspirations of a critical mass of the agricultural operators in the community. A situational analysis also determined the potential communication resources which might be used.
Key informant panels conduct a problem tree analysis
TARGET AUDIENCE ANALYSIS
The foregoing needs assessment activities were intended as a pre-requisite to the undertaking of detailed AKAP (awareness -knowledge-attitudes-practices) baseline surveys in each community.
In essence, the qualitative data gleaned from the RRAs and KIPs set the stage for more focused attention on awareness and knowledge levels of, attitudes / motivations toward, practices of, and productivity and income derived from, the priority technologies selected for transfer by each.
The combined use of the RRAs and KIPs led to the identification of farmers' priorities and therefore avoided the need for a more general needs assessment. Like most surveys of this kind, the AKAP's primary purposes were to
1) identify knowledge and awareness gaps and address them during media production, and
2) provide a pre-project reference point for later comparison or impact studies to quantitatively assess how well the project had achieved its objectives.
Key technologies for transfer included improved varieties and recommended cultivation techniques for rice, mangos, bananas and coconuts as well as Tilapia.
In each case, the base-line survey included a preliminary section on demographic characteristics of each barangay sample, existing productivity and income levels derived from the technologies to be promoted, detailed AKAP indices pertinent to each technology, and information on communication channel access, utilization, and perceptions of the most useful of all available sources of information, including agricultural extension and NGO field workers.
An additional innovation in the knowledge section was that each interviewer was trained to judge, while conducting an interview with a farmer at home or in the field whether his or her response to a particular question could be rated as high, medium or low in terms of accuracy.
This procedure greatly reduced the tabulation time for rendering tables and graphs describing where content emphasis should be placed, such as on low to medium knowledge scores on the technology topics to be transferred.
Baseline AKAP interviews with farmers provided benchmark quantitative data for setting communication objectives, campaign message design assessment
All questionnaires were pre-tested for ambiguity and redundancy and streamlined for between 30 to 45 minutes administration time in the field.
Overall, the field interviews were given by the study leader assigned to each project site, RACO staff, and agriculture extension workers assigned to the area.
Since the number of farmers in each project site was relatively small (approximately 200 to 250 ), for the most part complete sampling was recommended to allow for a substantial summative evaluation resampling ratio of about 60 percent.
This in turn would allow sufficient cell sizes for cross tabulation of a number of dependent indices (such as awareness, knowledge, practices, income levels) and independent variables (sex, age, education level, size of land holdings, income levels, and participation in media presentations and on-site demonstrations by extension agents, etc.) and testing for statistically significant differences between base-line and post-campaign surveys.
Wherever possible, the majority of RACOs also included a sample from a non-project site to allow for a "control community" with which to compare the effects of the DSC media strategies on the pilot sites.
SETTING DSC OBJECTIVES
Since this was a first at carrying out a complete DSC process, only parts of which the ACD and RACOs had experienced previously (for the most part producing materials with limited prior audience analysis and input, and no evaluation of media effects), the communication objectives were primarily concentrated on maximum increases in awareness, knowledge and adoption or modification of the recommended technologies.
No specific ceilings were established but it was generally assumed that awareness levels should top out at least 80 percent or better and that key knowledge indicators and practice changes should demonstrate a statistically significant change between bench mark and post-campaign surveys.
No instruments were developed to generate quantifiable data on attitudes toward the technologies promoted since it is very difficult to construct reliable attitudinal scales which will yield consistent results over fame. Rather, these were drawn out and assessed through focus group discussion methods.
MESSAGE DESIGN, CHANNEL STRATEGY AND DELIVERY
A common dilemma to designers of both DSC and distance education is to choose a "lead" medium and then to provide a "wrap-around" variety of reinforcement or support media: the media-mix.
In the case of distance education, the lead medium of choice has been print with radio or audio-cassettes and television or video typically providing the back-up or support function, along with access to tutors and learning resource centres.
Increasingly, conferencing capability is being introduced, for the most part audio or audio-graphics, with video conferencing on the horizon as channel compression makes distribution by satellites more feasible.
DSC rural audiences in developing countries, however, in the face of widespread illiteracy tend to rely more on audiovisual channels, with the latter supported minimally with simple print.
Certainly, with the emphasis on "pro-poor" in the current project, the bulk of the farming population was targeted at the primary education level and minimal literacy skills.
Community audio tower
With the foregoing criteria in mind, while keeping in view a multimedia campaign type of communication strategy, the search for a lead medium centred on the use of radio versus video.
Radio was the most serious contender since all RACOs were producing a regular half-hour weekly agricultural programme, with broadcasts reaching into the project barangays. Its main disadvantage was that it catered to a regional audience and hence could not target broadcasts exclusively to address the specific concerns of each project site.
On the other hand, since video production equipment had been provided to each region, video had the advantage of "localizing" technology concerns unique to each project site. Its major constraint was the turn-around time for editing at ACD's studios in Los Banos, which would preclude a frequent lead-medium presence in the communities.
For these and other reasons, it was decided to introduce a novel communication approach to the Philippines, one borrowed from Thailand, namely the community audio-tower system (CATS).
The Philippine CATS differed from the Thai model, however, in two important aspects.
The first was that the Thai system uses a variety of speaker-tower arrangements with more than one speaker set-up location per community, including powerline poles. The Philippine project used only one tower with four 100-watt speakers located near the project site office, which was often the barangay captain's headquarters.
Using this configuration, the range of clear amplification was between 1.5 and 2 kilometres. In sections of the communities beyond this range, audio-cassette listening groups were set up using the same materials transmitted through the CATS.
The audio-towers were installed by the barangays with guidance provided by the ACD. As well, production and transmission studios were constructed through community resources.
CATS studio featured a Karaoke system
Box 1 Comparisons of CATS versus low power AM or FM community radio
The World Association of Community Radio Broad casters (AMARC) defines a community radio station as one that "responds to the needs of the community it serves and that contributes to its development in a progressive manner promoting social change."
It promotes the democratisation of communication by facilitating community participation in communication". While this definition is intended to delineate an AM or FM community radio station, it also applies admirably to the method in which CATS is used in the Philippines.
Basically the Philippine CATS consists of a simple recording / playback studio, a 500-watt amplifier and a four-speaker system mounted on a tower.
Central to this configuration is a Karaoke system which can be used for both studio operations and as a mobile community resource for meetings and entertainment.
While all basic equipment was supplied by the project, averaging about US$2 000, studi