<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry No 05 - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Edible nuts </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Forests offer a variety of edible products, of which edible nuts form a distinct group.
Nuts are among the most nutritionally concentrated of human foods and are an important food source for rural communities and forest dwellers. While some of the edible nuts support subsistence, others are of considerable commercial importance.
However, the role and importance of edible nuts as a Non-Wood Forest Product is not adequately recognized or appreciated. An attempt is made here to address this deficiency.
The document deals with a representative selection of major edible nut producing plants, minor edible nut producing plants, and potential edible nut producing plants. The purpose is to bring the importance of edible nuts into sharp focus, to highlight their immense potential, to encourage further studies and research relating to edible nuts and to promote their development.
The draft of this publication was prepared by G.E. Wickens, previously of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (UK), and it benefitted from the detailed comments of G. Blaak, E.H. Sène and P. Vantomme. Laura Russo undertook light editing of the text and organized the illustrations. Format editing and proof reading was done by Elisa Rubini. Overall guidance and supervision for the preparation and publication of the document was provided by C. Chandrasekharan, Chief of the Non-Wood Products and Energy Branch. I wish to express my thanks to all of them.
I have great pleasure in releasing this valuable publication and feel confident that it will provide necessary impetus for positive action.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
abscision scar adhesion scar
accrescent inflated
achene 1-seeded, coriaceous (q.v.) fruit
acuminate (of a leaf) apex tapering gradually or abruptly into a narrow point
acute pointed
adaxial (of a leaf) upper surface
adventitious roots roots arising from an organ other than the root
aflatoxins group of secondary metabolites produced by Aspergillus spp.
commonly growing on stored food and often highly toxic
alternate (of leaves) inserted at different levels along the stem or branch, i.e., not opposite
androecium male component, i.e., stamens (q.v.) of an angiosperm flower
annual plant completing its life cycle within a year
apetalous without petals
aril (of a seed) an appendage covering or partly enclosing the seed and arising from
the funicle (q.v.)
armed equipped with spines
axil the angle between the leaf and branch
axillary arising from the axil (q.v.)
beaked terminating gradually in a hard, long, straight point
berry a juicy fruit with seeds immersed in pulp
bipinnate (of a leaf) where the primary divisions of a leaf (leaflets) of a pinnate leaf (q.v.)
are themselves pinnate
bony hard and very close textured and only cut with difficulty
bract a small leaf subtending a flower or flower stalk
bur, burr a rough, prickly or spiny husk (q.v.), also commonly applied to the
entire fruit
buttress a plank-like outgrowth of the lower trunk and providing support
caducous falling early
calcifuge a plant that grows in calcium deficient soils
calyx collective term for the sepals (q.v.)
carpel a simple pistil formed by a fruit-leaf folded lengthwise and united by
its edges (suture, q.v.), or one of several such united to form the
ovary
cartilaginous flexible but firm and tough
cathartic purgative
catkin a closely packed, bracteate, pendulous spike (q.v.), usually composed
of small, inconspicuous unisexual flowers
chartaceous papery
compound leaf leaf divided to the midrib or petiole to form leaflets (q.v.)
coriaceous leathery
corm a short, swollen, perennating, underground stem
corolla collective term for the petals (q.v.)
cotyledon first leaf or leaves of the angiosperm embryo
cupule cup-shaped structure partially or completely enclosing the fruit in the
Fagaceae formed from the fused extensions of the pedicel (q.v.)
cyme a type of inflorescence (q.v.) in which each axis ends in a flower
cypsela a fruit similar to an achene (q.v.) but develops from an inferior ovary
and consequently includes non-carpellary tissue. Typical of the
Compositae, where the fruit is surrounded by hairs, pappus, (q.v.),
derived from the calyx
deciduous eventually falling; not evergreen
dehiscent opening spontaneously when ripe
determinate growth ending in a bud
dioecious with unisexual flowers (c.f. monoecious)
disc a circular enlargement of the receptacle (q.v.)
dorsal lower surface, side facing away from the main axis
drupe a fleshy, indehiscent fruit in which the seed or seeds are surrounded by
a hardened, sclerochymatous endocarp (q.v.)
dry not fleshy
ellipsoid an elliptic solid
elliptic oval shaped, broadest in the middle
endocarp innermost layer of the pericarp (q.v.)
endosperm the nutritive material stored within the seed
epicarp see exocarp
etiology the study of the casual agents of a disease
exocarp the outer layer of the pericarp (q.v.)
exfoliate peeling off
fan palm palm with fan or wedge-shaped leaves
fastigiate a tree in which the branches grow almost vertically
feather palm palm with pinnate leaves
FOB free on board
foliate leaves divided into leaflets (q.v.)
follicle a pod (q.v.) consisting of a single carpel (q.v.) usually opening along
the inner suture (q.v.) to which the seeds are attached
funicle the stalk attaching the ovule and later the seed to the ovary wall
gametophyte the haploid generation in the life-cycle of a plant
geocarpic where the fruit are pushed into the soil by the gynophore (q.v.) and
mature
glabrescent becoming glabrous (q.v.) or nearly so
glabrous devoid of hairs
gourd fruits of the Curcurbitaceae with a hard rind (c.f. pepo)
gynoecium female component, i.e., carpels (q.v.), of an angiosperm flower
gynophore an extension of the receptacle (q.v.) which bears the ovary (q.v.)
hapaxanthic (palms) a plant which flowers only once and then dies (c.f. pleonanthic)
hastula a small flange of tissue at the junction of lamina (q.v.) and petiole
(q.v.) of most palm leaves
haustorium a nutrient absorbing organ, often produced by a plant parasite
hermaphrodite male and female organs present in the same flower
herbaceous soft, not hard or woody
hull lay term for skin of kernel
husk lay term rather loosely applied for the fleshy or fibrous outer cover of
a fruit
hypanthium a flat or cup-shaped receptacle (q.v.) on which the ovary is either
immersed or on the same level as the calyx and corolla
imparipinnate(of a leaf) leaf pinnate (q.v.) with an odd terminal leaflet (c.f. paripinnate)
indehiscent(of a fruit) not opening when ripe
Indo-China region of Southeast Asia which includes Myanmar, Thailand, Laos,
Cambodia and Viet Nam and the Malay Peninsula
inflorescence the arrangement of the flowers on a plant
infructescence fruiting inflorescence
involucre a number of bracts (q.v.) surrounding the base of a flower-head,
sometimes persisting in fruit
kernel the inner, usually edible part of a nut (q.v.) or stone (q.v.)
lamina leaf blade
lanceolate lance-shaped
leaf leaf blade plus petiole (q.v.)
leaf sheath basal part of a leaf surrounding the stem
leaflet a leaf-like unit of a compound leaf (q.v.)
legume the fruit-pod of the Leguminosae, consisting of a single carpel, usually
opening along both sutures (q.v.) into two halves
locule cavity of ovary or fruit
loculicidal opening into the cells, when a ripe capsule splits along the back
Malaysia Federation which includes Peninsular Malaysia, East Malaysia, Sabah
and Sarawak
Malesia bio-geographical region which includes Malaysia (q.v.), Indonesia, the
Philippines, Singapore, Brunei and Papua New Guinea
mastic resin
mericarp one of the separate halves or parts of a fruit
mesocarp the often fleshy or succulent middle layer of the pericarp (q.v.)
monoecious where the male and female flowers are separate but on the same plant
(c.f. dioecious)
mucilaginous a substance that swells with water to form a slimy solution
muricate with a surface covered by sharp points or prickles or hard, sharp
projections
mycoplasma small, parasitic microorganisms that lack rigid cell wall; they are
believed to be responsible for certain yellow diseases of plants
nut 1-seeded, indehiscent (q.v.), fruit with a hard, dry pericarp (q.v.)
nutlet a small nut (q.v.)
oblong oval (q.v.) with parallel sides
obovate ovate (q.v.) with the broadest part farthest from the petiole
oleaginous oily
operculum lid of a pyxidium (q.v.)
ovate egg-shaped with the broadest part nearest to the petiole
ovoid solid form of oval
oval broadly elliptic
ovary the swollen, basal part of a carpel (q.v.) containing the ovule (q.v.) or
ovules
ovule the immature seed before fertilization
panicle inflorescence in which the axis is divided into branches bearing several
flowers
pappus rig of hairs or scales round the top of Compositae fruit
paripinnate pinnate leaf (q.v.) without an odd terminal leaflet (c.f. imparipinnate)
pedicel the stalk attaching a flower to the main axis of an inflorescence
peduncle general name for a flower stalk bearing either a solitary flower or a
cluster of flowers
peltate (of a leaf) petiole attached to the undersurface instead of the margin
pepo a type of berry (q.v.) with a hard exterior derived either from the
epicarp (q.v.), or, in the Cucurbitaceae, from the receptacle (q.v.)
perennial a plant that survives for several years
perianth floral envelope consisting of sepals (q.v.) and petals (q.v.)
pericarp fruit wall derived from the ovary; in fleshy fruits the pericarp is
divided into an outer, toughened epicarp (q.v.), a fleshy mesocarp
(q.v.), and an inner, variously thickened or membraneous endocarp
(q.v.)
petal an individual unit of the corolla (q.v.), interior to the calyx (q.v.),
usually coloured
petiole stalk attaching the leaf blade to the branch or stem
pinnate a leaf divided along a common axis into leaflets (q.v.)
pinnatisect a leaf almost divided to the axis into segments (c.f. pinnate)
piscicide fish poison
pleonanthic (of palms) method of flowering in which the stem does not die after flowering
(c.f. hapaxanthic)
pod a dry, indehiscent (q.v.) fruit
pome a fleshy fruit where the succulent tissues are developed from the
receptacle (q.v.)
pubescent covered with short hairs
pyrene a nutlet (q.v.) or kernel (q.v.), the stone of a drupe (q.v.) or similar
fruit
pyxidium seed capsule having a circular lid (operculum q.v.) which falls off to
release the seeds
raceme an inflorescence (q.v.) in which the flowers are borne on pedicels
along an individual axis or peduncle (q.v.)
rachis main axis of a compound leaf (q.v.) or inflorescence (q.v.)
receptacle the extremity of a peduncle (q.v.) or pedicel (q.v.) on which the floral
parts are borne
reniform kidney-shaped
root tuber a swollen root or branch of a root acting as a food reserve
samara an indehiscent (q.v.), 1-seeded, winged fruit
samaroid like a samara (q.v.)
sarcotesta (of palms) outer seed coat developed as a fleshy layer surrounding the rest of the
seed
schizocarp a dry fruit derived from two or more 1-seeded carpels which divided
into 1-seeded units at maturity
sclerenchymatous composed of strengthening tissues
seed the product of a fertilized ovule
sepal an individual unit of the calyx (q.v.) exterior to the corolla (q.v.),
usually green
septum (pl. septa) dividing wall
septicidal divided into compartments
serrate with regular, saw-like, teeth
sessile stalkless
shell hard, dry pericarp (q.v.) of a nut (q.v.)
simple (of a leaf) not divided into leaflets (q.v.)
solitary palm stem not suckering
spike inflorescence with sessile (q.v.) flowers along a simple, undivided
rachis (q.v.)
stamen male reproductive organ of a flowering plant
staminode sterile or rudimentary stamen (q.v.)
stigma receptive tip of the style (q.v.) or, where absent, carpel (q.v.) where
the pollen is received at pollination
stipule leaf-like or scale-like appendages , usually at the base of the petiole
(q.v.)
stolon a runner that roots
stoloniferous with stolons (q.v.)
stone woody endocarp (q.v.) of a drupe (q.v.)
strobili pine cone
style sterile portion of the carpel between the ovary (q.v.) and stigma (q.v.)
suture line of union (and eventual opening) of a carpel (q.v.)
subcordate (of a leaf) leaf base rounded and slightly notched
tendril a coiling, modified plant organ used for climbing
terminal at the end of
testa outer seed coat
tomentose densely covered with short, soft hairs
ton long ton, equivalent to 1.016 tonnes
tonne metric tonne (one thousand kilogrammes), equivalent to 0.984 tons
toothed (of a leaf) variously and regularly indented (c.f. serrate)
trigonous obtusely 3-angled
turgid swollen
unarmed without spines
valve (of fruit) one of the segments produced by the splitting of a ripe capsule (q.v.)
ventral upper surface, side facing the main axis
vermifuge expels or destroys intestinal worms
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION 1
Edible nuts are used by mankind for food, edible oils, spices, condiments or beverages. They have been an important food source from prehistoric times and are among the most nutritionally concentrated of human foods, high in protein, oil, energy, minerals and vitamins. Nuts that are only rarely used as famine food have been excluded from this present study partly because of the paucity information available but mainly because they are not normally considered edible. Nuts used solely for spices or condiments have also been largely excluded since they are used sparingly, to flavour food and not as a food; traditionally they are considered separately from edible nuts. Nuts that are largely used as commercial sources of edible oil are not discussed in any great detail since they are already adequately dealt with in the literature, e.g., Hartley (1988) regarding the oil palms Elaeis guienensis. However, their local uses are briefly mentioned in Appendix A.
Melville (1947) has, perhaps not unexpectedly, noted a correlation in nutritive values between species within a genus or family. There are also similarities to be found between related species in the harvesting, storage and processing techniques, etc. The arrangement of edible nut species in Appendix A is, therefore, by families in the expectation that users can compare related species and possibly improve management techniques or deduce possible techniques where none are known.
Botanical terminology has been used where known but, in view of the uncritical use in the literature of layman terms, it has not always been possible to identify the true nature of the organs without further research and this may have led to the wrong deduction being made in this paper. As far as research time has permitted, the currently accepted botanical name is used within the text and these, together with their synonyms used in the consulted references, are given in Appendix C.
The term "forest", as used in the title of this report, embraces all the natural ecosystems where trees and shrubs form a significant component. As such, "forests" range from evergreen rainforest to desert, although in the latter habitat the trees and shrubs are confined primarily to oases and waterways (Wickens, 1991). In certain areas, trees and shrubs bearing edible nuts are preserved on farmlands and homesteads after land clearance and constitute the chief supplies available for household consumption or sale; as such they can be considered as relics of the natural ecosystems. There is also a rather grey area where forestry, horticulture and agricultural interests overlap. While nut plantations are included in this report, certain recognized nut crops, such as peanuts, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds and soya beans are definitely agricultural crops and are not considered in any great detail here.
What are edible nuts
The botanical use of the term "nut" refers to an indehiscent fruit that is usually shed as a 1seeded unit. It is formed from more than one carpel but only one seed develops, the rest abort. The pericarp is usually lignified and is often partially or completely surrounded by a "cupule". True nuts include the hazelnuts, Corylus spp. (Corylaceae), and from the Fagaceae, beechnuts, Fagus spp. and acorns, Quercus spp. The term is also loosely applied to any woody fruit or seed, such as the walnut (drupe of Juglans spp., Juglandaceae), Brazil nut (seed of Bertholletia excelsa, Lecythidaceae) or peanut (indehiscent legume of Arachis hypogea, Leguminosae subfamily Papilionoideae). It is even incorrectly applied in the vernacular names to non-fruiting bodies, such as the root tubers of the pignut or earthnut Conopodium majus (Umbelliferae) and Cyperus esculentus (Cyperaceae), although in the latter case the root tubers are eaten as a form of dessert nut. A further complication is
that the seeds of several members of the Cucurbitaceae and the sunflower, Helianthus annuus (Compositae) are eaten as dessert nuts and are included in the literature on edible nuts yet they are always referred to both botanically and in the vernacular as seeds.
For the purpose of this work nuts are hard-shelled fruits, or the edible kernels of fleshy drupes or berries, or seeds that are traditionally referred to as nuts. The first two categories of nuts are the fruits of trees or shrubs, the third include some herbs. Since the value of some nuts as food is relative to what better alternatives are available, there are obvious grey areas regarding whether the nut is to be regarded as edible or not and an arbitrary decision has been made as to whether a species should or should not be included. Some 542 species of edible "nuts" have been listed in Appendix A. More detailed information is given in the text on the major, minor and potential nut species. However, researchers requiring even more information should bear in mind that the information given is a summary of information obtained from a selection of the published literature, the primary sources of which have not been consulted.
While a species may conform to the general description of "edible nut" it does not follow that an allied species also bears acceptable "edible nuts", as for example with the almond, Prunus dulcis, and plum, P. domestica; although children may very occasionally eat the plum kernels it has never been considered other than as a fruit crop.
It is possible that a number of species have been omitted because the information is not readily available or is too vague while others should be eliminated because the information obtained has been misleading.
Previous authors have also had problems in defining an edible "nut" and have provided their own apparently arbitrary limits. Menninger (1977) provides the widest definition where a nut is defined "as any hard-shelled fruit or seed of which the kernel is eaten by mankind". This definition is so broad that even grasses and a number of herb species have been included, the former are generally regarded as cereals while the latter would be more appropriately listed under edible seeds. However, all the authors consulted, with the exception of Verheij and Coronel (1991), have accepted the popular or everyday use of the term "nut", including its conservative use by Howes (1948) to include "any seed or fruit consisting of an edible, usually oleaginous kernel, surrounded by a hard or brittle shell". Interestingly, the major authors consulted, Howes (1948), Menninger (1977) and Rosengarten (1984), have, like the present author, all made their own interpretation as what to include or
exclude as an edible nut, while Verheij and Coronel (1991) declare "it is not possible to define the edible fruits and nuts in such a way that clearly sets them apart from species in other commodity groups".
Nutritional value
Most edible "nuts" contain concentrated food reserves for future generations of plants and provide valuable sources of energy, protein, oils, minerals and vitamins suitable for human consumption. Others have their food reserves in the form of starch instead of protein, including chestnuts - Castanea spp., acorns - Quercus spp., water chestnuts - Trapa spp., ye-eb - Cordeauxia edulis, Bambara groundnuts - Vigna subterranea and lotus seeds Nelumbo spp. While Pinus spp. are protein rich, some members of the Gymnospermae such as Ginkgo biloba and Araucaria spp. also have starchy food reserves (Melville, 1947).
Nuts have a reputation for being indigestible, especially if eaten in large quantities or poorly masticated. They are generally a highly concentrated food but low in water and fibre content and consequently require thorough mastication if they are to be properly digested, and are preferably eaten with other foods. They have the additional value in that their fats are, in the main, highly unsaturated and are consequently beneficial in that they do not raise blood cholesterol. Peanuts (Arachis hypogea), sunflower seeds (Helianthus annuus), souari nuts (Caryocar nuciferum) and soynut (Glycine max) are specifically mentioned in this context (Howes, 1948; Rosengarten, 1984).
The nutritional value of a number of nuts are given in Appendix B. It is difficult to draw any firm conclusions from these analyses because the majority appear to be based on a single analysis which have been passed down through a number of publications. Ecotypic and seasonal variations, the effects of fertilizers, drought, etc., have not been investigated.
Harvesting
The harvesting of nuts from arborescent species is often of fallen nuts and as such is generally a prolonged, laborious and wasteful process since fruits do not necessarily all ripen within a short period. Picking fallen fruits is time consuming, especially in rough terrain and, depending on the time lapse between consecutive harvestings, can lead to rapid deterioration as well as losses to predators. Plantations can improve efficiency by providing better accessibility and easier harvesting conditions and, provided they are large enough, lead to mechanized harvesting by the use of ground harvesters and/or tree shakers. Mechanization is being increasingly important in North America where labour costs are particularly high.
Processing and storage
This discussion is limited to the major nuts, where appropriate techniques and equipment have been developed, about which more detailed information can be obtained from Woodroof (1979). By dealing with processing and storage in general terms it is hoped that readers will obtain ideas for dealing with similar problems in the less-known and little researched species.
Many dessert nuts loose their palatability or otherwise deteriorate if not properly dried or cured after collection or are badly stored, especially those with a high oil content. Among the major nuts walnuts and chestnuts are among the more perishable while pistachios and almonds are among the better keepers.
In-shell nuts are best stored at low temperatures. While rancidity is the main problem with shelled nuts, the kernels also have the ability to acquire off-flavours from the environment, such as tobacco and paint. Apart from rancidity, deterioration during long storage can be difficult to determine and aflatoxins can be present even when there are no obvious presence of moulds (Matz, 1984).
Dehusking
Modern packaging and marketing is increasingly demanding kernels ready for immediate use, both in the home and confectionery trade. Hand processing is being replaced more and more by mechanization for providing a marketable product, especially where large-scale production is concerned.
Most tree nuts are enveloped in a fleshy or fibrous outer covering or husk which may or may not remain attached to the nut as it ripens and falls to the ground, as is the case for such important commercial nuts as the walnut, pecan, almond and macadamia. In some varieties of walnut and almond the ripe nut readily separates from the husk of their own accord; a few nuts, termed "sticktights" remain attached to their husks, the proportion depending on the cultivar. A poor or dry season may increase the number of sticktights.
The husk has to be removed either mechanically or by hand before nuts can be dried, shelled or otherwise processed. Walnuts especially must be dehusked as soon as they are collected, otherwise the colour and quality of the kernel will be progressively adversely affected the longer the husks remain (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Washing
Nuts gathered from the ground are frequently soiled or dirty, especially after rain, so that washing is necessary in order to make the product more attractive for the market. Again, hand washing in tubs or machine washing in cylindrical drums may be carried out. Any staining or discoloration is not affected by the washing and is removed at a later stage during bleaching (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Drying and dehydrating
Artificially produced heat and forced draughts are now increasingly replacing sun-drying for the drying or "curing" of nuts, especially by large-scale commercial producers. Outputs range from 1-7 tonnes for a drying time of 12-24 hours at, in the case of walnuts, not more than 43° C. Such mechanical dryers are not only independent of the weather but also give a more thorough and uniform drying of the nuts and, in the case of walnuts, result in less splitting. In America mechanical drying has been found to increase packing-house efficiency by stabilizing the delivery rate from the growers and to aid marketing by providing an earlier product. The investment costs did not exceed the high labour cost of sun-drying.
Sun-drying is still largely practised by small producers, particularly with almonds in the producing countries of Europe. It requires a high labour input to spread the nuts out on sheets or in trays, stirring frequently to ensure uniform drying, and also to provide protection at night or in the event of rain. Drying is completed when the kernels can be heard to rattle in the shells or can be broken rather than bent with the fingers. Drying may require only 2-3 days with continuous hot sun or take 2-3 weeks in inclement weather. Similarly, chestnuts in southern Europe were traditionally sun-dried or dried over a wood fire in a specially constructed kiln. A slow process, it may take several weeks and a heavy fuel input to achieve, although the smoke is reputed to have a beneficial effect in inhibiting subsequent fungal infestation but the process results in the loss of the fresh chestnut flavour and the chestnuts may even acquire a disagreeable one. The curing is complete when
the shells may be easily separated from the kernels. Modern, mobile mechanical dryers now provide a faster and more uniform drying with a greater economy in fuel (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Bleaching
Some nuts intended for marketing in-shell may have their appearance enhanced by bleaching to remove stains due to sun scorch and disease; walnuts are frequently thus treated by immersion for 1-2 minutes in a bleaching solution.
Sulphur dioxide or burning sulphur may be used, particularly for almonds that have been blemished during harvesting or drying, but this is practised less so now than in the past. Good quality almonds that have been quickly sun dried are already of an attractive appearance and require no bleaching. Over bleaching can give the shells a sickly white appearance and is liable to soften them and flavour the kernels; too little causes irregular bleaching.
Pecans can be considerably improved by removing the outer rough layer and polishing, a process which, if required, makes the nuts more responsive to bleaching and drying. The outer layer may be removed by steel brushes or by the use of revolving drums containing coarse sand. Bleaching is effected by dipping the nuts for 4 minutes in, for example, sodium hypochlorite containing 2% active chlorine. Various dyes may be used to colour the polished and bleached nuts an attractive brown or reddish brown (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Grading
Mechanical graders, such as a perforated revolving cylinder, are commonly used to sort nuts into various sizes, the smaller nuts being the first to fall. Pecan nuts, due to their ovoid or oblong shape, require special graders consisting of variously spaced rollers.
Imperfect, faulty or broken nuts may be removed by hand as the nuts pass along a continuous belt. A suction machine may also be used to lift blank or imperfectly filled nuts over a trap while the heavier nuts pass on. The low specific gravity of Grade 1 macadamia kernels allows them to be removed by floatation in ordinary water. Grade 2 may be removed using 30 g of salt in 1 litre of water, with Grade 3 sinking to the bottom. The nuts are then thoroughly dried (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Storage
Most nuts can be satisfactorily stored for several months provided they are kept cool and dry. Many nuts are stored in the shell for longer periods but there is now a trend towards the cold storage of shelled nuts or kernels. Although requiring more space, the best results are obtained by storing in moisture proof containers after thorough dehydration. Cold storage in open receptacles can result in an uptake of odours such as ammonia, a loss of colour, flavour and texture and the possible development of rancidity. Cold storage in vacuumized containers or the use of inert gases appear to offer little advantage over cold storage for a similar period.
Commercial cold storage is general practice with the pecan. Better prices can be obtained by holding the nuts in store for some time after harvesting and the higher prices more than offset the cost of storage. It may also be profitable to hold a portion of a heavy crop in store in the expectation that the following crop will be smaller and the price higher.
Freshly gathered chestnuts have a high moisture content and consequently prone to fungal attack. Stored in small heaps or shallow layers in an airy store walled on three sides and periodically turned over, they will keep perfectly for up to 3 months or longer. If stored too dry or in a single layer the kernels will shrivel and become hard. The onset of mould, as well as harmful grubs and insects, during storage may be prevented by immersing the fresh chestnuts in a solution of a fungicide for 48 hours. Gas treatment in autoclaves has been effectively used in France; chestnuts have also been successfully held in cold storage. Chestnuts placed in layers of sand and kept cool keep well and retain their germinability but may become less palatable.
Cob nuts are sometimes stored in sawdust, which helps to prevent shrivelling (Howes, 1948; Menninger, 1977; Rosengarten, 1984).
Cracking
The mechanical cracking of nuts is becoming increasingly important, nevertheless, large quantities of some kernels are still extracted laboriously by hand in some countries, such as the cashew in India and the almond in the Middle East. Mechanical cracking is faster but usually results in a higher percentage of broken kernels which, fortunately, usually finds a ready outlet in the confectionery trade.
Power-driven, self-feeding nut-cracking machines require grading for size before being fed to the cracking jaws or rollers with special shaking devices to separate the kernels from the broken shells. The kernels may still have to pass along a continuous belt for broken kernels and other debris to be removed by hand.
Individual pecan nuts are commonly picked up in cups on an endless chain passing through a hoppere of graded nuts. Each nut passes to a slot where a piston-like rod exerts pressure at the end of the nut and cracks it, the shells and kernels then being released to a receptacle below. Very dry pecans often shatter badly with this treatment; prior wetting can reduce this problem, the kernels being redried after shelling.
The varying differences in the thickness and texture of the macadamia shell has created problems in the development of a suitable machine for cracking the shell without damaging the brittle kernel as there is less than 0.4 mm clearance between the two. The current vice-like design employs the principle of the nut being held between two blunt movable wedges.
Special cracking machines are also used for pine nuts where the demand is almost entirely for kernels.
The tough leathery shell of the cashew is overcome by preliminary roasting, thus making the shell brittle and responsive to cracking, as well as lessening the danger of blistering from the caustic oils in the fruit. The roasting is usually done by hand, placing small quantities of k