<title>Fact sheet: Zimbabwe - Women, agriculture and rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Role of woman in agriculture
Role of woman in agriculture
Approximately 80% of women live in the communal areas where they constitute 61% of the farmers and provide 70% of the labour. Thus, the work of women farmers is essential for food security. Most women are unpaid family workers. Rural women work 16 to 18 hours a day, spending at least 49% of their time on agricultural activities and about 25% on domestic activities.
Division of Labour by Gender. While both men and women participate in most agricultural tasks, men predominate in land preparation, ploughing and pest control, while women are primarily engaged in watering, planting, fertilizing, weeding, harvesting, and marketing. Women carry out the majority of firewood gathering and almost all the water fetching, food processing and preparation' cooking and domestic work.
Gender Relations in Decision-making in Farming Activities. According to a 1993 household survey of the Department of Agricultural Technical and Extension Service (AGRITEX), in male-headed households, men dominate decision-making. In female-headed households (60% of households in the communal areas), women are responsible for farm management decisions. In households where the husband is absent, men still make a large proportion of the decisions regarding sale of crops and use of money. However, the majority of women make decisions on how to spend the income generated from their own activities such as market gardening, crafts, poultry keeping, etc.
<section>2</section>
Sharing of power and decision-making
Sharing of power and decision-making
Members and Officers of Agricultural/Rural Organizations. Women comprise at least 75% of the members of the powerful small-scale farmers' organization, the Zimbabwe Farmers Union (ZFU), but constitute only 4.5 % of the office bearers. In the Commercial Farmers Union (CFU) women comprise only 8.6% of the members, reflecting the low percentage of women owning large farms. The proportion of women office bearers is 10%.
Women in Decision-making Positions in Ministries and Government Bodies. In spite of the predominance of women in agriculture, very few women hold decision-making positions in government bodies dealing with agriculture.
Ministry of Land, Agriculture and Water Development (MLAWD)
Source: MLAWD
<section>3</section>
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of woman
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of woman
National Machinery. The Department of Women's Affairs (DWA) was established in the Ministry of National Affairs, Cooperatives and Employment Creation, with the mandate to coordinate interministerial WID activities. However, as a result of the Structural Adjustment Programme, the staff and capabilities of the DWA have been seriously reduced.
WID Units or Focal Points in Technical Ministries. The MLAWD does not have a WID Unit, as the Central Planning Unit is responsible for responding to WID issues. AGRITEX incorporates WID issues in its Training Branch and the AGRITEX Directorate has a senior officer whose duties include liaison on WID issues.
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). NGOs play an important role in supporting rural women. In addition to a gradual increase in NGOs that focus on rural women, some NGOs are specifically oriented to reaching rural women. These include: the Zimbabwe Women's Bureau' the Self-Help Development Foundation, Organization of Rural Associations for Progress (ORAP), Africa 2000, Association of Women's Clubs, and the Dondolo Mudonzo Credit Schemes. In addition, the Zimbabwe Women's Resource Centre and Network (ZWRCN) carries out research on gender issues in agriculture.
<section>4</section>
Women's rights
Women's rights
Zimbabwe is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).
In the past ten years, several measures have been introduced to enhance the legal status of women, including legislation which: empowers the Court to equitably divide and reallocate property, including land, in the case of divorce; makes it possible for a widow to claim a share of the estate of her husband on the basis of her contribution to its acquisition, and to continue to enjoy the use of crops and animals; and, makes it possible for married women to acquire immovable property, including land, without having to obtain consent from their husbands.
However, women still do not have equal access to land in the communal areas. Married women have only secondary land use rights through their husbands, and divorced women are required to vacate the land and acquire new land in their natal homes. In addition, rural women who are not in formal employment are not covered by social security schemes.
The Economic Structural Adjustment Programme (ESAP) introduced in 1991 has resulted in a sharp increase in the interest rates charged to farmers, and a sharp rise in the retail price of agricultural inputs. As a result of escalating production costs, small farmers, who are primarily women, have had to decrease their use of inputs, resulting in declining productivity. Women in particular are also negatively affected by the decreased government provision of agricultural and social services and the removal of government control of prices and marketing.
The severe drought of 1992 crippled agriculture and threw the economy into a deep recession. Water resources are inadequate in 75% of the communal lands where the majority of women live. The drying up of water sources and wetlands means that women must walk longer distances to water sources.
About 75% of the communal lands consist of semi-arid lands with marginal agricultural potential. These regions experience the least reliable rainfall and are characterized by rocky topography, steep slopes and shallow, infertile soils. Environmental degradation is causing further deterioration in the communal lands, including deforestation, soil erosion, and declining soil fertility, caused by a shortage of land, population pressure, and unsustainable land use systems and farming techniques, in the absence of alternatives.
About 60% of the households in the communal lands experience food deficits. One-fifth to one-fourth of Zimbabwean children suffer from malnutrition, which is especially extensive among children residing in communal areas and on large-scale commercial farms.
Women in approximately 50% of the districts experience fuel shortages requiring them to spend more time and labour gathering fuelwood.
Male migration has resulted in an increase of female-headed households, which account for 60% of all households in the communal areas. These households are likely to be allocated smaller parcels of land than male-headed households. Fewer rural female-headed households own agricultural productive resources, and in terms of household incomes, they are 40% poorer than rural male-headed households.
Land. Zimbabwe inherited a landownership system in which about half the land was reserved for those of European descent through the Land Tenure Act. Although this Act was repealed in 1979, the best agricultural land remains concentrated in the commercial sector, dominated by a small number of farmers and companies. Almost two-thirds of the population live on the poorer agricultural lands in the communal areas. Although a Land Resettlement Programme was set up after independence in 1980, progress has been slow. No data is available on how this programme has affected women.
Although legislation has improved women's access to land in the communal areas, where the majority of women reside, married women still have only indirect access to land through their husbands. Moreover, traditional attitudes and practices have lagged behind legislation. According to a sample survey, the mean arable landholding for male-headed households is 2.73 ha, while that for female-headed households is 1.86 ha.
Livestock. Data collection needed.
Forestry. Data collection needed.
Water. Data collection needed.
Credit. The communal agricultural sector is served by the parastatal Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC), which requires only that its clients have access to land and a marketing card. Approximately 32% of its clients are women, an increase from 11% in 1982. A number of other Government-sponsored credit schemes, such as the Small Farmer Credit Scheme and the Resettlement Credit Scheme, have been introduced, but no data is available in regard to women's access to these. A number of private credit facilities have been formed to assist women, including the Zimbabwe Women's Finance Trust, which provides credit and technical assistance to small-scale grassroots businesswomen. Women comprise the majority of members of savings clubs which were formed to help meet the needs of the rural population. For instance, women constitute 83% of the membership of the Self Help Development Foundation, which promotes group savings that can be mobilized for productive purposes.
Extension services and agricultural training. The Extension Services Department did not focus on gender issues until 1990, when it became apparent that agricultural extension was contacting only 44% of women farmers. In 1994 the Department began focusing on the constraints to women's participation in extension in an attempt to develop a more appropriate package to reach women farmers.
Prior to 1980, women were not awarded master farmer certificates, but from 1982 to 1992, women constituted 33.2% of this training programme, and in 1993, there was an increase in women's participation of 60 to 90%.
Until the mid-1980s, the majority of agricultural training institutes did not have facilities for women. Since then, there has been a gradual increase in women's enrolment. In 1988, only 7.77% of extension staff were women. More recent data is needed.
Agricultural Extension Staff by Position and Gender, 1989
Source: Agricultural Extension and Farm Women in the 1980s, FAO, 1993
Enrolment in Agricultural Colleges and Universities
Source: MLAWD, Universities and Agricultural Education Branch
<section>5</section>
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Legal and Policy Reform
· The Land Tenure Commission, instituted in late 1993, addresses questions related to land rights. individual and groups of women have presented evidence of their lack of legal access to adequate land in the communal areas. However, there is only one women commissioner out of the 12 commission members.
· The Women and Law in Southern Africa (WLSA) research project and Women in Law and Development in Africa (WILDAF) are two NGOs that carry out research on women's legal situation in Zimbabwe, as well as activities in the areas of legal literacy, awareness building and legal and policy reform.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· A Communal Land Re-Organization Programme is addressing constraints faced at village level in regard to water and fuel supply and sustainable agriculture.
· The Small-Scale Irrigation Programme is designed to implement irrigation schemes at community level to mitigate the effects of drought and to increase land productivity.
· The Forestry Commission and the Department of Natural Resources are implementing programmes to promote women's increased participation in the sustainable management of woodlands and land resources, including agroforestry and fruit tree production, and in the use of wetlands.
· The Agricultural Recovery Programme is designed to cushion the effects of the Economic Structural Adjustment Programmes by issuing free inputs to communal land households.
<section>6</section>
Areas to be strengthened
Areas to be strengthened
Policy Planning and Research.
· Permanent WID focal points should be created in the MLAWD to ensure that legislation, policies, programmes and projects address gender issues.
· The Central Statistical Office should create a Gender Section to develop a framework for data generation on the status of women in agricultural and rural development.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· Increased efforts are needed by the government, NGOs and donors to make credit accessible to all women farmers. This should include a special revolving fund, with affordable interest rates, within the AFC.
· Training in marketing skills for local grassroots farmers institutions and women farmers.
· The Department of Energy and the Forestry Commission should design a national programme to reach all communities in order to assist women to identify more appropriate options to meet present and future energy needs.
· The National Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme (NRWSS) should continue its nationwide programme to supply clean water to rural households. Financial resources must be identified to enable the NRWSS to continue its activities.
· The Government, NGOs, and donors should formulate programmes to enable women to participate in the food processing industry.
Source: National Sectoral Report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development, 1994.
Prepared by:
Integration of Women in Development Service
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel: +(39)6 52251
<section>e</section>
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Agriculture is the predominant sector of the Zimbabwean economy, with approximately 80% of the population dependent on it for their livelihood. In 1991, agriculture contributed 20% of the GDP, about one-third coming from the subsistence farmers on communal lands, and employed 67% of the labour force. The principal cash crops are tobacco, maize, cotton, coffee and sugar, while wheat, soybeans and groundnuts are also cultivated. Beef production is also an important economic activity, and agriculture supplies about 50% of raw materials for the manufacturing sector.
The Second Five-Year Development Plan (19901995) projects a growth rate of the agricultural sector of 3.5%, allowing for both national food security and increased opportunities for jobs and exports.
Sectoral Contributions to GDP and Employment 1991
Source: Europa World Yearbook, 1994
