<section>e</section>
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Agriculture makes an important contribution to the country's economy, accounting for about 18% of the GDP and employing 22.4% of the labour force. The main cereal crops are wheat and barley. Olives, dates and citrus fruits are grown for both export and domestic consumption. The main agricultural export is olive oil. The country imports large amounts of dairy products, cereals, meat and sugar. An Economic Structural Adjustment Programme, started in 1986, has liberalized trade, prices and investments, and privatized public enterprises.
Sectoral Contributions to GDP and Employment
Source: Europa World Yearbook, 1994
<title>Fact sheet: Tunisia - Women, agriculture and rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Role of women in agriculture
Role of women in agriculture
Rural women in Tunisia have always actively participated in agriculture, working in the field, with livestock on the farm, and in the processing and storage of products for household use and the market. Because women work mainly as unpaid family labour, their quantitative and qualitative contribution to agriculture has not been counted or has been greatly underestimated in statistics. According to a survey by the Ministry of Agriculture in 1990, women provided 23.5% of agricultural labour, not counting transport of water and fuelwood. Women also comprised 34.7% of temporary agricultural workers in 1990.
Division of Labour by Gender. The division of labour differs according to farming system, local tradition and age. In areas where men are engaged in fishing, mining and commerce, or have migrated to urban areas or abroad for jobs, women take on essentially all of the farming tasks. In areas where agriculture is the main source of income, the whole family is engaged in farming with the following division of labour: men are responsible for land preparation, digging pits and cisterns, irrigation, harvesting and livestock herding; women are responsible for hoeing and weeding, caring for livestock within the household enclosure, processing and storage of agricultural products, and artisanal production for home and market of carpets, blankets, baskets and other items. Fishing is essentially the domain of men. Women are responsible for all the household tasks including collection of water and fuelwood, which is used by about 20% of households for cooking.
Gender Relations in Decision-making in Farming Activities. The more women are involved in agricultural activities, the more decision-making power they have. Men retain the decision-making power over the sale, rent and exchange of land and the means of production, including large livestock. Decisions on development planning, large-scale projects and the introduction of technologies and infrastructure are made by male planners without input from rural women or taking into consideration their specific needs.
<section>2</section>
Sharing of power and decision-making
Sharing of power and decision-making
Members and Officers of Agricultural/Rural Organizations.
Data collection needed.
Women in Decision-making Positions in Ministries and Government Bodies.
Data collection needed.
<section>3</section>
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
National Machinery. The Ministry for Women and the Family, attached to the Office of the Prime Minister, is mandated to coordinate activities for women at the national level. A Women and Development Commission was set up at the end of the 1980s to develop a WID strategy in the framework of the Eighth Development Plan.
WID Units or Focal Points in Technical Ministries. A unit for Women's Professional Training has been established in the Ministry of Professional Training and Employment.
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). The National Union of Agriculture and Fishing of Tunisia (UNAP) created within its structures in 1990, a National Federation of Women Agriculturalists, grouping 18 regional delegations, led by women. The National Union of Tunisian Women (UNFT) is the oldest women's NGO in the country. Other NGOs, such as the Association for Agricultural and Rural Development (ASDEAR), the Association for the Promotion of Employment and Housing in Rural Areas (APEL), the Tunisian Federation for Community Development (FTDC), and Environment and Development in the Third World (ENDA), have developed women-specific activities.
<section>4</section>
Women's rights
Women's rights
Tunisia signed the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1980, and ratified it with reservations in 1985. Following independence in 1956, a Personal Status Code was passed to protect women's rights. Men and women have equal rights, except in the case of inheritance where women's inheritance is half of men's. Legislation protecting women is not always put into practice, due to lack of information and deep-rooted traditions.
<section>5</section>
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
The economic crisis of the mid-1980s led to the implementation of a structural adjustment programme, which limited public sector spending and decreased subsidies for agriculture. A national programme of aid to needy families was set up to cushion the effects on the poorest families. Although illiteracy rates have dropped, about 66% or rural women were still illiterate in 1990.
<section>6</section>
Access to agricultural resources and services
Access to agricultural resources and services
Land. Data collection needed.
Livestock. Data collection needed.
Forestry. Data collection needed.
Water. In 1991, about 31% of rural households were able to access water supplied by the National Water Supply Society (SONEDE) and another 31% are served by public wells. About 30% of households do not have a safe water supply.
Credit. Although data collection is needed, women's access to credit is limited by lack of information and by traditions that hinder their access to public places.
Extension services and agricultural training. There are insufficient women extension workers to care for the needs of rural women. However, the creation of an Agricultural Training and Extension Agency (AVFA) in the Ministry of Agriculture, and a unit for Women's Professional Training in the Ministry of Professional Training and Employment, as well as the appointment of several women to posts in various ministries, should contribute to improving the incorporation of women's needs for training and technical assistance in projects and programmes. While women comprise less than 4% of extension staff, they account for almost 12% Of those enroled in agricultural training.
Agricultural Extension Staff by Position and Gender, 1993
Source: Agricultural Extension and Farm Women in the 1980s, FAO, 1993
Agricultural Training Enrolment by Gender, 1992
Source: National Sectoral Report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development, 1994
<section>7</section>
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Policy Planning and Research
A Women and Development Commission was set up at the end of the 1980s to develop a WID strategy in the framework of the Eighth Development Plan.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· A number of projects directed to rural households and projects with women's components have improved women's access to basic needs such as water, health services and education, and to agricultural training and credit.
· An extension project has a women's component to design and implement an extension programme and to consolidate the training and role of women extensionists, benefitting about 7,500 rural women.
· A unit for Women's Professional Training has been set up in the Ministry of Professional Training and Employment.
<section>8</section>
Areas to be strengthened
Areas to be strengthened
Policy Planning and Research.
· For the first time, development plans and policies, through the Eighth Development Plan, specifically give attention to women and provide for a strategy to strengthen women's participation in productive farming activities.
· Research and statistics are needed to determine the real place that rural women occupy in agriculture.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· The Eighth Development Plan provides for training activities for women, the establishment of a women's credit programme, and the inclusion of a women's component in every agricultural project.
· A National Action Plan for Professional Training includes improvement of professional training for young rural women and the promotion of apprenticeship of women in technical specialities in agro-industry.
Source: National Sectoral Report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development, 1994.
Prepared by:
Integration of Women in Development Service
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel:+(39)6 52251
