<title>Harvesting of textile animal fibres</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
The animal fibres covered in this bulletin are of considerable importance to the world's textile industry. As a natural renewable resource they have been a vital factor in the development of mankind. Thier products have provided protection from the elements and processing of them was one man's first rudimentary industries.
Today, millions of people still depend on them for their livelihood.
Being products of nature, each of the animal fibre types covered in this bulletin has unique properties, including variability in fibre diameter, colour and length. They are also exposed to the climatic variations of the seasons which result in dirt, seeds and other extraneous matter finding its way into fleeces.
To realise their potential value as textile fibres it is essential that basic rules be followed when harvesting and preparing animal fibres for sale to the world's textile industry. Preparation must focus on meeting customer requirements and expectations to ensure that the confidence of the textile industry is maintained or enhanced.
The world textile industry is highly competitive and animal fibres, although important, fill a relatively small proportion of the total fibre requirement.
Cotton and synthetic fibres dominate textile production, and the synthetic fibre makers continually attempt to duplicate the unique properties that animal fibres possess. Their aim is to penetrate the luxury segment of the consumer market where the majority of products made from animal fibres command premium prices because of their natural properties and perceived value.
This bulletin provides general background information on the main textile producing animals and detailed guidance on the harvesting techniques, including preparation for sale. By following these guidelines growers will maximise the monetary value of the fibre and its value to the textile industry.
A wide range of sources have provided information on the techniques and practices, skills and tasks that must be performed with different fibres to provide the quality assurance approach essential to successful marketing.
I hope all readers will find some beneficial information in the text and that the techniques recommended will lead to improved fibre presentation and increasing demand from manufacturers and consumers alike.
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Wools of New Zealand (formerly called the New Zealand Wool Board) has kindly made available a considerable amount of the material on shearing and gear maintenance, which has been republished in this bulletin. I am extremely grateful for this information and I express my thanks accordingly to Wools of New Zealand - my former employer.
Wools of New Zealand is a wool grower funded body which works to promote New Zealand wool internationally. It also provides wool growers with a range of services to ensure the quality and efficiency of wool production is enhanced.
Wools of New Zealand offers training and instruction services covering:
- Shearing (at junior, intermediate and senior levels)
- Wool handling instruction courses (at junior, intermediate and advanced levels).
- Wool classing instruction and refresher courses.
- Advice to wool growers on farm management, sheep selection, clip preparation and market information.
For your information Wools of New Zealand can be contacted through:
Group Manager Grower Services
Wools of New Zealand
P O Box 3225
Wellington
New Zealand
Phone (04) 472 6888
Fax (04) 473 7872
In conclusion, a special acknowledgment to Liz Kahn, Secretary Grower Services Group for her valued assistance, forbearance and co-operation with the preparation of this bulletin.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1
TEXTILE FIBRE PRODUCING ANIMALS
1.1 Sheep
1.1.1 Introduction to Sheep & Wool
One of the first animals to be domesticated were sheep, some ten to twelve thousand years ago. This very early domestication was due to a number of important factors. Sheep provided prehistoric man with two sources of food - meat and milk as well as producing a very useful fibre plus a pelt. Sheep therefore provided the two essentials for life - food and protection. In addition sheep also helped fertilise the fields of early man. In its primitive state, the sheep moults it's fleece in spring and early summer. Women picked up the shed wool, admired it, spun and wove it. The textile industry was thus born - almost certainly between 10,000 and 8,000 BC. and somewhere in the country bounded by the Black Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Caucasus and the Himalayas.
Sheep are a ruminant mammal of the genus Ovis whose likely ancestor has been traced to the Moufloniforuve Ovis Blyth. However, owing to the wide genetic variety of sheep, there is a range of opinion as to their exact origin. There are now about 200 different breeds and crosses producing a great variety of grades and types of wool. They range from the merino producing the finest apparel wool through to both developed and primitive carpet wool sheep and hair sheep.
Sheep are farmed in most countries around the world. From the hot desert regions of Australia, Asia and the Middle East through to cold, bleak conditions in Northern Europe, Russia, Iceland and Southern South America. They graze pastures in the high altitudes of central Asia and the Himalayas through to the low coastal regions of New Zealand and the United Kingdom. This adaptability has necessitated a variety of pasture types being utilised in these environments. Sheep are even farmed successfully indoors.
Today, the best wool comes from the International Wool Secretariat (IWS) member countries, ie. Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Uruguay. These countries have practised advanced selective breeding programmes for many years and consequently their wool is of very good quality, with excellent colour and the incidence of melanin pigmentation is rare.
Wool now constitutes 5% of the world's textile fibre and the finished products made from wool are positioned in the top end of the market, whether they are apparel, machine or hand-knotted carpets or bedding.
Sheep are usually shorn annually in the spring/summer months, however in some countries such as New Zealand, shearing more than once per year is practiced. This may be twice per year or three times in two years. The time and frequency of shearing has a great affect on the quality of wool harvested as it can have a major influence on important fibre characteristics, and in particular the degree of fault(s) present. High preparation standards are also maintained in the IWS member countries. These standards focus on preparing wool to meet customer/producer requirements. As a result, the consistency of grower lots put up for sale is very good. The pre-sale testing to objectively determine a number of important fibre properties serves to compliment the quality of wool available. The advanced nature of the sheep and wool production systems in these countries ensures wool's position as a premier textile fibre is maintained.
As this bulletin deals with the harvesting of animal fibres the detailed differences between the principle sheep breeds of the world has not been covered. If this information is required, there are many excellent reference publications available.
In shearing wool from sheep one of two basic techniques or patterns is used:
r One is for Merino sheep, which constitute close to 50% of the world's sheep population.
r The other has been developed for breeds other than Merino.
It is this second shearing pattern that has also been modified to accommodate the shearing of the fat tailed sheep which are found primarily throughout the Middle East.
1.1.2 Sheep and Wool Production
The total world wool production in 1992/93 was 1.664 million tonnes on a clean basis. Production in Australia, the world's largest producer was 561 thousand tonnes clean in 1992/93. New Zealand's production of wool was the lowest level for 30 years at 193 thousand tonnes clean. Estimated production in the Commonwealth of Independent States (C.I.S), the third largest producer in the world, was 170 thousand tonnes clean, while the production estimated for China, the fourth largest producer, was 124 thousand tonnes clean. Production in Argentina was 68 thousand tonnes, while Uruguay's production was 55 thousand tonnes. Production in the United Kingdom was 47 thousand tonnes clean while production in South Africa was 44 thousand tonnes clean.
Table 1.1 World wool production
(thousand tonnes clean)
Country or Region
Country
Australia
New Zealand
Soviet Union/CIS
China
Argentina
Uruguay
United Kingdom
South Africa
Turkey
Pakistan
India
United States of America
Spain
Brazil
Morocco
Iran
Romania
France
Mongolia
Chile
Bulgaria
Region
Other Western Europe
Other Eastern Europe
Other Asia
Other Africa
Other America
World Total
of which:
Merino
Halfbred
Crossbred
Source: International Wool Textile Organisation (IWTO)
p - figures are provisional for the latest season.
Table 1.1 shows world wool production by major wool producing countries and regions for the period 1987/88 to 1992/93 season. World wool production is broken up into three breed groups: Merino, Halfbred and Crossbred.
Table 1.2 shows world woolled sheep populations by major producing countries and regions for the period 1986/87 to 1991/92 according to three breed groups. Australian wool is predominantly Merino and Halfbred while New Zealand is the world's largest producer of Crossbred wools. Graph 1.3 illustrates shares of world wool production in 1992/93 by the major producer countries.
Note: In table 1.1 and 1.2:
Other Africa includes Algeria,, Botswana, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Libya, Mali, Mozambique, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Other America includes Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Greenland, Mexico, Paraguay, Venezuela. Other Asia includes Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cyprus, Gaza, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Macau, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Yemen. Other Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland.
Graph 1.1 World wool production
Graph 1.1 World wool production
Graph 1.2 World wool production by category
Graph 1.2 World wool production by category
Table 1.2 World woolled sheep population (millions)
Year ending Sept. of second
year shown
Census Month
Average
Albania
Dec
Argentina
June
Australia a
Mar
Brazil
Dec
Bulgaria
Jan
Canada
June
Chile
June
China
Dec
Czechoslovakia
Jan
Falkland Is.
May
France
Dec
E. Germany
Dec
W. Germany
Dec
Greece
Dec
Hungary
Dec
India
May
Iran
Oct
Iraq
Mar
Irish Republic
June
Italy
Dec
Lesotho
Aug
Mongolia
Dec
Morocco
Mar
Namibia
Aug
New Zealand
June
Pakistan
May
Peru
Dec
Poland
June
Portugal
Dec
Romania
Jan
South Africa b
Aug
Former Soviet Union c
Jan
Spain
Dec
Turkey
Dec
U.K.
June
U.S.A.
Jan
Uruguay
June
Yugoslavia
Jan
Other Africa c
Other America c
Other Asia c
Other Western Europe c
World Total of which:
Soviet Union, China, Eastern Europe
Source: International Wool Textile Organisation (IWTO)
a Covers all farms.
b Official series plus fixed estimate for woolled sheep in Bantu areas.
c See note below for country coverage.
1.1.3 Fibre Characteristics of Wool
Wool is a protein fibre chiefly composed of keratin. The fibre is made up of overlapping cuticle scales and an inner cortex. Both the cortex and the cuticle influence the fibre properties of the wool and the fibre is slightly elliptical, unlike other animal fibres. With the wide range of sheep breeds, the fibre properties of the wool produced are equally wide ranging. The particular fibre characteristic of specific breeds can be exploited by processing the fibre into appropriate end products. In a general sense, wool varies from the super fine Merino producing a fibre similar to cashmere, very high lustre English breeds producing mohair-like fibre, and coarse hairy wools similar to the guard coat of some goats.
The range of fleece weights produced annually by sheep in the IWS member countries is from 2-5 kg clean depending on the breed of sheep and the farming environment. In the countries where sheep owners income from wool is less important, the annual fleece weights are lower, ie. from 1-3 kg clean.
The first shearing of the sheep as a lamb occurs from 3-11 months of age and produces lambs wool which is the finest diameter wool the sheep produces. The diameter is from 2-6 microns finer than the second time the sheep is shorn usually at 9-18 months. The amount of change that occurs is influenced by the interval between shearing, feeding levels and animal health and possible breed effects. The third time shorn, the wool maybe from 1-3 microns coarser that the previous shearing . From then the change in diameter is small. The range of fibre diameters between the different breeds of the sheep varies from 15 microns grown by superfine Merinos through to 45 microns produced by the carpet wool sheep.
The length of wool produced is influenced by breed and fibre diameter. Merinos range from 60-110 mm if shorn annually through to the coarse carpet wools ranging from 100-200 mm annually.
Scientific breeding programmes in the major producing countries have almost eliminated melanin pigmentation and consequently the wool is of very white colour. However, this is not the case with wools grown in many of the other producing countries.
<section>4</section>
1.1.4 End Uses of Wool
Wool constitutes 5% of the world textile fibre production. Wool's limited supply coupled with its excellent textile performance properties has resulted in wool products being positioned in the luxury end of most markets. The promotional activities of IWS have focused on the "woolmark" and have assisted greatly with enhancing this position in the market place. The "woolmark" is an internationally recognised registered trade mark denoting products made from pure new wool, which also meets strict performance criteria.
Owing to the range of sheep breeds and wool types produced wool is processed into an equally wide range of end products. End uses of wool is determined by the main fibre characteristics. These include fibre diameter, fibre length/strength, colour and handle, plus others such as lustre, bulk, presence of faults like vegetable matter and the level of felting.
The two major end uses for wool are apparel products and carpets (both machine made and hand-knotted).
The three systems for making wool yarns are:
r Woollen (condenser spun)
r Semi-worsted, or
r Worsted.
The following table provides a general indication of the end uses of wool based on fibre diameter.
Diagram 1.1 End use of wool
Diagram 1.1 End use of wool
The consumption of wool by end use in the six main markets (France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK and USA) for 1992:
Million kg
Menswear 101.1
Womenswear 150.1
Knitwear 89.7
Other Apparel 73.7
Carpets 165.9
Other Interior Textiles 70.6
Total 651.1
There are however, a vast number of other products made from wool and a few of the more interesting ones include:
r Mattress and furniture stuffings
r Tennis ball covers
r Piano hammers
r Insulation
r Felt hats and toys
1.2 Goats
1.2.1 Mohair
1.2.1.1 Introduction to Mohair
Somewhat confusingly, mohair comes from the angora goat, a species indigenous to Turkey but said to have originated in the mountains of Tibet - although its true origins are subject to speculation. The evidence, however, suggests that angora goats arrived in Turkey by way of Palestine and the desert regions further north. The breed is thought to be at least 3,000 years old, and there is little doubt that for many centuries these unusually frail and beautiful creatures have been highly prized.
The breed takes its name from Angora in Turkey, better known today as Ankara. The hair of the goat - which is white, long and very fine and silky - is called "mohair" which is a corruption of the ancient Arabic word "mukhyar" meaning the "best of selected fleece". It was noted for its softness, brightness and receptiveness to rich dyes.
Today, the best raw material comes from South Africa where there are strict guidelines and standards, and the industry is well organised. The focus in breeding programmes is to obtain goats that produce less kemp fibre.
Despite its historic connections with mohair, Turkish mohair production lags behind the industries in South Africa and Texas. Turkish quality control leaves much to be desired by modern standards and Turkish fleeces are considered too kempy. The amount of mohair obtained per goat is much lower than South African and Texan goats, as animals raised in Turkey are shorn only once a year.
Australia currently contributes 4 per cent and New Zealand only 2 per cent of world mohair production, although the fibre produced is more lustrous than that obtained in more arid climates. It is also reported that genetic breeding programmes in Australasia are resulting in a dramatic reduction in the level of kemp.
Angora goats are not a sturdy breed and thrive best under certain conditions. The angora goat's demands are exact: they thrive at altitude in a warm, dry climate. If exposed to cold or wet, they may die of pneumonia, and this provides a sharp contrast to the much hardier cashmere goat.
The best fleece is produced in high altitude where the animals can forage for a variety of shrubs and aromatic plants. It is important for the goats to lead an active life, constantly on the move.
More attention must be paid to the fragile angora goat than to any other livestock. The amount of mohair that the angora goat produces (unlike the cashmere goat) is mainly dependent on the nutritive value of its feed, rather than upon seasonal or climatic effects, although mohair production obviously falls during drought periods.
1.2.1.2 Production of Mohair
Mohair accounts for only 0.1 per cent of world natural fibre production. Annual world mohair production amounts to 15 thousand tonnes compared with 15 thousand tonnes of cotton and 1.7 million tonnes of wool. The major producers are Southern Africa (South Africa and Lesotho), followed by the USA (Texas), Turkey, Argentina, Australia and New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand production is still very small as breeders in both countries are trying to develop a breed of angora goat suitable for their particular environment, but it is hoped that production will expand. Small amounts of mohair are also produced in Zimbabwe; by the Navajo Indians in Arizona, USA and Mexico; and on many small angora goat farm operations in the UK, Spain and France. However, the quantities from these sources are negligible compared with the major producing countries.
The latest figures suggest that the total production of mohair in 1993 was 14.95 thousand tonnes.
Table 1.3 World mohair production by main producing countries
(thousand tonnes)
YEAR
SOUTH
AFRICA
F
USA
F
TURKEY
F
ARGENTINA
F
LESOTHO
F
AUSTRALIA
NEW
ZEALAND
MISC
PRODUCTION
F
TOTAL
Source: International Mohair Association
1.2.1.3 Fibre Characteristics of Mohair
The Mohair fleece of the angora goat is white, smooth and lustrous and has a high tensile strength. The smooth lustrous appearance is caused by the flat, overlapping scales covering the fibre. Although mohair - like wool - consists of the protein keratin, it nevertheless differs from wool in certain respects. The cross-section of wool is slightly elliptical, whereas the very fine mohair fibre is round. The scales are larger than wool and lie flatter, making a smoother fibre surface. The resultant greater reflection of light gives mohair its characteristic lustre.
The value of a fleece is determined by fibre diameter, lustre, softness, freedom or near freedom from kemps, and clean yield. Kemps are short, heavily medullated, coarse fibres. Kemp fibres contain air spaces (medulla) which reduce the effectiveness of dye and in a finished cloth show up as being much lighter in colour than the other fibres. Although in certain end uses kemp can be used to create a special effect, in mohair kemp is undesirable - too much kemp will cause serious problems in spinning and dyeing. The presence of any foreign material in the fleece will affect the quality of the final product and will have to be removed prior to processing, adding to the cost of manufacture. Kemp can be controlled or reduced by genetic selection.
Grading is primarily related to fibre diameter. The age of the goat is probably the most important determinant in the quality and quantity of mohair produced. Fleece production increases from birth and peaks at approximately three or four years of age. The average peak production in South Africa is about 4-5 kg a year for females and 5-6 kg for males. Over the goat's lifespan, the fibre diameter increases from an average of 24 microns for kids up to 46 microns for strong adults. Kids normally produce fibre with a diameter of 24-28 microns at their first shearing, approximately 29-30 at one year, 31-34 at 18 months, and from 36 to 46 microns as adults. Staple length shows little change with age and grows at an average rate of 20-25 mm/month.
The first three shearings produce the most sought-after fibre and subsequently the fibre becomes coarser. Kid mohair fetches the highest price but only represents 16 per cent of the clip.
1.2.1.4 End Uses of Mohair
Mohair is a lustrous fibre with a silky, luxurious appearance but it is also very hard wearing. One of the advantages of this fibre is its tremendous versatility. It can be used both for clothing and furnishing and, within these, its end uses are wide ranging. Individual fibres are strong and make a finished fabric that is non-crushable, soil resistant and does not pill. Mohair has an affinity for dyes and is able to absorb them completely and indelibly. It provides warmth during the winter months but also makes a cool suiting fabric for the humidity of summer, hence its popularity in the Far East, particularly Japan.
Mohair is used to manufacture many products - including knitting yarn for hand or machine knitwear, lightweight suitings, fabric for stoles, scarves and warm blankets and durable upholstery velours. It is often blended with wool for top quality blankets where the mohair content makes the fabric warmer, and at the same time lighter.
About 12 per cent of total mohair production goes into furnishing fabrics, such as upholstery velours and moquettes. Such fabrics are often used for upholstery, particularly in prestige locations - including the first class areas of ships such as the QE2. Mohair upholstery velours are chosen because, although expensive, the fabric is extremely hard wearing and easy to clean while creating a feeling of quality.
One of the challenges facing the mohair industry - particularly the knitting sector - is that the fibre has been imitated by much cheaper acrylic yarns, developed to have similar properties and described as "mohair-like". These products are seen to have done genuine mohair a disservice, adulterating its high quality image.
1.2.2 Cashmere
1.2.2.1 Introduction to Cashmere
The appeal of cashmere and its unrivalled status as a luxury fibre hinges on three key factors:
r its visual appeal and its extreme softness;
r its scarcity, and
r its image or mystique.
As a luxury fibre, Cashmere commands some of the highest prices in the world of textiles. Only vicuna and musk ox - neither of which is available in anything approaching commercial quantities - achieve higher prices than cashmere. Another key feature of its attraction is its scarcity in comparison with other well known fibres, both natural and man-made. The uncertainty and speculation which surround the production and availability of cashmere have increased its appeal, sometimes sending prices soaring upwards. Also, the geographical remoteness of cashmere production, the dependence on manual skills in the early stages of processing and the fibre's association with exotic peoples following a traditional rural way of life add to the attraction of cashmere fibre in highly industrialised western urban markets.
Cashmere is one of the alternative - and lesser used - spellings of Kashmir, a region, partly in India and partly in Pakistan, in the western Himalayas. This wild and mountainous area gave its name to the fine soft goat's wool, or down, which first came to the West in the form of intricately woven cashmere shawls. In fact the fibre came not from Kashmir but from Tibet where it was gathered by herdsmen from their goats during the animals' spring moult. Cashmere fibre took its name from Kashmir as it was there that it was spun, woven and sold as a finished item. Today in Kashmir and Tibet - where the fibre is still produced and processed by hand - it is known locally as pashmina.
1.2.2.2 Production of Cashmere
Detailed information on cashmere production, particularly that in China, is not easy to obtain. Accurate figures on national cashmere production are difficult - if not impossible - to acquire. One source of information is the IWS China Branch which estimates that in 1988 there were 67 million goats in China, of which 40 million were producing cashmere.
However, in 1988, world production of cashmere was estimated at about 5,000 tonnes. This compares with an annual availability of wool in the same year of 1.8 million tonnes. World cashmere production is thought to have declined since then.
Estimates of the volume of cashmere produced in China, Mongolia, Iran and Afghanistan vary considerably. An estimate of current world production of cashmere raw material is 4,500 tonnes, which represents a 10 per cent decline from a figure quoted in 1987 of 5,000 tonnes.
China itself produces roughly 60 per cent of the total volume of raw cashmere, with Inner Mongolia contributing up to 70 per cent of this amount. The remainder is thought to be split roughly equally between Mongolia (20-25 per cent) and Iran and Afghanistan (20-25 per cent). Iranian and Afghan cashmere is of a lower quality to the cashmere from China and is spun into yarn principally for woven cloth.
As well as being by far the world's largest supplier, China produces the best quality cashmere. The Chinese claim that the very finest cashmere is produced north of the 40th parallel in Inner Mongolia (north of the Yangtse River).
1.2.2.3 Fibre Characteristics of Cashmere
Chinese cashmere has a fibre diameter of between 12.5 and 16.0 microns. A diameter of 15.5 microns is considered a standard for cashmere. The longer the fibre the better the quality. The Chinese Commodity Inspection Bureau (CCIB) specifies that the hair should be longer than 32 mm. A fibre length of 46 mm is considered long.
White breeds are most desirable, as white down commands the best prices. White fibre is preferred since it is easiest to dye, producing the purest colours. This is particularly important for cashmere knitwear where soft pastel shades are perennial favourites. Cross-breeding can result in undesirable coloured fibre.
Cashmere produced in Mongolia is generally slightly coarser, between 16.0 and 17.5 microns, but longer. It is used in knitwear and weaving. Cashmere produced in Iran and Afghanistan has a diameter of 17-21 microns and is chiefly used for weaving.
1.2.2.4 End Uses of Cashmere
The knitwear industry is the largest consumer of cashmere. Traditionally, Scotland has been the home of the cashmere knitwear industry, producing collections known to prestigious markets all over the world. Many knitwear producers use cashmere from time to time, often using blended yarns. Few specialise in 100 per cent cashmere knitwear, however. The Scottish knitters still constitute one of the biggest markets for cashmere fibre outside China.
The weaving sector is a smaller consumer of cashmere than is the knitwear industry. Nevertheless, significant amounts of cashmere go into accessories (scarves, shawls, stoles), rugs (especially travel rugs and "throws") and cloth for luxury coats, jackets and suits for the menswear trade.
The hair which is removed from the down in the debarring process is used in carpets, underfelts, and interlinings for men's suits and jackets.
1.3 Camel
1.3.1 Introduction to Camel Hair
The Camelus is part of the Camelidae Gray family, as is the South American Auckenidi (which includes Llama, alpaca, vicuna and guanaco). The Camelus is made up of two sub-species: the one humped and the two humped.
The one humped dromedary or Arabian camel is found throughout Africa, Arabia, the Near East and, to a lesser extent, in other areas of Asia. It was imported into the Canary Islands, Spain, the former USSR, and to various Central and South American countries and Australia, where it adapted to local conditions.
The two humped species, known as the Bactrian camel, is bred in Eastern and Central Asia. Surviving in extremely cold climates, the Bactrian camel has been used throughout history by the Tartars, the Mongols and the Chinese. It is not a particularly intelligent animal, having a difficult and capricious character. Both species are used as pack animals, for riding, and sometimes for sport. Camel hair raw material is largely obtained from the double humped Bactrian camel.
The double humped camel is bred mainly in the northern areas of China and Mongolia. In Inner Mongolia (China) breeding areas are concentrated in Alxa Megn prefecture, bordering on the Gobi Desert and in Mongolia. This is an area where the predominantly desert conditions yield only shrubs, on which camels alone can survive. In Mongolia most camels are raised in the Gobi Desert which makes up the southern third of the country. Over half the camel hair produced by China comes from Inner Mongolia, with the remainder from Xinjiang, Gansu, Qinghai and Ningxia. Some camel hair also comes from Afghanistan and Iran, but this is generally of an inferior quality.
1.3.2 Production of Camel Hair
Details on the production of camel hair are very limited.
In 1987, China recorded national production of 1800 tonnes of camel hair, of which 56% came from Inner Mongolia. In this same period, China exported 546 tonnes.
<section>5</section>
1.3.3 Fibre Characteristics of Camel Hair
Camel hair, like cashmere, comprises two qualities: relatively coarse outer hair and inner down fibre. The underdown produced by animals living in the hottest desert climates tends to be coarser and sparser than from those living in a more temperate climate. The best fibre is found in Inner Mongolia and Mongolia. The fine down fibre varies from 19-24 microns - about 2 microns coarser than Iranian cashmere - and varies between 2.5 and 12.5 cm in length. This fibre is the result of many years of selective breeding.
The outer hair of the camel is coarse and can be up to 37.5 cm in length with a diameter of 20-120 microns. The average weight of the adult female under hair is 3.5 kg while that of the male is double this amount. The fibres are obtained by shearing and also by collecting the hair during the moulting season.
Like cashmere, only the soft underwool or down hair is used in the production of yarn. When the camel moults it does not lose its hair all at once: first the neck hair falls off, then the mane and finally the body hair. This process takes place over a six to eight week period starting in late spring. The hair covering the humps is not shorn since, without it, the animals would be more susceptible to disease in the summer months. The hair is obtained by a number of methods: by combing, by shearing and simply by collecting the clumps of hair shed naturally during the moulting season.
Varying from reddish to light brown, the hair is sorted according to shade and age of the animal. Baby camel hair, which has an average diameter of about 19 microns and a length of 2.5-12.5 cm, is the finest and softest. It holds greater cachet but it is not currently in greater demand than adult hair as its high premium is beyond its economic value.
During the winter the Bactrian camel produces long, thick hair. A type of mane grows around the neck and a long tuft extends from the muzzle. Long hair is also found on the joints of the elbows, knees and on the limbs. The most common colour is reddish brown, with variants from brown to grey. The white fleece is the most valued but is very rare.
1.3.4 End Uses of Camel Hair
Fabrics containing camel's hair are left in the natural state or dyed to a darker shade of brown. The fine fur fibres are woven or blended with fine wool for overcoating, top coating, sportswear and sports hosiery.
The long hair removed by the dehairing process is used to make felt for the Mongolian yurts or tents and for the herdsmen's winter coats, which are very warm and completely waterpr