<title>Understanding farmers' communication networks: an experience in the Philippines. Understanding farmer's communication network: an experience in the Philippines</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
PREFACE
It is morning time in Mamala 1, a village in the Quezon province, last ten years: How has farmers gather around a wooden table in the barangay hall. Several deal with those major crops guage among the farmers and have asked for a meeting; they claim they want to learn about farming. After some hesitation, at the request of the visiting workers, institutions and the felt pens and start out by drawing a map of the barangay. The farmers discuss the detailed locations of fields and roads, farms and crops. As other men and women come by, they are absorbed by the group's illustration effort; each one insists on including the exact location of their farms and homes. Corrections are made; unexpected details of the local environment appear. A map of their own environment emerges with their major crops and enterprises carefully illustrated on the large piece of paper.
The researchers ask the group to reminisce on what has changed over the are, how the information farming changed? What have been the major changes in the way they is useful as a common lan-wandering around the area map? Who brought about the new ideas and innovations? Anecdotes emerge along with names of farmers, vendors, extension emerge as well, like the organizations who over the last decade have shaped and influenced farming in the area. From this history of innovation, the "actors" and their interactions start to appear as a network of knowledge and information exchange. It is now late moming; after some refreshments, this time the researchers offer to do some drawing in return. They group and draw the actors who work at the village, municipal and regional level; they draw a map showing their relationships. A pattern of information exchange emerges on the map; who their partners are, where their sources of knowledge Philippines, and a group of has circulated, who has
controlled the linkages, who has reamed. The map researchers have been which are drawn on the and the researchers. From "reading" the map, major stories surface, such as the problems with cabbage pests; major possibilities researchers, they pick up pineapple contract production which is under way. The last decade in the evolution of the farming system is mapped out in terms of the major players. The farmers have visualized a reality and it has been analysed using a common language with the researchers; a sense of fulfilment permeates the group as communication takes place. It is now time to meet and interview the other actors and start investigating the linkages; it is time to look for entry points for their possible improvement.
ACRONYMS
AKIS Agricultural Knowledge and Information System
AT - Agricultural technician (extension worker)
BPI Bureau of Plant Industries
DA Department of Agriculture
DANIDA Danish International Development Agency
DENR Department of the Environment and Natural Resources
DOST Department of Science and Technology
DSC Development support communication
FPR Farmer participatory research
FSD Farming systems development
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ISATGaT Integrated System for Agriculture Technology Generation and Transfer
KADA Key agricultural development area (Department of Agriculture)
KPA Key production areas (Philippines 2000 medium term strategy)
LGC Local Government Code
LOU Local government unit
MAO Municipal agricultural officer
NARRDN National Agricultural Resources Research and Development Network, PCARRD
NARS National agriculture research systems
NEDA National Economic Development Authority
NIA National Irrigation Administration
PCARRD Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development
PHILRICE Philippines Rice Research Institute
PRA Participatory rural appraisal
PTD Participatory technology development
R & D Research and development
RAAKS Rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems
RLARC Regional Integrated Agricultural Research Centre
RRA Rapid rural appraisal
SCU State colleges and universities
STAND Science and Technology Agenda for National Development (1993)
STARRDEC Southern Tagalog Agriculture and Resources Research and Development Consortium, Los Banos, Region IV
T & V Training and visit system
TOT Transfer of technology model
UPLB University of the Philippines at Los Banos
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION
For several years there has been an awareness in the Philippines of the need to ensure that investments in natural resources research produce options which farmers may adapt and adopt. The Philippines Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) 1991 Review highlighted the need to address inadequate links between farmers, outreach systems and research. The report underlined the limited number (11 percent) of "mature technologies" which had been adopted by farmers.
This case study grew out of an FAO/UNDP communication for development project which aimed at improving the exchange of relevant agricultural information between research, extension networks and farmers in five regions of the Philippines. The field work in each site was started using rapid appraisal techniques. It soon became evident however, that technology and information per se were insufficient elements to propel an increase in agricultural productivity and rural incomes. Other demands were voiced by the communities, which in turn pointed to the need to make services in all sectors more responsive to barangay needs, including credit supply, infrastructure development, marketing, health and education. The farmers' definitions of problems and their underlying causes indicated the limited impact which agricultural information and communication have, if not coordinated, with other services. This explains why agricultural development needs to have a systems perspective. From a
systems perspective, it is necessary to identify all the actors involved. In this context it was clear that the Department of Agriculture's extension system is only one of many actors which influence farmers' decision making
hence the necessity for systematic mapping of the agricultural information linkages that are important to farmers.
Farmers' capacity to control their environment is the result of the resources at their disposal; among these, knowledge and skills are key components. Indeed, the evolution of farming is influenced as much by changes in the environment, the marketplace and culture, as it is by the information which flows into a farming society.
Farmers communicate with multiple sources of information to shape and enrich their knowledge base. This study focuses on developing an approach to map the communication networks which exist in an agricultural system and to identify the main actors which play a role in shaping agricultural and rural development.
This study proved timely because of the new Local Government Code (LGC) implemented in April, 1993. The LGC has decentralized the Philippine extension service to the provincial and municipal levels. This authority is already in the hands of provincial governors and municipal mayors. Many extension workers have now become municipal employees, which means their job descriptions require reviewing. This decentralisation also calls for the development of new relationships among researchers, universities and municipal authorities. It was therefore deemed imperative to develop innovative approaches for diagnosis and decision-making regarding agricultural development at the local level. The new municipal agricultural officers (MAOs) need to be equipped for the additional responsibility granted by the LGC, especially as their new supervisor is a democratically-elected mayor with a constituency to serve.
THE CONCEPTS
The many levels of the knowledge and information networks emerged during interviews conducted by a multi-disciplinary team that went to several farming communities to develop a participatory rural appraisal approach to understanding how villagers receive and process agricultural information.
In order to understand a farming system, it is just as important to understand its information networks as it is to understand its environmental situation or changes in its market place.
An agricultural knowledge and information network describes the interactions among the institutions or individuals - researchers, public sector workers, private tradesmen, non-governmental organizations and farmers - who are part of the system in which agricultural information is exchanged. Yet it is seldom perceived as researchable. The study team sought to develop a quick method for identifying actors and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of a barangay information network. By understanding all of the links and sources of agricultural information and knowledge, it becomes possible to plan interventions that could improve farmers' agricultural knowledge.
By using existing tools of communication for development, farming systems development (FSD), participatory rural appraisal (PRA), and agricultural knowledge and information systems (AKIS) analysis, the multi-discipline team developed an approach for farmers and municipal level officers which will serve as a compliment to FSD and PRA. The team was made up of specialists from FAO and consultants in the fields of communication for development, farming systems, and agricultural research (see Appendix 1).
The study began at the farmer level. The team joined farmers in an exercise to identify the actors in their information network. It then moved up the system, to interview those actors- barangay organizations, municipal agricultural technicians, and officers, input tradesman and middlemen, provincial agricultural officers, regional representatives of government departments and national level officials of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Science and Technology.
In the study, the method proved useful at the barangay level when it was possible to gather farmers for open informal discussions about their farming system. In the process of working together to map linkages, the farmers and team members developed a common language and farmers' analytical abilities were enhanced. The process also proved useful in a group meeting with municipal agricultural technicians.
In all communities visited, the agricultural information which had reached the users was found to be, at best, limited, and in most cases, inadequate. Farmers' primary source of information was other farmers. In general, the agricultural technicians (ATs- formerly, extension workers) were not meeting the farmers' needs. The information programmes handed down from researchers to the ATs for transfer to farmers were not adequate. It was evident there was a need to transform the role of the AT into a facilitator or information broker. Some of the ATs themselves recognised the need to improve their skills and redefine their roles. The roles of several of the private sector actors appeared to be complimentary to the ATs, and there is ample room for improving the link between research and farmers.
THREE MAJOR LESSONS:
* Mapping linkages in a knowledge system uncovers information exchange mechanisms. Evaluating the performances of these linkages is a first step toward a systematic linkage analysis. For rural development programmes which target poverty alleviation, it is especially important to understand the control of a linkage because it reveals who is being served.
* There is a need for a new role for municipal ATs. The farmers proposed a shift in functions. The ATs are committed workers who are more effective when facilitating than when instructing. The farmers' needs as well as the professional goals of the ATs call for these new roles.
For municipal leaders, the approach provides a tool to assess farmers' needs, identify networks and identify the appropriate actors with whom to collaborate. Municipal agricultural officers (MAO) and mayors will be better equipped to negotiate with all sectors when they understand the needs, resources and patterns of information demand and supply. For the MAO, the approach provides a management tool.
* These developments suggest that this study was not only timely, but of relevance to several governmental departments that play a role in agricultural development. They also show that there was a methodological gap to fill in order to operationalize the new relationships between the local government units (at the municipal and provincial levels) and national government agencies.
The approach developed by this research team can contribute to the process of decentralisation by providing a cost-effective mechanism to bring farmers, field workers and municipal officers together through a common learning process.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 2 - COMMUNICATION IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
This section has two parts. The first gives the background of the principles that led to this study and explains the increasingly important role of communication in participatory and client oriented agricultural research & development (R & D). The second describes policy changes in the Philippines which are creating a need for the new R & D approaches. The bibliography offers a guide to other literature related to this approach.
THE R & D EVOLUTION
For a better understanding of the R & D evolution, the following main models and trends of the last three decades are described: the "transfer of technology (TOT)" model; the "systems perspective from cropping systems to farming systems development"; the "participatory approach"; the "agricultural knowledge and information systems" model; and finally, the "rapid and participatory appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems".
The transfer of technology model: no room for communication
Since the late 1960s, the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) of many nations have been centralised. The transfer of technology (TOT) model, which considers research the starting point for disseminating agricultural knowledge, has been the standard for NARS in many countries.
In a simplified form, TOT calls for the delivery of research results from scientist to the extension agent, who in turn will transfer the information to the farmer. This model performs well when the scientist, extension agent and farmer come from similar backgrounds, speak the same language and share information of common relevance. The design of extension systems has followed this model.
TOT has been successful in terms of increased food efficiency in favourable areas of many countries. However, TOT has often had inadequate results because of its centralisation of research resources (human and capital), its specialisation of research and the distance of research programmes from small farmers. The yield potential of the best endowed areas is often reached, but at the cost of environmental degradation. In terms of equity to resource-poor farmers, the R & D systems of many countries did not meet the expectation.
In the last two decades, many NARS have become concerned with how to service the technology needs of the large numbers of farmers who have remained outside R & D systems. These are farmers who work with small, fragmented plots of land in rainfed, sloping, droughty, and/or low fertility conditions. Their production systems are complex and diversified. There are no single solutions. Often, the conditions at research stations are different from conditions at the farms, farmers cannot afford to implement recommended technologies or do not have the resources to apply them. As a result, the farmer cannot adopt what the research and extension system offers.
NARS trying to respond to small farmers' needs have faced the constraints of TOT's unidirectional information sharing. In the TOT model, the research system (including basic research, applied research, adaptive research) passes on research results and technology to the extension worker. The extension worker is expected to package this information for dissemination to the farmer. This unidirectional process makes the farmer the receiver of "packaged wisdom". As Roling (1988) put it, the extension worker's job was essentially to get the farmer to do what the extension worker wanted the farmer to do. Then, if the technology was not adopted, it was blamed on the farmer's resistance to change.
The diffusion of innovations model (as developed by Everett Rogers (1983) and others) was based on this blame-the-victim concept.
That model was accompanied by the "training and visit system" (Benor & Harrison, 1977) in which farmers were categorised by their willingness and capacity to innovate. Homogeneous categories of farmers were targeted by extension programmes. Research results were matched with "recommendation domains", that is, homogeneous farmer groups for whom the technology was relevant.
The role of communication in the TOT model is merely to produce information materials for the transfer of knowledge from researchers to farmers through the extension system (Figure 1). This unidirectional transfer leaves little room for communication.
Figure I The TOT model concept.
The research system with its TOT model failed to question its own weakness. It did not ask why the client (farmer) was not adopting its product (improved technology). Instead, it searched for groups of clients willing and capable of adopting it, and for extension mechanisms such as "training and visit systems" (T & V) to reach them more efficiently. It did not seek to communicate, but rather to inform.
The TOT model seeks to sell (disseminate for adoption) a product (technology) by identifying potential customers (homogeneous groups of farmers) and improving the advertising (social marketing for extension). It fails however to feed back information systematically to its R & D department on the clients' views that might make the product more relevant. Feedback only happens when the recipient group is a well-organized and influential farmer lobby: pressure [from a farmer group] implies that farmers have some power to ensure their preferences are considered (Kaimowitz, 1992). Increasingly, compelling evidence suggests that interaction with and external pressure on research from farmers is essential if research is to generate technology options relevant to farmers' needs and opportunities (ISNAR: 1994, p. 3). In addition to external pressure from the farmers, others argue that researchers in the public sector also need to become more accountable to their clientele: "One of the
biggest obstacles to institutionalising participatory, client-driven R & D is that presently most public sector agricultural research systems and staff are not penalised for producing technologies that farmers cannot use." (Ashby, 1993: p.2).
The systems perspective: an opening for communication
Cropping systems development was the first attempt by R & D subsystems to respond to the complexities of farming systems and was a significant first move away from the monocropping laboratory conditions which dominated commodity-based research.
Its approach of looking at the relationship among the many crops grown by small farmers led researchers to consider a broader set of variables - labour availability, gender roles, household economies, markets, supply and availability of credit and inputs, price policies, interactions among the different components of a diversified farm (livestock, trees, pasture, annual and perennial crops, aquaculture, etc.), energy, etc. The "farming systems development" (FSD) perspective invited the social scientist into the agricultural R & D arena. As an interdisciplinary approach, FSD has battled to gain recognition in the R & D community made up of specialised expertise and compartmentalized mandates. Not surprisingly, FSD has come under attack. After all, the TOT model has never welcomed critiques.
The systems approach makes an effort to close the gap between the research systems' agenda and the resource-poor farmers' needs. FSD recognises that the nature of research itself needs modification, but FSD still offers only unidirectional transmission of information. The control of decision making remains in the hands of the experts, although at least now they come from both the natural and the social sciences (Chambers & Jiggins, 1986).
Figure 2 Farmers' diagram (from Lightfoot, Feldman and Abedin, 1991)
The systems approach has at least provided a foothold for the field of communication. After all, systematic farming-systems surveys require contact with the farmers. Even though the survey tool remains researcher-controlled, the dialogue which develops is already an improvement. "Rapid rural appraisals" (RRA) are an example of the contribution of the FSD approach in terms of a cost-effective tool to obtain a multi-dimensional picture of a farmer's situation. However, RRA is researcher-controlled. The farmers are surveyed but their answers are used as part of an outsider's study. Participatory rapid appraisals tools have been developed to shift the control over the diagnosis from researcher to the audience. In this instance, the tools by which the audience expresses itself are in fact communication tools. The work done by Lightfoot & Minnick (1991), and Lightfoot, Feldman and Abedin (1991) using diagrams for improved FSD analysis with farmers is an important accomplishment
because the farmer can contribute his own perspective, language or voice.
The systems approach courts the participatory approach: a red carpet for communication
Parallel to the evolution of FSD, the development of farmer participatory research methods brought attention to several previously-ignored issues. Farmers' indigenous knowledge, their experience in doing research (often dealing with multiple variables and risk considerations) and their capacity to share information are crucial assets. The development of participatory appraisal tools reflects the need to shift the control of FSD diagnostic tools from specialist to farmer. PRA methods have evolved through communication tools that are already part of farmers' livers (Haverkort, et al. 1991).
The field of participatory technology development began with the PRA diagnostic stage, but now involves farmers in several other steps of agricultural research. The communication possibilities for this kind of horizontal interaction are wide open and most promising. "Farmer participatory research" (FPR) requires communication to make use of its full potential as a facilitator of exchange between cultures and perspectives. Much work has already been done in terms of integrating communication tools into those PRA methodologies that include visualized analyses. This study drew on several:
* participatory mapping and modelling (resource and social maps)
* aerial photograph analyses
* seasonal calendars
* daily and activity profiles
* historical profiles and trend analyses
* time lines and chronologies
* preference ranking
* Venn and network diagrams
* systems and flow diagrams
* pie diagrams
(Cornwall, Guijt and Welbourn, 1992, p.14)
Figure 3 Overlapping domains in the systems approach
From the point of view of information exchange, the above methodologies call for close interaction among researchers, field workers and farming populations (Figure 3). The interaction between researchers and farmers refers to the growing field of participatory research, also referred to as farmer participatory research (FPR).
The interaction among research, extension and farmers as portrayed in Figure 3 is referred to as participatory research and extension or, in other words, the joint search for solutions to problems. As is highlighted in the last chapters of this report, the role of the extension worker in this context is one of facilitation of common learning. The field worker becomes a facilitator, a broker of knowledge supply and demand.
Agricultural knowledge and information systems: the door to integrate communication into agricultural R & D systems
As the systems approach to agricultural R & D evolves to accommodate participatory approaches, the underlying TOT linear model is stretched to its limit. This is evident when institutions try to adopt newer methods and find that the underlying TOT model blocks the way. For example, the FSD units of many NARS function effectively as add-on services, but have not become part of the major commodity programmes.
Figure 4 The AKIS (from Roling, 1988)
The TOT model is being eclipsed by newer models which acknowledge the overlapping of researchers, outreach workers and farmers. (Christoplos & Nitsch, 1993). Rather than focusing on the technology itself, the new systems recognise that information and knowledge provide a common denominator among farmers, extension workers and researchers. In the late 1980s, researchers at Wageningen Agricultural University in the Netherlands proposed the "agricultural knowledge and information systems" (AKIS) model.
The model describes the two-way flow of information and knowledge among the research, dissemination and utilizer sub-systems (see Figure 4). These sub-systems play equally important roles in the system.
The utilizer sub-system is a source of information and knowledge that feeds into the other two. For the utilizer sub-system to be on a more equal footing with the other two, the sub-system must have a demand capacity. After all, the best extension systems in the world develop where farmers are organized and able to lobby for the technical assistance which they consider priorital (Roling, 1988). It is the demand capacity of farmers that dictates the quality and effectiveness of the extension support. The opposite process, whereby extension systems conceivably strengthen farmers' production systems through technology, is more a myth of the TOT model than an observable reality.
In the AKIS, the two-way exchange of information is crucial for effective generation and transfer of relevant technology. As a consequence, the role of the dissemination sub-system (the extension organization) has been reformulated from a one-way TOT persuasive channel into a two-way channel for requests and answers which facilitates the learning process for both farmers and researchers. But the change from disseminating to facilitating requires staff with fundamentally different attitudes, skills and knowledge. From the point of view of the AKIS, and of participatory research, the facilitator can be described as a broker of information demands and supplies.
The model is aimed at "supporting decision making, problem solving and innovation in a given country's agriculture" (Roling, 1990). The AKIS model is based on systems theory and is therefore difficult to operationalize in the context of existing linear systems which were developed in the NARE; under the TOT model. The model must first be tested by using it to analyze a given AKIS. Roling (1990) suggests eight different research methods to study AKIS:
1. Comparative analysis of two systems
2. Comparing the formal and the actual system
3. Linkages matrix
4. Tracing one successful innovation back through the system
5. Comparing the ideal theoretical system with the actual
6. Analysing the transformations (research findings into recommendations, messages, etc.)
7. Participating in linkage events
8. Assessing corporate ideology
However, the above choices remain research-controlled and do not necessarily incorporate the participatory dimension.
AKIS and participatory rapid appraisal: the starting point for this study
The main contribution of this study has been the experimental development of an approach to make the AKIS model operational. "Rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems (RAAKS)", a methodology pioneered by Engel and Solomon (1983) provided a concrete starting point - an operational method with steps to follow. Using RAAKS to study an AKIS provides a strategic diagnosis in support of knowledge management.
As developed by Engel and Solomons, RAAKS may be used as a management tool for understanding an agricultural knowledge system, or for any other system where knowledge is the common denominator among groups of individuals and institutions. RAAKS is rapid and very systematic, but it is also a complicated exercise. The project team borrowed heavily from RAAKS but tried to make it more accessible to farmers. Following a growing trend of participatory analyses (Dela Cruz, et al., 1992; Lamb, R., 1993), this study explored network analysis from the user perspective.
The team focused on communication linkages and the patterns of exchange in the context of the AKIS. It also focused on mapping the AKIS from the farmer level up. For a farmer, the AKIS is basically a communication network for the exchange of information. "Communication does not take place randomly, but within patterned networks. Network analysis, when applied to communication about agriculture in rural communities, reveals those people who are regularly used as sources of advice and information and agriculture and conversely those who are not well connected to establish networks (Garforth, 1993: p.2).
In the analysis of the major linkages, the relevance of other actors' services was used as a criterion to review linkages. This criterion refers to the usefulness of a service for the other actors' learning process.
At this stage it may seem tempting to try to develop a blueprint for the new tasks of the extension organization and its field workers. However, the nature and structure of an AKIS are not static - they differ according to site and level of analysis. In terms of change through time, farming systems' "evolvability and flexibility are critical characters for survival" (Lightfoot, Pingali and Harrington, 1993: p. 18) and therefore contribute to the evolving nature of an AKIS. In addition, the extension organization is only one among the many actors in the AKIS and therefore the role of a field worker and the organization must be flexible - flexible enough to exploit the strengths and maybe overcome some of the weaknesses of an existing AKIS.
A future step would be the description of the AKIS as a learning system: 'What we are suggesting through our parading of systems agriculture is a further shift towards the creation of new learning systems. Here, agricultural professionals will be engaged in the process of collaborative inquiry with farmers, in action-oriented research towards the establishment of sustainable relationships between people and their environment" (Sriskandarajah, 1991:p. 3). "The focus is then less on what we learn, and more on how we learn. The need is for learning environments: conditions in which learning can take place through experience, through open and equal interactions, and through personal exploration and experiment" (Pretty & Chambers, 1992: p. 5).
Knowledge management is defined as the activities people perform to facilitate collective learning and local knowledge processes among individuals and organizations. RAAKS is a participatory communication method that enables the actors in an AKIS to diagnose and define problems and plan interventions. This feature of the RAAKS has proven important in the present study in terms of the potential application of the approach as a management tool for agricultural decision making at the municipal level.
POLICY CHANGES IN THE PHILIPPINES INFLUENCING R & D
In this section particular attention is paid to the significance of the approach in the context of the new policy framework with examples drawn from experiences in integrating the above R & D models and methods in the Philippines.
In 1987 the Department of Agriculture (DA) was given the mandate "to use a bottom-up, self-reliant, farm systems approach that will emphasise social justice, equity, productivity and sustainability in the use of agricultural resources" (Dar, 1993: p. 1). However, the same author acknowledges that "in many instances, farming systems technologies developed by R & D institutions failed the test of site realities... The lesson is that in the formulation of interventions we have to begin by taking as the point of departure the existing tradition and resources of farmers." (ibid, p.5).
The constraints are not merely methodological or technical. Land tenure and migration to the highlands are major constraints to effective agricultural development in the Philippines. The FSD perspective has become integrated into some R & D programmes, yet its impact has been limited because of inadequate diagnosis of existing practices (knowledge). T