<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
An important recommendation of the International Expert Consultation on Non-wood Forest Products held in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, from 17 to 27 January 1995, was that FAO should develop and provide comprehensive guidelines for sustainable management and utilisation of these products. Preparation of such guidelines is a major and multidisciplinary task which needs to be approached in phases. It involves evaluation of existing knowledge and practices, assessment for their strengths and weaknesses, analysis of linkages of different aspects and influence of technological and institutional factors, development and testing of guidelines for component aspects, and consolidating of them into a compatible set of practical guidelines covering the whole field of NWFPs. This would need time.
Development activities on NWFPs cannot afford to be delayed till the whole process is completed. In fact, it is possible to compare the merits and demerits of selected cases and to develop general principles and approaches for the sustainable management and utilization of NWFPs, and to make them available for reference and use. The present publication: Promoting Non-wood Forest Products for Rural Income and Sustainable Forestry aims to do that. It is basically targeted at planners, practitioners and extension agents and its effects are expected to be filtered down to the benefit of local communities. It is also expected that this would encourage similar publications in local languages.
On our part, it is our intention to follow this publication on principles and approaches with detailed guidelines on specific aspects, and eventually to prepare consolidated and comprehensive guidelines for planning and developing NWFPs. Work is already under way on guidelines for management of non-wood forest resources and marketing of non-wood products.
Material for this publication was assembled and an initial draft prepared by David Taylor. A number of experts working in the field of NWFPs, both within and outside FAO, provided valuable inputs. The final version benefited from the detailed comments provided by Blaak, Braatz, Chipeta, Hoskins, Lintu, Souvannavong and Vantomme. The editing and organising of illustrations were done by Laura Russo. Elisa Rubini did the formatting and proofing. All activities leading to this publication were guided and coordinated by Cherukat Chandrasekharan, Chief, Non-Wood Products and Energy Branch. My thanks are due to all of them.
It is my pleasure and privilege to release this publication with the hope that it will be found useful by readers.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
Acronyms
ATI
Appropriate Technology International
CAMPFIRE
Communal Areas Management Programme for Indigenous Resources
CATIE
Centro Agronómico de Investigación y Enseñanza Tropical
CIGAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
CONACNIE
Coordination of Indian Nationalities in Ecuador
CPC
Provisional Central Product Classification
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
F/FRED
Forestry/Fuelwood Research and Development
GATT
General Agreement on Trade and Tariff
GEF
Global Environmental Facility
HS
Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System
ICRAF
International Centre for Agroforestry Research
IDRC
International Development Research Centre of Canada
IFPRI
International Food Policy Research Institute
IITA
International Institute for Tropical Agriculture
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
ISIC
International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities
ISO
International Standards Organization
IUCN
World Conservation Union
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NWFPs
Non-Wood Forest Products
SITC
Standard International Trade Classification
TRAFFIC
Trade Record Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce, a monitoring body of IUCN
TRIFED
Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India
TRIPs
Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights
UNAC
Upland NGO Assistance Committee (Philippines)
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WHO
World Health Organization
WRI
World Resources Institute
WTO
World Trade Organization
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>3</section>
Summary
This volume outlines the approaches for assessing the potential of NWFP activities in a particular area. It is mainly addressed to policy-makers, researchers, local extension workers, NGOs and others professionals to identify and pursue possibilities for better management of NWFPs. It is hoped that through better assistance and support, community-level producers and processors will be able to realize the sustainable potential of NWFP activities. An outline of the kind of technical, institutional and policy support required to promote NWFP activities, is also provided.
Chapters 2 and 3 describe methods of assessing the forest resource as a source of non-wood products, and its relationship to local communities. This assessment of the resource, its sustainable yield and current demands on it form the most basic steps in determining what level of forest use is sustainable in the long term. Yet this crucial information is often overlooked.
Chapter 4 outlines opportunities for improved and integrated forest management incorporating NWFPs, and discusses recent trends in wildlife management, research for medicines, and ecotourism.
Chapters 5-7 focus on enhancing local livelihood through local enterprises based on forest resources. In many cases, capturing an appropriate share of a product's added value closer to the source represents a way to ensure that the resource is valued properly in management decisions, and to distribute its added value more equitably through the market chain. Chapter 5 describes how to identify promising commercial opportunities, how to assess alternatives and what skills are needed for ensuring success of the ventures. Chapter 6 goes into more detail on specific types of NWFP processing enterprises. Chapter 7 outlines the crucial but often neglected areas of marketing and trade.
Chapter 8 addresses the issue of organizing local groups for harvesting, processing and marketing. Collective/participatory organization is an important factor in the success of local enterprises, both economically and environmentally.
Chapters 9 and 10, finally, describe the technical and institutional requirements for improved management of NWFPs.
The principles and approaches described here represent an early step on the path toward better understanding the role and use of NWFPs. Many gaps remain in our knowledge - on harvesting technologies, assessment of resources and harvest levels, as well as on the nature of non-wood forest resources themselves - that must be addressed in further research involving communities. For example, techniques for assessing forest herbs and vines lag behind those for assessing tree-based products; that gap is unavoidably reflected here. Likewise, sub-fields for which few sound guidelines exist, such as ecotourism, are suggested here for further study. The sections "For further reading" after each chapter provide sources of more information.
Appendix 1 lists contact addresses to promote networking among those working in the broad and varied field of NWFPs.
Correcting the neglect of this sector and integrating non-wood forest resources into overall development requires involvement by people from a wide range of backgrounds. This volume attempts to provide a common basis for this collaborative action.
As for Uncle Sanya, ... he was off into the woods on one pretext or the other ... Mushrooms and snails were the real goals, with the gathering of firewood used as the dutiful excuse.
- Wolé Soyinka (Nigeria), Aké: the years of childhood
A large, red-leafed tree in a field caught Maan's attention. "What's that tree?" he asked
... "It looks a bit like a mango with its red leaves, but it isn't a mango."
"That's a mahua^1^/," said the farmer ... He looked amused, as if he'd had to explain what a cat was.
^1^/ Madhuca indica.
"Very handsome tree," said Maan.
"Oh yes. Useful too," said the farmer...
"The flowers ... are very light and fragrant ... Ferment them, and they'll give you a liquor ... Cook them, and they'll act as a vegetable. Boil them with milk, and they'll make the milk red and the person who drinks it strong. Mix them with the flour you use to make your rotis with in winter, and you won't feel the cold ... Feed them to your cattle," added the farmer. "It'll double their energy." ...
"What a wonderful tree!" said Maan, delighted ... The countryside, which so far had looked entirely monotonous to him, became interesting.
- Vickram Seth (India), A Suitable Boy
<section>4</section>
1. Introduction
Why are non-wood forest products important?
Who uses non-wood forest products?
A basis for sustainable forest management
A range of options
References
In recent years forests have been increasingly recognized as rich reservoirs of many valuable biological resources, not just timber. The term non-wood forest product (NWFP) emerged as an umbrella term to recognize the products derived from these various forest resources as a group.
This volume originates from an International Expert Consultation on Non-wood Forest Products, cosponsored by the FAO Forestry Department and the Indonesian government in January 1995. It represents a first step taken by FAO to respond to that meeting's recommendation that FAO prepare guidelines for planners and entrepreneurs to use in developing NWFPs activities.
The definition of non-wood forest products used here is the one which was adopted at that meeting in Indonesia (FAO, 1995):
NWFPs consist of goods of biological origin other than wood, as well as services derived from forests and allied land uses.
This definition is intended to encourage better accounting of NWFPs, of both plant and animal origin, as a group and their contribution to the national economic indexes which policy-makers use to decide development priorities and policy. As such, it admittedly does not cover many important cultural and environmental forest functions. The definition will no doubt continue to be refined as the field evolves.
Why are non-wood forest products important?
For most of recorded history, people have valued forests not for wood, but for other products. Ancient writings from China, Egypt and India record a wide variety of uses for forest plants, and compilations of botanical knowledge from Western Asia were prized by the ancient Greeks (Wickens, 1990). Whereas wood products have become major international commodities in modern times, NWFPs rank among the oldest traded commodities (Iqbal, 1993). Ancient Egyptians imported gum arabic from Sudan for use in paints and the mummification process. International trade in sandalwood oil dates back to the twelfth century A.D.
Through the experience of forest communities, forestry professionals have recently rediscovered the great importance of NWFPs (ranging from food, fruits and fibres, dye stuffs, flavours and medicines) for meeting people's needs. In recent years, a growing body of scientific research has suggested that, given certain basic conditions, NWFPs can help communities to meet their needs without destroying the forest resource.
The most commonly cited instances come from Latin America, where the term extractive reserves describes a system where forest is set aside for low-impact use by traditional communities in the area. No single model can suit all conditions, however.
Why have modern science and governments overlooked the importance of this non-wood forest wealth for so long? The answer is threefold. First, most of these products are used mainly for rural subsistence or local markets. They often go unrecorded in official statistics, which focus on nationally traded goods (Chandrasekharan, 1994). Second, because modern government administration has divided these products among forestry, agriculture and horticulture, statistics do not recognize even nationally and internationally important non-wood forest commodities as originating from the forest. The divisions between, and the lack of clear definition of, agriculture and forestry have created a large blind spot in the way we reckon our dependence on forests. Finally, modern forestry has favoured timber and large-scale enterprises, and has generally regarded non-wood products as incidental. However, studies show that forests produce many more types of products than wood products
particularly in some tropical forests. (Toledo et al., 1992). Small-scale forest-based enterprises in Zimbabwe, which mostly are based on NWFPs, employed 237,000 people in 1991, compared to 16,000 employed in conventional forestry and forest industries for the same year (Arnold et al., 1994).
Who uses non-wood forest products?
For most of the world's rural households, NWFPs provide essential food and nutrition, medicine, fodder, fuel, thatch and construction materials, mulch and non-farm income. These products are particularly important in relieving the "hunger periods" in the agricultural cycle, and in smoothing out other seasonal fluctuations. Dealing in NWFPs can provide employment during slack periods of the agricultural cycle, and provide a buffer against risk and household emergencies.
Poor households, in particular, depend on these products for their livelihood because they usually have more access to the forest than to other resources.
For the same reason - greater dependence on open-access forests, for lack of other options women usually rely more than men on NWFPs for household use and income. In many places, women are responsible for the household activities that involve forest-based foods and medicine, as well as fuelwood. In this respect NWFPs are particularly important to women, addressing their needs for food security and nutrition.
In local, urban, national and international markets, forest foods and medicines contribute substantially to national economic growth.
NWFPs are therefore important to three main groups:
o rural populations (the largest group) who have traditionally used these items for livelihood and social and cultural purposes;
o urban consumers (a smaller group, but growing faster), who purchase these items;
o traders, and product processors, whose numbers in the NWFP sector increase as urban markets for these products grow.
A basis for sustainable forest management
NWFPs, by complementing wood-based management, offer a basis for managing forests in a more sustainable way. In fragile ecosystems, NWFP activities hold prospects for integrated forms of development that yield higher rural incomes and conserve biodiversity while not competing with agriculture (Sharma, 1995). An important concept in realizing these prospects is adding value locally, usually through some form of rural processing, to ensure that a fair portion of a product's market value accrues to the people who manage the forest resource.
Agenda 21, approved by the UN Conference on Environment and Development (1992) which provides a global plan for action, has recognized the role of NWFPs in sustainable forest management. UNCED highlighted the importance, already recognized by many governments, of informed participation by local communities in all aspects of forest management and planning.
1. Resin tapped from Chir Pine in Northern Pakistan has many uses in various industries. (Photo: M. Kashio)
2. Bamboos are used worldwide for construction, furniture, handicrafts, food (young shoots), erosion control, and many other purposes. (Photo: M. Kashio)
3. Babassu kernel oil in Brazil is a major subsistence product in rural Amazonia and has also a critical industrial and commercial value. (Photo: G. Blaak)
4. Bactris gasipaes in Brazil is widely used for the production of palm heart, fruits, beverage. (Photo: G. Blaak)
Local participation is important for sustainable management of NWFPs for several reasons: (1) to recognize the full extent of local demands on the forest resource; (2) to fully consider the local knowledge of the resource that has developed over time; (3) to engage nearby communities as stake holders in managing the resource, ensuring their commitment to long-term management goals; (4) to engage the energies of local people in their own economic change, which can include decisions on social and cultural priorities that outsiders do not realize.
Involving communities in managing local resources is therefore not simply an equity issue; it is an issue of wise resource use. Failure to do so has broad consequences. Witness the case of Australia, which although home to more than 20,000 species of native flora, until quite recently produced no new food crop except macadamia nuts (Macadamia species), which were domesticated elsewhere. This singular failure is probably because European settlers refused to accept that the indigenous people knew any plants worth cultivating (Wickens, 1990). For more in-depth information on community participation, see FAO (1990).
A range of options
This publication aims to provide some principles and to outline approaches for action by producers of NWFPs and by the agencies that support them - government agencies, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and research organizations.
It is important to recognize that it is not a choice of either timber or non-wood products. Traditional management systems of forest peoples and modern scientific experience with multiple-use management suggest that, with careful planning and monitoring, forests can yield both timber and non-wood harvests on a sustainable basis.
This publication builds on the premise that forests offer a variety of production activities for improving local incomes that do not jeopardize the forest ecosystem. Forest management for NWFPs can provide a continuing source of livelihood and help to maintain the forest resource for future generations. The focus here is on activities that produce items for subsistence and market use. It also considers several activities, such as ecotourism (environmentally and culturally sound tourism based on local scenic attractions) and environmental data gathering (also called "biodiversity prospecting"), which involve no harvest, just observation.
This volume points to the varied cultural roles of forests and their non-wood products, but a full assessment of these is beyond its scope. Rather, it concentrates on the decisions by which people choose to manage non-wood forest resources for livelihood purposes.
References
Arnold, J.E.M., Liedholm, C., Mead, D., and Townson, I.M. 1994. Structure and growth of small enterprises using forest products in southern and eastern Africa. OFI Occasional Paper No 47. Oxford Forestry Institute, Oxford.
Chandrasekharan, C. 1994. Non-wood forest products: a global view of potentials and challenges. Paper for the International Seminar on Management of Minor Forest Products, Dehra-Dun, India, 13-15 November, 1994. FAO, Rome.
FAO. 1990. The community's toolbox: the idea, methods and tools for participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry. Community Forestry Manual No. 2. FAO, Rome (English, French and Spanish versions).
FAO. 1995. Report of the Expert consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 17-27 January 1995. Non-Wood Forest Products 3. FAO, Rome.
Iqbal, M. 1993. International trade in non-wood forest products: an overview. FAO Forest Products Working Paper Misc/93/11. FAO, Rome.
Sharma, P. 1995. Non-wood forest products and integrated mountain development: observations from Nepal. In Report of the Expert consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 17-27 January 1995. Non-Wood Forest Products 3. FAO, Rome.
Toledo, V.M., Batis, A.I., Becerra, R., Martínez, E., and Ramos, C.H. 1992. Products from the tropical rain forests of Mexico: an ethnoecological approach. In Plotkin, M., and Famolare, L., eds., Sustainable harvest and marketing of rain forest products. Conservation International, Washington, D.C.
Wickens, G.E. 1990. What is economic botany? Economic botany 44:12-28.
<section>5</section>
2. Resource assessment and development
Determining tenure and access
The resource inventory
Other factors in resource assessment
Species selection
Sustainable harvest levels
Scope for domestication of species
Summary
References
For further reading
A first step in developing any viable forest enterprise is understanding the capacity of the forest resource. It is impossible to manage the resource wisely or profitably without knowing about its natural growth and production, and the human environment that affects it.
Many people assume that harvests of NWFPs have less impact on a forest than logging. However, this assumption is unfounded. Forest ecosystems have such complex interrelationships that harvests of some non-wood resources can affect plant (and wildlife) populations as negatively as logging. Without a sound knowledge of the resource and regular monitoring, harvests of certain non-wood resources can have a disastrous impact that is not noticed until it is too late to remedy.
For example, overharvesting of fruits or seeds of a tree species can drastically reduce regeneration to the point of local extinction without any visible effect. Large individual trees may remain and the system might appear undisturbed. Only years or decades later, when the large trees die and no individuals replace them, will the damage become evident (Peters, 1994).
This chapter describes the steps required to gain an understanding of an area's non-wood resource. Based on this, a community or enterprise can begin to prepare a plan for management. Chapter 3 describes the equally necessary step of gauging the existing nearby communities' dependence on the resource.
Determining tenure and access
Even before producers can assess the biological components of an ecosystem for management, they must understand the legal situation of the land in question. Legal title and the rights of harvest determine the scope of management options, the management objectives and the possibilities for resource inventory.
The first questions that must be answered in a resource inventory include: Who owns the resource? Who has the right to use the resource? What restrictions (e.g. licensing) apply to management?
Property rights can be divided into four categories:
o private property situations are fairly straightforward, although resolving conflicting land-use claims can be complex (see Chapter 8);
o common property resources have clearly recognized users who, although they may not own the resource, have recognized access rights and the ability to limit access to others (ATI, 1995). Many traditional communal systems for land use are common property systems;
o open-access resources, accessible to all, have no recognized users and are not easily controlled;
o state or public property often requires users to negotiate rights or obtain authorization for secure rights or access.
Successful extractive activities using NWFPs often have the features of common property management. Common property resources may often be mistaken for open-access resources, but common property resources are more widespread. If a resource is open-access, the resource manager(s) should seek to change this, because it is very difficult to manage an open-access resource sustainably and equitably (ATI, 1995).
The resource inventory
Advance planning
Inventory methods
Importance of wildlife
Analyzing the results
Reducing inventory costs
Once tenure is clarified, a resource inventory should ask certain key questions: What economic plant and animals species occur in the area? What are their ecological and biological characteristics? What products do they produce? How abundant are they and what is their capacity for regeneration? During which seasons are they harvestable? What local social and cultural values are associated with different parts of the forest? (Reds, 1995)
In tropical forests, one consequence of species diversity is extremely low densities for individuals of any given species. In inventories at two sites (one in Amazonia and one in Southeast Asia), less than 10 percent of the species had more than four trees per ha. Such low density causes difficulties in accurate inventory as well as in harvest management. Of course, there are many exceptions to this generalization. Oligarchic forests (in which one species predominates) exist in almost every region of the wet tropics and offer great promise for relatively easy sustainable harvests (Peters, 1994).
Advance planning
Planning helps to make inventories, which are expensive and labour-intensive, more efficient. Before the inventory, it is useful to answer the following questions, among others, for each major species (Peters, op. cit.):
o Where does the desired species occur in greatest abundance? Its distribution should be mapped as precisely as possible;
o is the species limited to a certain forest type, or is it fairly evenly distributed throughout the area?
o is the desired material produced by only one species or by several species? What is the exact taxonomic identity of these plants?
o has a product already been harvested from the area? For how long and how, and by whom? Heavily exploited areas and areas of selective planting or other management by local people should be noted on the map;
o do any good maps, aerial photos or satellite images of the region exist? Handheld, low-cost global positioning systems (GPS) now permit communities to locate boundaries fairly accurately using satellite data;
o has the area ever been inventoried, perhaps for another resource (timber, minerals, wildlife)? If so, for what kind of resource? Try to obtain copies of any information available.
In this advance work, no available sources of information should be overlooked, including: unpublished reports by local government officials, companies or projects; local export statistics; or specimens at a nearby herbarium (Peters, op. cit.).
Inventory methods
When all the above information has been collected, a professional inventory specialist or team should conduct the inventory. Conventional forestry methods for conducting inventories are geared to wood production and are not well suited to the task of assessing non-wood resources. Still, they provide a starting point for understanding the resource (see "For further reading" regarding inventory methods).
Peters (op. cit.) describes information that an inventory should provide:
o a reliable estimate of the resource density (i.e. total number of harvestable individuals per hectare for that species) in different forest types. For fruit and oil seed species, this means the total number of adult trees. For rattan, medicinal plants and species that produce latex, this may also include juvenile individuals;
o the current size-class distribution of adults. For trees, this means measuring the diameter at breast height (DBH) of all stems. For herbaceous plants and small understorey plants, height measurements are used instead;
o a preliminary assessment of species regeneration. Are there enough small individuals to replace the older adult trees when they die or are removed? Answering this requires that smaller, non-productive individuals also be counted and measured.
The smallest diameter limit of trees to be measured depends on the size distribution of the species and it;, density in the forest. Using a smaller minimum diameter increases the useful information that the inventory will produce, but also makes it more expensive due to the added fieldwork required. For tree species that occur at relatively low densities, a minimum diameter of 10 cm DBH is useful; for more abundant species, a higher minimum might be used.
The overall sampling intensity (or pattern of sample plots used) also depends on the trade-off between inventory precision versus cost, and the species. For example, inventories of bamboo and rattan may measure all stems 3 m and longer in a 10-m radius plot. An inventory of nipa palm (Nipa fruticans) might use different sample plot sizes for different plant sizes: all seedlings shorter than 1.5 m may be measured in plots of 2-m radius; in 5-m radius plots, all plants taller than 1.5 m may be measured (Reds, op. cit.).
An inventory of non-wood resources in southern Ghana focused on a few forest products that were widely traded or otherwise subject to increasing pressure. These included climbers (such as cane), bamboo and some herbaceous plants. The inventory used a uniform 1-ha sample plot size throughout, but sampling methods varied depending on the species. For cane, the inventory recorded the numbers of mature, immature and cut stems. For herbaceous plants, the inventory noted the number of plant groups (clumps) per plot. (Falconer, 1992).
A useful inventory should take advantage of local knowledge. For this, the inventory team should include a knowledgeable local collaborator who can help record each plant's local uses (all plant parts used) and local harvest techniques (Reds, op. cit.).
Some innovative inventory procedures compare natural forest with locally managed forest plots (Salick, 1992). One inventory in Nicaragua compared species regeneration in both situations, using 5 x 2 m subplots within 1-ha plots. This study thus provided a resource inventory along with detailed comparisons with local management. These comparisons permitted a general assessment of the impact of current local harvests and management.
Recently, some new models of arrangements have been developed to carry out comprehensive inventories of biological resources. Examples of this "biological prospecting" are the INbio-Merck agreement in Costa Rica (see Chapters 4 and 10 for more details) and the grants organized by the US National Institutes of Health in Latin America and Africa (Sittenfeld and Lovejoy, 1994 and Grifo, 1994).
Importance of wildlife
Wildlife is often an important non-wood forest resource, particularly in Africa. Wildlife population characteristics should be recorded in a forest inventory. Even where communities do not use the wildlife resource, wildlife activity influences forest dynamics in important ways, for example, as seed dispersal agents.
Analyzing the results
Before analyzing the results of an inventory, it is necessary to divide the information following a suitable classification (e.g. species, size classes, forest types, use types). The data for each forest type can, for example, be translated into charts of size-class structure. Size-class divisions for these charts vary for different types of trees. For large canopy trees, 10-cm diameter classes are adequate. Smaller tree species may need to be divided into 5-cm diameter classes. For shrubs and small palms, Peters (op. cit.) suggests a 50-cm height interval. Each chart could include 8 to 12 size classes.
These charts provide a valuable baseline for assessing the impact of harvesting. They can show when a population presents a healthy distribution of different-aged trees, or in contrast, reveal a worsening situation where species regeneration is severely limited for some reason, with no established seedlings. Peters (1994) explains in more detail how to interpret these charts.
Reducing inventory costs
Inventories are expensive to conduct and most communities or enterprises cannot afford them by themselves. However, several groups interested in a forest's various wood and non-wood resources may work together to conduct an inventory and share the costs.
Alternatively, in some cases, an "indicator" species might be studied as a signal of forest health. An indicator species is one that is more sensitive to changes in forest conditions. Where such a species is recognized locally, a focused inventory could study this species to gauge the impact of harvesting on the ecosystem (FAO, 1995).
Other factors in resource assessment
The previous section summarizes the ecological aspects of resource inventory. At the same time, an overall assessment of prospects should also consider the following (Vantomme, 1995):
o socio-economic information on the nearby communities and the costs and benefits of mana