<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Trade restrictions affecting international trade in non-wood forest products </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Trade restrictions control and influence international trade in forest products, as they do for most products that cross international borders. They range from tariff to the less obvious, but often more complex, non-tariff restrictions. Their significance to countries engaged, or wishing to move into trade, can be quite significant. Without an awareness of the range and size of barriers that must be faced, it may be difficult to plan effectively - or in the initial stages to even determine whether it is preferable to trade outside the country.
Often just determining which, if any, restrictions exist can be a complex, or at the very least, time consuming job. In the case of non-wood forest products (NWFPs) the difficulties are increased because of the wide variety of products involved and the many different levels of their processing.
The present study was developed by FAO to partially remedy this situation. It provides information on the range of restrictions facing various NWFPs, and indicates the degree to which these may present problems to those seeking to develop their international trade in these products. In this it complements an earlier FAO study "International trade in non-wood forest products: an overview" by M. Iqbal, 1993, FO:Misc/93/11 Working Paper, Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome, which provided a preliminary coverage of the characteristics of trade in NWFPs but did not consider the subject of trade barriers.
The present study was undertaken by Dr. Mohammed Iqbal and is based on information found in a wide variety of sources, but particulary individual country customs schedules and the UNCTAD trade database TRAINS. It was funded by FAO's Regular Programme, and was under the supervision of Dr. I.J. Bourke, Forest Products Division.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
ACP African, Caribbean and Pacific Countries
BSI British Standards Institution
CACUM Central American Common Market
CCCN Customs Cooperation Council Nomenclature
CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
CENTA Combined Edible Nut Trade Association
EC European Community
EFTA European Free Trade Association
EOA Essential Oil Association of USA
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FEMA Flavour and Extract Manufacturers Association
FMA Fragrance Materials Association of USA
FTA Free Trade Agreement
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GEFCA Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives
GSP Generalized System of Preferences
HS Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System
IFEAT International Federation of Essential oils and Aroma Traders
ISO International Organization for Standardization
LDCs Least Developed Countries
MFN Most Favoured Nations
NAFED National Association for Export Development
NTM Non-tariff measures
NWFPs Non-Wood Forest Products
NTFP Non-Timber Forest Products
nes not elsewhere specified
nesi not elsewhere specified or included
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
SITC Standard International Trade Classification
TRIFED Tribal Development Federation
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
WTO World Trade Organization
WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>3</section>
I
INTRODUCTION
1. BACKGROUND
In the context of this report, non-wood forest products (NWFPs) are considered to be as all the biological materials (other than timber and firewood) that may be extracted from natural ecosystems, managed plantations and semi-wild trees growing on farmlands and be utilized within the household, be marketed, or have social, cultural or religious significance. Both plant and animal products are included.
Whereas, the products collected from wild sources (natural forests) can be easily seen as NWFPs, some confusion exists about products collected from plantations (e.g. rubber, some condiments, certain medicinal plants and essential oils), particularly when part of the supplies come from natural forests and part from plantations/cultivations. Between these two extremes are also some products which originate from semi-wild and/or farmland trees. Products originating from all these sources have been considered NWFPs in this report.
NWFPs are of significance primarily in household and local economies. Many also, however, channel into international markets, mostly in unprocessed or semi-processed forms. Such products play a significant role in earning foreign exchange, so valuable for most of the developing economies. These commercial NWFPs which enter international trade are the focus of this report.
International trade in NWFPs, as that in most other products, is controlled and regulated by various trade measures. A wide array of these exist and their nature, significance, extent and impact vary considerably from nation to nation and product to product. Whereas some studies have investigated the effect of such restrictions on wood products (e.g. Bourke, 1988; Bourke, 1991; and Bourke, 1992), no systematic study has so far been conducted to identify such measures and to assess their impact on NWFPs.
2. REPORT OBJECTIVES
This study provides information on restrictions facing the international trade in NWFPs. The specific terms of reference of the study were:
i. To identify information on tariff and non-tariff measures affecting
international trade in NWFPs and prepare a listing of these.
ii. To review the extent to which these measures are affecting international
trade in NWFPs and evaluate their impact on trade.
iii. To identify possible policy action which might be taken to overcome
the negative impact of trade restrictions.
iv. To provide an assessment of the impact of any reductions agreed to in
the Uruguay Round on future international trade in NWFPs.
v. To identify any new restrictions which may increase in future.
3. APPROACH
NWFPs entering international trade were identified in an earlier study by the author by reviewing explanatory notes of the harmonized commodity description and coding system 1 * (HS) together with other secondary sources (Iqbal, 1993). This information was further refined and up-dated for the present study. Trade restrictions were then investigated primarily using the UNCTAD trade data base 2 * for major products/group of products thus identified. Other available secondary sources, in particular individual country custom schedules, were also reviewed. The report refers to the total range of products that may be considered as NWFPs.
4. SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS
NWFPs face both tariff and non-tariff trade restrictions. The nature of these restrictions varies from country to country and product to product. As the list of importing countries is quite large and the range of products extensive, analysis of the trade restrictions has been restricted to the markets of EC, USA and Japan, which collectively account for about 60% (by value) of international trade in NWFPs (Appendix I).
Although an attempt has been made to give as comprehensive a treatment to the NWFPs entering these markets as possible, some of minor ones may have been missed. The problem of dealing with cultivated products like natural rubber, mulberry silks, honey, beeswax, cultivated medicinal plants like ginseng roots, sisal, etc., is recognised but they have been included because of their connections with the NWFPs, in one form or another or because it has been impossible to differentiate between these and non-cultivated products.
Finally a word of caution regarding the international trade statistics presented. As a very large volume of NWFPs are being traded unregistered, under-reporting or non-reporting, double counting, grouping of NWFPs among themselves and with other products, particularly with agricultural-based products, and the use of unrealistic prices are among the systematic shortcomings of these statistics. At the same time, since there is considerable overlap between some of the NWFPs and agricultural commodities in the trade statistics, there is every likelihood of distortion of the figures. Further, because of the variable availability of trade statistics, the quantities and values indicated for various countries reflect data from different years.
For all of the above reasons the statistics should be accepted with some caution. They do, nevertheless, provide a reasonable indication of the level of magnitude of trade in the various products.
<section>4</section>
II
INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN NWFPs
1. MAIN COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS
International trade in NWFPs is composed of imports and exports of numerous products at different stages of processing. Some of the products are unprocessed goods, while others have undergone various degrees of processing.
At least 150 NWFPs, including 26 essential oils are of major significance in international trade. In addition, a large number of botanicals (ranging between 4,000 to 6,000), enter international markets. A summary of NWFPs of commercial significance is given in Tab.1
Most NWFPs are traded in rather small quantities, but some such as ginseng roots, natural honey, walnuts, gum turpentine, rosin, rattan and gum arabic do reach substantial levels. Over US$ 380 million of ginseng, for example, is imported annually; while natural rubber imports reach well over US$ 1,000 million, although there is obviously some question as to whether to classify this as a NWFP or an agricultural crop since most is grown in agricultural plantations.
Pine nuts (seeds of Pinus gerardiana, P. pinea, P. korainsis and P. cambra) are an important NWFP with a growing and high-value market, particularly in countries with a health food awareness. Seeds of Chalghoza pine (P. gerardiana) are produced and exported by Afghanistan and Pakistan. China is the world's largest producer and exporter of Pinus korainsis seeds - one of the bigger-seeded species- and seeds of Pinus cambra - the Siberian equivalent to the edible European nut species (P. pinea) (Richardson, 1993). Spain and Portugal are the major producers and exporters of pignolia nuts (P. pinea).
Similarly black mushroom or morels, belonging to genus Morchella, are another product of considerable economic and commercial significance. The morels are prized for culinary uses, particularly as a gourmet food. Morels grow naturally in temperate forests of many European countries, USA, Canada, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Turkey, Nepal, and Bhutan. Total world production is estimated to be approximately 150 tonnes. Pakistan and India are the main producing countries, each producing about 50 tonnes of dry morels annually (equivalent to fresh morels of 500 tonnes), all of which is exported. Total world trade in morels is of the order of US$ 50 to 60 million.
Like morels, truffles are also highly favoured by gourmets in various European countries and USA. France and Italy are the main producers. Whereas production in France was around 1,000 tonnes, 95 years ago, it had fallen to 20 tonnes in 1988^/. In Spain, about 15 to 30 tonnes of truffles are collected each year, of which the bulk is exported to France (FAO/ECE, 1988). Truffles are exported in fresh as well as preserved form. In 1989, USA imported 5.4 tonnes of fresh or chilled truffles, mainly from Italy and France, valuing US$ 1.477 million (c&f) or US$ 273 per kg^/.
Table 1. List of NWFPs of commercial significance
S.No.
Category
Products
I Food products
1. Nuts. Brazil nuts, pine nuts, pignolia nuts, malva nut,
walnuts and chestnuts.
2. Fruits. Jujube, sapodilla and Ginkgo.
3. Edible fungi. Morels, truffles and pine mushrooms.
4. Vegetables. Bamboo shoots, osmunds, reindeer moss
and palm hearts.
5. Starches. Sago.
6. Birds' nests.
7. Oils. Shea nuts, babassu oil,sal or tengkawang or
illipe oil.
8. Maple sugar.
II Spices, condiments and culinary herbs
1. Nutmeg and mace.
2. Cinnamon and cassia.
3. Cardamom.
4. Galanga
5. Allspice
6. Caraway
7. Bay leaves
8. Oregano, etc.
III Industrial plant oils and waxes Tung oil, neem oil, jojoba oil, kemiri or candle or
lumbang oil, akar wangi, babassu, oiticica and kapok oils.
Carnauba wax.
IV Plant gums
1. Gums for food uses. Gum arabic, tragacanth, karaya
and carob gums.
2. Technological grade gums. Talha and combretum gums.
V Natural pigments Annatto seeds, logwood, indigo.
VI Oleoresins
1. Pine oleoresin
2. Copal, Damar, Gamboge, Benzoin gum, Dragon's blood
(Benjamin), and Copaiba oil.
3. Amber
VII Fibres and flosses
1. Fibres. Bamboo, rattan, xateattap, aren, osier, raffia,
toquilla straw products, cork, esparto, Erica and other
broom grasses.
2. Flosses. Kapok or silk cotton.
VIII Vegetable tanning materials Quebracho, mimosa, chestnut and catha/cutch.
IX Latex Natural rubber, gutta percha, jelutong, sorva and chicle.
X Insect products
1. Natural honey.
2. Beeswax.
3. Lac and lac-dye.
4. Silk. Mulberry and non-mulberry silks
5. Cochineal
6. Aleppo galls
7. Kermes
XI Incense woods Sandalwood, gharu or aloewood.
XII Essential oils
XIII Plant insecticides Pyrethrum, Derris, Medang and Peuak Bong.
XIV Medicinal plants
XV Wild plants
XVI Animals and animals' products Ivory, trophies, bones, feathers, maleo eggs,
butterflies, live animals and birds.
XVII Miscellaneous products
1. Bidi leaves.
2. Soap berries (soap nut).
3. Quillaia bark.
4. Betel and cola nuts.
5. Chewing sticks.
6. Lacquer.
7. Dom nuts or ivory nuts.
Source: Iqbal (1993).
Bamboo shoots represent an expanding and fashionable export market. China (Taiwan) alone exports over US$ 20 million annually. In China, tender shoots of about 100 species are edible; their production averaging one million tonnes annually (Sulthoni, 1989). Thailand exported 31,730 tonnes of canned bamboo shoots during 1989, valued at 460.62 million bahts^/. The bulk of the exports went to USA and Japan, followed by UK, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, Canada, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, France and Republic of Korea. Japan is the main market for bamboo shoots in Asia. Small quantities of bamboo shoots are also exported from Indonesia.
Sago is a starch rich food obtained from a fresh water palm (Metroxylon spp.). Indonesia is the major producing and exporting country. During 1991, it exported 10,107.7 tonnes of sago flour and meal to Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore, valuing US$ 2.32 million (fob). Malaysia, also produces small volumes.
Illipe nuts are oil-bearing seeds of sal trees (Shorea spp. and Madhuca spp.) The oil resembles butter in its physico-chemical properties. Indonesia dominates world trade in illipe nuts, exporting about 15,000 tonnes annually, worth about US$ 8 million.
Salanganes' or birds' nests are built by two species of cave dwelling swiftlets, Collocalia fuciphaga and C. maxima in Malaysia and Thailand, which are collected for sale to a Chinese market at home and abroad. Malaysia is the major producer and exporter of birds' nests. Malaysian exports during 1991 totalled 18.6 tonnes, mainly to Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and China (Taiwan), valuing Malaysian $ 2.93 million.
Spices, condiments and culinary herbs are another important group of NWFPs which constitute a significant component of world trade. Indonesia is the largest world producer of nutmeg and mace and accounts for three-quarters of world production and export. Grenada is the second largest producer and exporter. Indonesia produced 15,800 tonnes of nutmeg during 1990, whereas Grenada produced 2,700 tonnes of nutmeg and 200 tonnes of mace, in 1991^/.
World trade in cinnamon is between 7,500 to 10,000 tonnes annually. Sri Lanka contributes 80% to 90%, most of the remaining balance coming from Seychelles and Madagascar (Smith, 1986). The world trade in cassia is of the order of 20,000 to 25,000 tonnes annually, of which Indonesia accounts for two-thirds and China most of the remainder. Minor producers include Viet Nam and India. About 2,000 to 3,000 tonnes of cassia bark are exported from Viet Nam annually (de Beer, 1993). The EC, USA and Japan are the major markets.
Gum arabic, an exudate of Acacia senegal, is the most widely used and traded plant gum. Current worldwide trade is around 25,000 tonnes, of which about 20,000 tonnes comes from Sudan alone. The remaining 5,000 tonnes originates from other African nations, notably from Nigeria^/. The USA is the largest single market, accounting for 25% of the world market. The EC, Switzerland and Scandinavia collectively account for 40% of the world imports, and about 10% is channelled into Japanese markets.
Gum tragacanth is the second most important commercial gum and is produced by several shrubby plants of the genus Astragalus, growing from Pakistan to Greece, particularly in Iran and Turkey. Iran and Turkey are major exporters. Total world trade is around 400 tonnes. The EC, USA, Japan and former USSR are the major importing regions.
Gum karaya, also known as Indian tragacanth, is obtained almost exclusively from Indian plantations of Sterculia spp. India is the only regular producer, overwhelmingly dominating international trade in the gum. Total world production is about 5,500 tonnes per annum.
Carob or locust bean gum is obtained from the endosperm of the beans of carob tree (Ceratonia siliqua), which grows in abundance in the mediterranean region. Total world exports of locust bean gum are currently about 12,000 tonnes per annum, of which over 80% is attributable to Spain, Italy and Portugal.
Gum Talha is a water soluble gum derived from a number of Acacia species like A. seyal, A. sieberana, A. hockii, A. ehrenbergiana and A. karroo. Production remains fairly constant at around 6,000 tonnes per annum (Anderson, 1993). About 3,000 to 5,000 tonnes are exported annually, mainly from Sudan.
Combretum gum is obtained from Combretum nigricans, occurring throughout tropical West Africa, particularly in northern Nigeria, Mali and Niger.
Annatto is a reddish-orange colorant, called bixin, derived from seeds of achiote tree (Bixa orellana). Average annual production is in the range of 10,000 to 11,000 tonnes. Peru is the largest producer, accounting for 32% of the world's total, followed by Kenya and Brazil.
World production of oleoresins (naval stores) from all the sources, is almost stable, ranging between 1.1 and 1.2 million tonnes annually. China and Indonesia dominate the world's production. China has emerged as the world's largest producer of rosin, with annual production level of nearly 400,000 tonnes (Richardson, 1993). The world's annual trade in gum rosin is around 330,000 tonnes. Portugal and China with total annual exports of around 200,000 tonnes, dominate this trade, and China accounts for about one-third of total world's production and exports. The list of countries importing naval store products is quite long ? well over 100; Japan, Germany, UK, France, the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium/Luxembourg, Australia, Austria, Canada, Colombia, Switzerland, South Africa, Zaire and Nigeria being the major importers. Japan is the largest importer. About 50% of the total exports of gum rosin from China enter Japanese markets.
The average value of the world's trade in rattan is US$ 66 million. Malaysia, Indonesia, Viet Nam and China, are the main origins. Small quantities also originate from Myanmar, Thailand, and the Philippines. Italy, USA, Spain, France, Japan, the Netherlands and Germany are the major destinations.
Average value of world trade in bamboo is of the order of US$ 36.2 million^/. China and Thailand are the main origins; Malaysia, Myanmar, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Viet Nam, the Philippines and Bangladesh being minor exporters. France, Germany and the Netherlands are the main markets.
Kapok is a mass of silky fibres that clothe the seeds of ceiba tree (Bombax ceiba) and is used as a filling for mattresses, life preservers, and sleeping bags and as insulation. The tree grows in many South Asian countries, but Thailand and Indonesia are the main suppliers in the world trade. Japan, China, EC and USA are the major markets. During 1992 total value of world trade was of the order of US$ 11 million^/, of which about 66% was contributed by Thailand and 16% by Indonesia.
Spain, France, Italy, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco are the main cork producing countries. Total world production is estimated to be 250,000 tonnes per annum, of which about 50% is produced in Portugal, 25% in Spain, and remaining 25% in Italy, France, Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. Morocco's cork oak forests are spread over an area of 100,000 ha. Cork oak cultivation and processing is a very important industry for Moroccan economy, and cork is one of the country's main export earners. Portugal, Spain and Morocco are the major exporting countries; EC and USA being major markets.
Thailand and India dominate world trade in shellac, each exporting, on an average, about 6,000 tonnes per annum. Vietnamese annual exports average around 300 tonnes. China produces about 4,000 tonnes, but export statistics are not available. Shellac is exported to about 45 countries, but Germany, Italy, Egypt, Indonesia and USA are the major markets.
World trade in natural honey is of the order of 300,000 tonnes, valued at US$ 300 million. Former USSR, China, USA, Mexico, and Turkey are the major producing countries. Germany, USA, UK and Japan are the major world markets. Whereas treating wild honey as a NWFP would be easily understandable, inclusion of cultured honey as a NWFP could be questioned. Nevertheless, because many plants growing in forests and a number of semi-wild trees constitute an important nectar and pollen source for foraging bees at least a part of cultured honey should be considered as a NWFP. Actual apportionment, however, remains difficult as trade statistics lumps honey from all sources together.
Total value of international trade in insect waxes ranges between US$ 23 to 26 million. The bulk of it is contributed by beeswax, which like natural honey, originates from wild as well cultured sources. China, United Republic of Tanzania, Germany, Canada, the Netherlands, Brazil, Japan, USA and Ethiopia are the main origins; collectively accounting for 70% of the total trade volume. Australia, France, Chile, UK, Dominican Republic and New Zealand are some of the minor origins.
World trade in essential oils is of the order of US$ 1 billion, including both the wild as well as cultivated sources. China, Indonesia, Thailand, India and Brazil are the major suppliers of some of the oils. The EC, USA and Japan are the principal import markets, accounting for 72% of the total world imports.
Indonesia and Malaysia are the world's leading producers of natural rubber; collectively accounting for 47% of the world's total output of 5.54 million tonnes in 1992^/. Sri Lanka, India, Viet Nam, Papua New Guinea, Cambodia, China and Myanmar are other producers. Entire production of natural rubber in these countries, however, comes from plantations. Separate statistics on rubber extracted from wild sources, however, is not available. The EC, USA and Japan are the major markets.
Gutta percha is a tough plastic-like substance from latex of several Malaysian trees of genera Payena and Palaquium that resembles rubber but contains more resin and is used especially as insulation and in dentistry. Malaysia and Indonesia are major producers. Small quantities are also produced in Thailand. Total value of the world trade in gutta percha and other similar lattices is of the order of US$ 27 million. Japan, EC, USA, Republic of Korea, China and Australia are the major markets.
Total value of world's trade in tannin extracts of vegetable origin (HS 3201) was of the order of US$ 102.7, 102.5, 116.7 and 123.3 million during 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991^/, respectively, which shows a slightly rising trend. During 1991, 50% of the world's supplies of vegetable tannin extracts originated from Argentina (34%) and Brazil (16%). The USA, Italy, former USSR and Japan are the major markets.
Out of the long list of medicinal plants, about 4,000 to 6,000 botanicals are of commercial importance. Total world trade in 1992 in medicinal plants was of the magnitude of US$ 171 million. China is the biggest producer as well as exporter of medicinal plants, accounting for 30% of total world trade (by value) in 1991, followed by the Republic of Korea, USA, India and Chile. Singapore and Hong Kong are the main re-exporters in Asia. Japan, USA, Germany, France, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and UK are the major markets. Hamburg is the world trade centre. About 53 countries supply medicinal plants to Germany, of which important ones are India, Argentina, former Yugoslavia, Greece, China, Poland, Egypt, Hungary, former Czechoslovakia, Zaire, Albania, the Netherlands and France (Iqbal, 1993).
2. MAJOR SUPPLIERS AND MAIN MARKETS
The total value of world trade in NWFPs is of the order of US$ 11 billion^/, of which about 60% is imported by EC, USA and Japan (Appendix I). General direction of trade is from developing to developed countries (Iqbal, 1993). Information on major suppliers and markets for some of the important NWFPs is summarized in Table 2.
The list of countries contributing to the world trade in NWFPs is quite diverse, but the forests of Southeast Asia have traditionally remained the major source for many of these. There has been a significant trade in furs and skins, fruits, resins (naval stores, copal), fungi, wild honey, medicines, aphrodisiacs, oil (Cassia, Citronella), sandalwood, bamboo and rattan ware.
Recently, NWFP trade has reached new heights in China. Probably no country in the world processes as many wild products and there is growing interest worldwide in its natural foodstuffs and medicines. Consequently, it dominates world's trade. India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Brazil are other major suppliers of NWFPs to the world markets.
Table 2. Trade direction for major NWFPs
Product
Main origins
Main markets
Brazil nuts Brazil, Bolivia and Peru USA, UK, Germany, Australia and Canada
Pine nuts China, Afghanistan and Pakistan Middle Eastern countries
Pignolia nuts Spain, Portugal USA, Canada, Hong Kong, Japan and EC
Walnuts China, India, Afghanistan and Pakistan EC, Japan, Canada and Switzerland
Morels Pakistan, India and Afghanistan. France, Switzerland and Germany.
Truffles France, Italy USA
Pine mushrooms Chile USA, France, Peru, Holland, Switzerland.
Bamboo shoots China, Thailand and Indonesia USA, Japan, UK, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, France and Rep. of Korea.
Sago Indonesia, Malaysia Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore
Shea nuts (Karite nuts) Burkina Faso, Mali, Côte d'Ivoire, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Nigeria, Guinea and Central African Republic Japan, Sweden and EC.
Birds' nests Malaysia Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and China (Taiwan).
Nutmeg and mace Indonesia and Grenada. USA, EC and Japan.
Cinnamon and Cassia Sri Lanka, Seychelles and Madagascar USA, EC and Japan.
Gum Arabic Sudan and Nigeria. USA, EC (UK and Germany), Switzerland Scandinavia and Japan
Gum tragacanth Iran and Turkey EC, USA, Japan and former USSR.
Gum Karaya India USA, Japan, France, Germany, UK, Belgium, United Arab Emirates and the Netherlands.
Carob gum Spain, Italy and Portugal Western Europe, USA and Japan.
Annatto Peru, Kenya and Brazil USA, EC and Japan
Gum rosin China, Indonesia, Portugal Japan, Germany, UK, France, the Netherlands, Italy, etc.
Rattan Malaysia, Indonesia, Viet Nam and China Italy, USA, Spain, France, Egypt, Japan, the Netherlands, Germany, Greece and Thailand.
Bamboo China, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Rep. of Korea, Indonesia, Viet Nam, the Philippines and Bangladesh. France, Germany and the Netherlands.
Cork Portugal, Spain and Morocco EC countries.
Lac India and Thailand Germany, Egypt, Indonesia and the USA.
Natural honey Former USSR, China, USA, Mexico and Turkey Germany, USA, UK and Japan
Beeswax China, former USSR, Morocco, Tanzania, New Zealand, Canada and the Netherlands EC (Germany, France, Italy and UK)
Mulberry and non-mulberry silk China, India and Brazil Italy, Germany, France, Switzerland, the UK, Japan, Rep. of Korea and Hong Kong.
Cochineal Peru and Canary Islands EC, the USA and Japan.
Liquorice roots China, Pakistan, Syria, former USSR, Turkey, Afghanistan and Iran. USA, Japan and EC.
Ginseng roots Japan, China, Singapore and EC. USA, Rep. of Korea, Canada and China
Essential oil China, India, Indonesia and Brazil. EC, USA and Japan.
Medicinal plants China, Rep. of Korea, USA, India, Chile, Egypt, Argentina, Greece, Poland, Hungary, Zaire, former Czechoslovakia, and Albania. Japan, USA, Germany, France, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and UK.
Bidi leaves India Pakistan and Sri Lanka
Source: Iqbal (1993).
3/. Financial Times, 30 June 1988.
4/. The USA Import Statistics, 1989
5/. Thailand Foreing Agriculture Trade Statistics, Office of Agriculture Economics,Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation, Bangkok.
6/. Fruit and Tropical Products, 1992
7/. Chemical Marketing Reporter, 15 February 1993; pp 18-19
8/. COMTRADE data base
9/. UNCTAD data base
10/. Ruibber Satistical Bulletin; 47(7). International Rubber Study Group.
11/. COMTRADE data base
12/. UNCTAD data base. The figures are, however, indicative only and are to beused with caution.
<section>5</section>
III
TRADE RESTRICTIONS
1. GENERAL
Both tariff as well as non-tariff measures (NTMs) are applicable to international trade in NWFPs. They are applied by both importing and exporting countries for a variety of purposes. Tariffs, safety regulations and technical standards are the most common restrictions imposed by the developed countries on the import trade in NWFPs. Developing countries, which are the major suppliers to world markets, also impose measures which restrict or regulate export trade. The most common form is the use of export tariffs levied with the objective of raising revenue for the government.^/
2. TARIFF MEASURES
2.1. Import tariffs
Identification and analysis of tariff measures and their impact on the NWFP trade is relatively straight forward. In addition to the country custom schedules, information is also available in the UNCTAD computerized trade data base. Detailed results of the analysis of the EC, USA and Japan are given in Appendices II, III and IV, respectively, and a summary is given in Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of tariffs faced by NWFPs in EC, USA and Japanese markets
Market
No. of NWFP- containing tariff lines
No. of national lines of NWFPs falling under the tariff range (%) of
EC^/
USA^/
Japan^/
The concept of "protection" through imposition of import taxes to weaken the competitiveness of the imported products in domestic markets does not hold true in the case of the majority of the NWFPs, particularly in the markets of developed countries, since these products are not produced or collected in these latter countries. Collection and processing of NWFPs is quite labour intensive, and in developed countries labour is more expensive. Moreover, such jobs are often considered dirty, tedious and arduous. Consequently, developed countries tend to maintain low tariffs on NWFP imports, in order to ensure a sustained supply of these products to meet their domestic demands.
Generally the tariffs on NWFPs are quite low. For example, custom schedules of EC group NWFPs under 91 tariff lines. Of these 39.6% have no duty, 26.4% are levied a nominal duty of 1-5% (ad valorem), 26.4% face a tariff of 6-10%, 3.3% fall in the tariff range of 11-15%, and a few products (4.4%) like natural honey, truffles and spices face rates above 15%.
USA tariffs are even lower. Out of 98 NWFP-containing tariff lines, 47% are free of import duty, 33.7% face a nominal duty of up to 5% (ad valorem) and 14.3% are levied a duty of 6-10%. Only one product (luggage and handbags lined with bamboo) faces a duty of 12.50% and four tariff lines, containing various articles of natural cork, face a duty of 18%.
Similarly, in Japan out of 95 NWFP-containing tariff lines, 46.3% are duty-free and 27.4% are levied a nominal duty of up to 5%. Another 17% tariff lines face a duty from 6% to 10%. Only six tariff lines, containing products like nuts (walnuts, chestnuts, etc.), lac and some kinds of processed truffles face duties ranging between 17.5-20%. Three tariff lines containing products like natural honey, maple syrup and truffles (packed in air tight containers) face high tariffs of 30%, 35% and 25%, respectively. In addition to the import duty, consumption tax of 3% is levied on almost all products imported into Japan.
Tarif