<title>Fact sheet: Honduras - Women, agriculture and rural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Role of women in agriculture
Role of women in agriculture
Rural women play an important role in agriculture, especially in the peasant and small farmer sectors, working an average of four hours a day in crop and livestock activities. Women are responsible for establishing a survival strategy for the household unit. About 20% of rural households are headed by women, who bear the entire responsibility for agricultural production. Development policies, however, still consider men as producers and women as responsible only for household tasks. Official statistics on the economically active population do not account for rural women's unpaid labour on family plots.
Division of Labour by Gender. Women are primarily responsible for vegetable gardening and small livestock - poultry, pigs and goats. While little data is available on the gender division of labour in agriculture, women take part in most activities and predominate in food processing. In fisheries, women also work primarily in processing activities. Women are responsible for household tasks, including water supply. Men contribute significantly to fuelwood collection.
Gender Relations in Decision-making In Farming Activities. In households in which women are active in agricultural production, men and women often share the decision-making. Men predominate in decisions in regard to type of crops, varieties and fertilizers, while women generally have a greater say in family expenses and pricing of produce.
<section>2</section>
Sharing of power and decision-making
Sharing of power and decision-making
Members and Officers of Agricultural/Rural Organizations. Rural organizations are important for access to institutional resources. Rural women are organized in several types of groups, especially women-only organizations, including the traditional housewives clubs. In 1993, there were .14 federations or associations of peasant women, some independent and others women's sections of peasant organizations. In mixed rural organizations, women hold a growing but still small percentage of decision-making positions. One of the two major confederations has a woman in the national leadership. Few men or women are members of unions in rural areas and women do not participate significantly, although they comprise the majority of agricultural and agro-industry workers. The cooperative movement has a 30-year tradition, and in 1990 women comprised 61.4% of cooperative members. Of these, 88. 1% belonged to savings and credit cooperatives, 15% to agricultural and 1.6% to forestry
cooperatives. Women represented only 1.9% of the membership of agricultural and 0.2% of forestry cooperatives. In 1993, women comprised 15% of the leadership, up from 3% in 1988. A National Committee of Women in Cooperatives was formed in 1993 to promote women's participation in economic activities and equality with men in the movement. From 1990 to 1993, the Secretariat of Natural Resources served more than 5000 groups, approximately 25% of which were women's groups.
Women in decision-making positions in ministries and government bodies
<section>3</section>
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
Mechanisms to promote the advancement of women
National Machinery. While there is no national machinery for women, a National Policy on Women has existed since 1989.
WID Units or Focal Points in Technical Ministries. The National Agrarian Institute (INA) and the Secretariat of Natural Resources (SRN) began incorporating a WID perspective in their programmes during the Decade for Women 19761985. INA set up a small unit which has evolved into the Department for the Integration of Women and Rural Youth, with three technical staff in 1994. Its present mandate is the promotion of peasant women's enterprises. SRN also established a women's unit which exists today as the Unit for Women and Rural Youth (UMYJOR), for the promotion of training and productivity. The status of the two units has declined since the Decade for Women, and they have been adversely affected by the economic crisis and the lack of resources and coordination. The Office of Peasant Affairs, coordinated by SRN, promoted the establishment of a National Committee for the Development of Rural Women (CODEMUR), composed of representatives of peasant organizations, and public and
private organizations working with rural women.
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). About 40 NGOs provide support to rural women, mainly through small projects for income generation and other types of assistance. Some have begun to incorporate a gender perspective and gender sensitization in their work. In recent years, the Government has encouraged NGOs to fill some of the gaps in services that, due to the economic crisis, it can no longer provide.
<section>4</section>
Women's rights
Women's rights
Honduras signed the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1980, and ratified in it 1983. The Agrarian Reform law was revised in 1991 to give women equal rights to land. The Law for the Modernization and Development of the Agricultural Sector (LMA) recognizes women as producers. However, as these laws aim at modernization, globalization and privatization of the economy, conditions for application of the laws are limited or non-existent for the rural poor, who lack the necessary educational levels and experience in a market system. Women especially lack the means to obtain credit and investment capital.
<section>5</section>
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
Dimensions and determinants of rural poverty
The economic crisis and the economic structural adjustment programme increased poverty, especially among the rural poor. The economic modernization policy, oriented toward greater integration into the international market and privatization, has discouraged the production of basic food grains with the result that family food security has become more difficult. This has been exacerbated by high population growth, the national and international price fluctuations, and the energy crisis. The negative effects have been felt especially by small farmers who depend upon the production of grains. Poverty is felt most acutely by women because of their lower salaries and lack of direct access to land and agricultural services. Poverty is manifested in low educational levels, infant mortality and malnutrition.
<section>6</section>
Access to agricultural resources and services
Access to agricultural resources and services
Land. 66% of farmers, who produce the country's staple food grains, have access to only 8% of all cultivable land. Women comprise only 4% of the beneficiaries of land in 30 years of the agrarian reform process, and 22% of those in the land title programme. Women's plots tend to be very small.
Livestock. Data collection needed.
Forestry. Data collection needed.
Water. The lack of an adequate water supply for irrigated agriculture is a major problem for both women and men.
Credit. Many NGOS have directed small credit schemes to rural women and some larger bilateral and multi-lateral projects provide credit and revolving funds for women. However, women still have less access to credit than men, and receive smaller amounts. The Honduran Coffee Institute (IHCAFE) provides credit to the coffee sector, but only 9.5% of the beneficiaries in 1990 were women.
Extension services and agricultural training. Although the present institutional and programmatic framework of extension services and training is weak, there is openness to a greater participation of peasant women in the establishment of a more adequate structure. SRN carries out extension through contacts with small farmers, agrarian reform settlers and women's organizations. Work with women is usually carried out by women "promoters". In the period 1990-93, women comprised 11% of those trained in appropriate technologies. No women participated in the training on mechanization and food storage. Data on other types of training is not gender-disaggregated. The Honduran Corporation for Forest Development (COHDEFOR) and the Honduran Coffee Institute (IHCAFE) also carry out training activities. Women comprised 25% of those trained by COHDEFOR, and 9.3% of those trained by IHCAFE in 1993.
Secretariat of natural resources (SRN) extension staff by position and gender, 1993
In regards to agricultural training at the university level, women comprised 12.4% of the students in agronomic engineering, 36.2% in forestry engineering, and 42.2% in agricultural economics in 1993.
<section>7</section>
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Selected programmes in support of women in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Policy Planning and Research
· Studies and the publication of gender-disaggregated statistics from national censuses have increased information and knowledge of women's role in agriculture.
· The establishment of the Committee for Integration of Rural Women in Agrarian Reform and the Coordination Commission for Development of Rural Women provides the opportunity to redefine mechanisms and services of technical assistance, credit and access to land.
Legal and Policy Reform
The Women's Commission and the establishment of a Permanent Forum in the National Congress provide opportunities to channel legal reform initiatives and disseminate information on laws.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· An FAO-supported programme to increase rural women's access to extension trained women extension liaisons and women's group organizers to act as links between the extension system and grassroots groups of rural women. The women's group organizers helped organize new women's groups and also worked with women members of mixed peasant organizations and existing women's groups.
· Women's access to credit has been increased through the widespread development of community banks or savings and loan groups, often set up by NGOs.
<section>8</section>
Areas to be strengthened
Areas to be strengthened
Policy Planning and Research.
· The National Policy on Women should be used as a point of departure to redefine a development strategy with a gender perspective.
· The women's units and committees, the Government/NGO Liaison Office and CODEMUR should be strengthened and coordination improved.
· Macro-economic policies should seek a balance between modernization and subsistence food production, facilitating the access of small producers, particularly women, to technology.
· Existing research on the role of women in agriculture needs to be analyzed and translated in policy and planning.
· Methodologies for the collection and analysis of data need to be improved, and data banks and documentation centres established.
· Gender training should be carried out at all levels.
· Mechanisms and indicators for integrating women's needs should be developed for planning, monitoring, and evaluation of programmes and projects.
Legal and Policy Reform
Information on the LMA should be widely disseminated. The LMA should be made compatible with the women's policy and with internationally supported projects.
Access to Agricultural Resources and Services
· Agricultural and credit services should be designed to take into account the needs of women.
· Gender training should be incorporated into the training of technical agricultural personnel.
· Women should be trained and organized to demand access to resources and services.
· There should be greater coordination among government, bi-lateral, multi-lateral and NGO development assistance programmes and projects, as well as with women's organizations.
· Labour-saving devices and childcare facilities should be made available to women to alleviate their work burdens.
Source: National Sectoral Report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development, 1994.
Prepared by:
Integration of Women in Development Service
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy Tel: +(39)6 52251
<section>e</section>
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Importance of agriculture to the economy
Agriculture plays an important role in the country's economy, accounting for 21.7% of the GDP and employing 53.9% of the labour force in 1992. About 61% of the population live in rural areas. The main cash crops are bananas, which accounted for 35% of export earnings, and coffee, which accounted for 17.6% in 1992. Exports of shellfish, meat and timber are also important. The main subsistence crops are maize, plantains, beans and rice. Agriculture has been adversely affected by fluctuations in the prices of bananas and coffee on the world market. Food security remains a basic pillar of the country's economic policy.
Contributions to GDP and employment
