<title>The conservation of lands in Asia and the Pacific</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
The lands of Asia and the Pacific are under intense pressure. They include some of the most intensively cultivated land on the planet, and they support some of the highest population densities known. In most of the region, population is expanding fast, and the demands of an increasingly urban and grooving population are removing important areas of agricultural land from production.
Under such pressure, land degradation has become common and is reducing the productivity of which the region is so proud. The current situation is not sustainable and, though strenuous efforts have been made to halt degradation in many countries, they have met with limited success. As a result, the economies of many countries in the region - which depend essentially on their forests, croplands and pastures - have suffered: land degradation is estimated to be costing the countries of the region many tens of billions of dollars a year.
Yet land degradation can be prevented and even reversed. Soil conditions can be improved, and productivity restored. The region's lands could be made to support more people, and to guarantee a secure future for the rural population.
The importance of this issue was highlighted in FAO's 21st Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, held in New Delhi in 1992. One of the recommendations of this conference was that FAO should continue to provide assistance to member countries in formulating national strategies and policies to arrest land degradation. FAO has followed up this recommendation. One result is the Framework for Action outlined in this publication.
This proposal suggests a new approach designed to capture the interest and imaginations of rural people throughout the region. It has been developed largely as a result of Technical Cooperation between Developing Countries (TCDC) and it is expected that its execution will also depend heavily on TCDC.
The first section outlines the magnitude of the threat. It explains that while most traditional land-use systems did little harm to the environment, few of them have stood up to the pressures of expanding populations and more intensive land use. Past approaches to this problem were based almost exclusively on physical measures, such as creating mechanical barriers to soil movement. They were expensive and provided few short-term benefits to the land users themselves. They attacked the symptoms of the problem, not the causes. As a result, most were poorly maintained, and fell into disrepair.
The approach advocated in the Framework for Action is based on promoting sound land-use management principles which, because they produce increased yields and profits within one or two seasons, encourage widespread participation. Physical conservation measures will still be needed, but greater emphasis will be placed on increasing and maintaining the land's vegetative cover through innovative agronomic and forestry techniques, and introducing sound management practices. This approach protects the land surface from wind and water erosion, and improves soil conditions by increasing fertility, organic matter content and moisture storage capacity. As soils improve, productivity rises, profits increase and the risk of crop failure recedes.
Few farmers have had the time or the means to adapt their methods to today's conditions of land scarcity. Land mismanagement has become widespread. National action is needed to identify its causes and to suggest solutions based on techniques designed both to raise yields and to prevent degradation. National resources - money and manpower - must then be used to encourage the widest possible level of participation in these schemes and to develop conservation institutions, at both government and non-governmental level, to expedite national conservation plans. It is important that the actions of all government agencies involved in conservation are carefully integrated.
Increased research and advanced training are among the many requirements for tackling land degradation. These are often best advanced regionally and there are a number of successful precedents for this.
Finally, a mechanism is described to enable nations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), donors and financing agencies to cooperate in formulating policies and devising programmes that will work efficiently and effectively. Experience has shown that mechanisms which are controlled by governments but which invite widespread participation at a very early stage are the most likely to succeed.
<section>2</section>
The problem of land degradation
PRESSURES ON THE REGION'S AGRICULTURAL LAND ARE LEADING TO EXTENSIVE LAND DEGRADATION. THE CAUSES ARE POVERTY, LAND SHORTAGE AND INCREASING POPULATIONS
In 1992 developing countries in Asia and the Pacific accounted for just less than 54 percent of the world population - nearly 3000 million people. Yet these countries had only 17 percent of the world's land resources.
Even so, countries in Asia and the Pacific are relatively well fed compared, for example, to much of Africa and parts of Central and South America. This is because they have made profitable use of new agricultural technology, such as fertilizers, high-yielding crop varieties, mechanization and irrigation. During the period ]961-85, 93 percent of the region's increase in cereal production was due to increased production inputs. As a result food production has more than kept pace with population increase.
While agricultural productivity has risen dramatically, the cost in land degradation has been high. Large areas of the region's cropland, grassland, woodland and forest are now seriously degraded. Water and wind erosion are the major problems but salinity, sodicity and alkalinity are also widespread; water tables have been over-exploited; soil fertility has been reduced; and where mangrove forest has been cleared for aquaculture or urban expansion, coastal erosion has been a common result. Finally, urban expansion has become a major form of land degradation, removing large areas of the best agricultural land from production.
The effect of these forms of land degradation on cereal production has so far been masked by the increasing levels of agricultural inputs that are used. However, production of other crops, such as pulses, roots and tubers, has now begun to decline. It is no coincidence that these crops arc grown on land with low production potential, where rates of land degradation are highest.
'... it is urgent to arrest land degradations and launch conservation and rehabilitation programmes in the most critically affected and vulnerable areas.'
Agenda 21
Chapter 14, paragraph 44
The Earth Summit
Rio de Janeiro, June 1992
The effects of land degradation
In the Philippines, for example, it is estimated that soil erosion carries away a volume of soil equivalent to one metre deep over 200 000 hectares every year. In India, some 144 million hectares of land are affected by either wind or water erosion. In Pakistan, 8.1 million hectares of land have been lost to wind erosion and 7.4 million hectares to water erosion.
Deforestation is also widespread. During the 1980s, an estimated four million hectares of forest were lost each year in Asia and the Pacific. The destruction of the forests is mainly a result of clearance for agriculture. The search for fuelwood, as well as the growing frequency and severity of forest and bush fires, are also taking their toll. In Nepal, excessive fuelwood harvesting and cutting for fodder have severely degraded forests - some 40 percent of buffalo feed and 25 percent of the feed for cows is traditionally provided by the leaves of trees. In India, which supports 15 percent of the world's cattle and 46 percent of the world's buffalo, upland forests have been severely overgrazed.
Deforestation has led to a severe shortage of fuelwood and building materials in many areas. Crop residues and animal manure, which were previously returned to the soil to add valuable nutrients, are having to he burnt for fuel.
The region's grasslands are also being destroyed - a matter of great economic importance since grazing is the largest land use in Asia. Grasslands are under attack from over-intensive grazing and from the incursion of marginal agriculture which often fails and then leaves a residue of degraded land. In a converse of logic, as grazing areas decrease, livestock numbers often increase. Grazing areas are often located at the source of important catchment areas, influencing downstream agricultural and settlement so the cost of their deterioration is high.
The problem of the 'vanishing grasslands' is particularly serious in countries where grazing lands are used communally, but livestock are private property. It is virtually impossible to stop overgrazing in areas where grazing rights are not defined. No nation in the region has an effective plan of action to meet this challenge.
Land degradation is also altering hydrological conditions Where vegetative cover is removed, the soil surface is exposed to the impact of raindrops which causes a sealing of the soil surface. Less rain then infiltrates the soil. Runoff increases, stream flows fluctuate more than before, flooding becomes more frequent and extensive, and streams and springs become ephemeral. These conditions encourage erosion; as a result, sediment loads in rivers are increasing, dams are filling with silt, hydro-electric schemes are being damaged, navigable waterways are being blocked and water quality is deteriorating. In several parts of India, the potential life of reservoirs has been more than halved by sedimentation rates that are ten times higher shall those assumed by the designers.
The plight of China's loess plateau
The plight of China's loess plateau
China's Loess Plateau - the 600 000 km^2 watershed of the Yellow River in Shaanxi, Shanxi, Gansu, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia-Hui, Qinghai and west Henan - is one of the most severely eroded in the world. Intensive cultivation on steeply sloping hillsides, using outdated techniques, has meant that an estimated 1600 million tonnes of fine yellow silt (after which colour the river is named) are washed away every year. In Mizhi County, more than 60 percent of the area has slopes of more than 20 percent and annual soil losses have reached more than 20 000 tonnes/km^2.
The plateau supports a population of 155 million people who are among the poorest in China, many living in caves dug into gully or terrace walls.
In the Nihegou catchment area in Chunhua County, for example, in 1985 average annual per caput food production was 430 kg and net income was 210 yuan (about US$30).
Yet the Loess Plateau is intrinsically fertile, is easy to till and has enormous agricultural potential. New crops such as tobacco, groundnuts and water melons are being introduced with success, and the planting of apple trees has increased farm income in many areas.
The cost of land degradation
The most authoritative estimates of the extent of land degradation are contained in a report on South Asia prepared by UNDP, UNEP and FAO (Land Degradation in South Asia: its severity, causes and effects upon the people, Rome, FAO, 1994). Water erosion is the most common form of degradation in the area, affecting 25 percent of agricultural land. Wind erosion affects 40 percent of the agricultural land in the dry zone. There is also a widespread decline in soil fertility and extensive waterlogging and salinization in irrigated areas.
This report analyses the effects of various forms of land degradation on the economies of countries in South Asia. It concludes that land degradation is costing countries of the region at least US$10 billion a year, simply in terms of lost agricultural production. This is equivalent to 7 percent of South Asia's agricultural gross domestic product.
The breakdown of traditional solutions
Asian farmers and pastoralists have not always caused such problems. Traditional systems of land use were compatible with the environment - for example shifting cultivation in the humid tropics and nomadic grazing in the semi-arid areas.
Farmers practicing shifting cultivation would clear an area of forest and then cultivate the land for two or three years. When plant nutrients in the soil were depleted, and crop yields had fallen, farmers would move to a new plot, leaving the old one to regenerate under natural vegetation. It could be 20 or more years before the original plot was cultivated again. In the meantime its fertility would have been restored by the bush or forest fallow, and weeds and pests suppressed.
Nomadic pastoralists traditionally moved with herds of animals to different areas of good grazing and water supply as seasons and conditions changed. With low stocking levels they were able to move to new areas before the reserves of any single area were irreversibly depleted and the soil laid bare.
Problems arose when populations started to increase, and the pressure on land resources became more severe. There is no longer enough land to allow long fallow periods; more and larger herds compete for forage; and other traditional systems of land use are being placed under increasing strain.
Farmers have responded by trying to develop new land. As a result, marginal land - steep land, land in areas of uncertain rainfall and land with poor, erodible soils - is being overused. Large areas of forest have been destroyed and much traditional pasture put under the plough.
Shifting cultivation, in its currently common forms, is a major problem in the region where it is practiced by at least 22 million people over an area of some 63 million hectares.
The causes of land degradation
There are six major causes of land degradation in the region: deforestation, shortage of land due to increased populations, poor land use, insecure land tenure, inappropriate land management practices and poverty.
This situation is particularly serious in Asia and the Pacific because most good agricultural land has already been opened up. Indeed, the region as a whole may already have passed the safe limits for agricultural expansion. The region had only about 0.14 hectares of arable and permanently cropped land per head of population in 1990, compared to about 0.4 hectares in the rest of the world. Outside Asia and the Pacific, agricultural expansion has more or less kept pace with population growth since the early 1960s. The fact that it has not kept pace with population growth in Asia and the Pacific is the region's principal cause of land degradation.
In Latin America, for example, land in use per person was 0.44 hectares in 1990, and is expected to decrease to about 0.35 hectares in 2010, with reserves remaining. In South Asia, with virtually no reserves of land with crop production potential, the land in use per person will fall from 0.17 hectares in 1990 to some 0.12 hectares in 2010. The vicious circle produced by limited land and a rising population is described in more detail in the box below. This pressure on the land has three main effects:
o extensive farming systems, which were traditionally in harmony with the environment since only low productivity was demanded of them, have become inappropriate;
o increasing numbers of the rural population are being forced to farm marginal and unsuitable land, which shell becomes quickly degraded; and
o more people move to urban areas, adding to congestion, pollution and often removing yet more prime agricultural land from production.
The vicious cycle of land degradation
Land, population and degradation
The two most important driving forces of land degradation in Asia and the Pacific are limited land resources and population increase. The result is small farms, low production per person and increasing landlessness. A consequence of land shortage is poverty.
Land shortage and poverty, taken together, lead to non-sustainable land management practices, the direct causes of degradation. Poor farmers are led to clear forest, cultivate steep slopes without conservation, overgraze rangelands and make unbalanced fertilizer applications.
Land degradation then leads to reduced productivity: a lower response to the same inputs or, where farmers possess the resources, a need for higher inputs to maintain crop yields and farm incomes. This has the effect of increasing land shortage still further, thus completing the cycle.
Substantial efforts have been made by individual farmers, national governments and international agencies to counteract the cycle of poverty and land degradation by research and development of improved technology. Much success has been achieved, as in the spread of high-yielding crop varieties and use of fertilizers in the 'green revolution'.
This effort may be nullified if it is not accompanied by a reduction in population growth rates. Governments of the region, as well as international agencies, recognize the need to limit increases in population. There is also a growing awareness that population questions cannot be treated in isolation, but must be linked with sustainable land development. As FAO has put it, 'A lack of control over resources; population growth; a lack of alternative avenues of livelihood: and inequity are all contributing to the degradation of the region's resources. In turn, environmental degradation perpetuates poverty, as the poorest attempt to survive on a diminishing resource base'.
<section>3</section>
A framework for action
Improving land use
Involving the people
Developing local and national activities
Strengthening regional activities
Coordinating international action
Many past attempts to prevent land degradation in the region have been unsuccessful. One of the main reasons was that these attempts were centrally organized and produced few short-term benefits for the farmers who had to execute them. The farmers had little motivation for the hard manual work involved in erecting tile mechanical barriers to soil erosion on which these past attempts largely depended. The problems were treated from an engineering perspective, and little attention was given to inept forms of land management and use, of which excessive runoff and soil erosion were only the symptoms.
Fortunately, alternatives to the purely mechanical solutions of the past now exist. These depend primarily on:
o ensuring that land users themselves are involved from the start in analysing their problems and finding solutions for them;
o identifying the causes of land degradation before prescribing solutions for it;
o using techniques that provide economic benefits for land users in the short as well as the long term; and
o promoting land-use systems that provide permanent vegetative cover to protect the soil, increase fertility and optimize water penetration.
The remainder of this publication describes a framework for action, built on these principles, to tackle the problem of land degradation in Asia and the Pacific, including desertification in the region's arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas. The framework is designed to optimize actions at national, regional and international levels.
Action at national level
The prime responsibility for putting the framework into practice rests with national governments. They must spearhead plan formulation, mobilize the people and initiate the programmes and projects that will be needed.
The key action required at the national level is to develop a long-term land conservation plan which will provide the necessary continuity of approach. A long-term land conservation plan is, without question, a government's best investment in land conservation.
These long-term plans need to be fashioned to suit the exact requirements of individual countries. However, they will all be based on three key principles: improving land use, obtaining the participation of the land users and developing the necessary institutional support.
Action at regional level
National action needs to be supported by regional action in specific areas where this is more efficient. Long-term training programmes, information exchange and major research programmes, for example, are often best carried out at the regional level.
Action at international level
Finally, international coordination is needed to ensure that the region's plans to tackle land degradation receive the long-term support that they will require. A scheme for ensuring efficient international coordination is outlined on 'Coordinating international action'.
Improving land use
EVALUATING LAND RESOURCES AND IDENTIFYING THE CAUSES OF LAND MISUSE ARE THE FIRST STEPS TO IMPROVING LAND USE. ONCE THIS HAS BEEN DONE, NEW POLICIES AND IMPROVED TECHNOLOGIES CAN BE INTRODUCED
Land degradation is the direct result of incorrect land use and poor land management. It follows that an analysis of the reasons wily land is incorrectly used or managed is needed if lasting solutions are to be found. Failure to do so will result in the development of programmes which deal with the symptoms of the problem rather than the causes.
The following steps need to be followed to bring about improved land use:
Evaluating land resources
Reliable data on land resources - including soils, climate, vegetation and topography - are needed if sound land-use and conservation policies are to be developed. Some of these data are more widely available than is generally realized. However, the data are usually fragmented, of different scales and reliability, and are stored in different ministries, libraries and universities.
The first major task is to find out what data are available and where they are located. The second is to gather existing data together, arrange them in a usable form, assess their utility and decide what additional data still need to be gathered.
With computers becoming more readily available and easier to use, it is now possible for any country to establish its own Geographic Information System (GIS) for the assembly, storage and processing of natural resources data. With such a system all relevant data can be stored in one place, added to as more and better data become available and quickly processed into usable forms. All countries should consider establishing their own GIS.
Improving land use
Other more traditional systems of gathering, compiling, storing and processing natural resources data should not be overlooked. As a minimum, each country should establish a small office or operations centre which is given responsibility for recording what relevant data are available and where they are located.
When sufficient data have been accumulated, they can be used in land-use planning exercises to identify priority areas for land rehabilitation. These areas can then be examined more intensively and strategies developed to improve land-use patterns.
Identifying causes of land misuse
The most difficult step in the process, but also the most important, is identifying those factors that can be changed by government to reverse the processes that lead to land degradation. Possible causes include growing the wrong crops on the wrong land, insecure land tenure, poor infrastructure, lack of inputs, inappropriate pricing structure for agricultural products, subsidies, incentives, taxes or even out-moded laws or social customs. Problems like these can seldom be overcome simply by introducing a new technology.
It may be difficult for governments to remove or change some of these causes of land misuse, and changes may have to be introduced over a period of time. Even where immediate changes cannot be made to overcome a basic problem, it is important that the reasons for the problem be understood. Failure to do so can result in the waste of time, effort and money.
On the other hand, if governments understand why land is being degraded, it may be possible to introduce gradual and inexpensive changes that will encourage farmers to take up more productive and sustainable forms of land use.
This information can provide the background to the policies and strategies that are required by a government to overcome its land degradation problems. Even if it is not possible to implement them immediately, the information can guide governments away from programmes that will fail because they are aimed at the symptoms of the problems, rather than the causes. In either case the results will be beneficial and the options available will be clarified.
Lessons from northern Thailand
International aid to help develop northern Thailand began in the early 1970s. Initially, the primary concern of aid programmes was to assist in opium eradication and control. Over the years, there has been a progressive change in approach, from crop substitution to integrated development. A concern for environmental aspects has been explicit or implicit ill many of these projects. However, the way this was carried through to activities, and the priority given to conservation, differed greatly. In addition, these projects took a rather restricted approach to resource conservation in the early years. The use of mechanical erosion control structures was universal at this time. Bench terraces, contour banks or contour ditches were the mechanical structures used. In early 1984, one of the internationally-founded projects made the control of soil erosion a priority for developing sustainable farming systems. In late 1985, based on results from its trials, this project started
implementing erosion control measures devoid of physical structures. This marked a major departure from the previous mechanical approach. The objective was not simply soil conservation, but sustainable farming systems. Among the key lessons learned were:
o the importance of having a master plan for watershed development;
o the importance of participation at all levels; and
o the use of vegetative barriers as the most pertinent and cost-effective erosion control measures in the region.
Source: P. M. Hoey, International Aid and Land Protection in Highland Development in Northern Thailand, in 7th ICSO Conference Proceedings.
Implementing the changes
Reforming agricultural policies
Agricultural policies can have a profound effect on land use. Subsidies, incentives and taxes can all have a big effect on what crops are grown where and whether or not the land is well managed. Governments, attempting to achieve self-sufficiency in a food crop, frequently promote policies which result in marginal land being misused. This, in turn, leads to land degradation. On the other hand, the price of food crops is sometimes controlled and kept to such a low level that it becomes pointless for farmers to manage their crops or land well. This also leads to land degradation. All government policies which affect the economics of land use should be carefully reviewed and, where necessary, modified so that they encourage productive and sustainable land use rather than destructive practices.
Developing and promoting new technologies
New technologies can also radically change land use - for better or for worse. Some of the conservation technology introduced in the past proved neither popular nor effective. For example, systems of earth contour banks and artificial waterways have not proved suitable under most conditions in Asia where land is in short supply. Here farmers are not prepared to sacrifice the land that is taken up by the structures. Where farms are small other technologies, such as the use of grass strips planted on the contour, have proved more effective and acceptable to the farmers.
However, experience has shown that no matter how effective a technology may be in controlling land degradation, it is unlikely to be accepted and practiced by farmers unless it also meets some other immediate need such as increasing yields, reducing the risk of crop failure, providing feed for livestock or reducing labour requirements. For this reason systems which combine agroforestry with terracing have proved popular and effective in the Philippines as they have led to higher and more assured crop yields while controlling soil erosion.
Malaysia: leguminous shrubs for erosion control
In most areas of Malaysia it is common to use a mixture of leguminous creepers as cover crops on land that is planted with rubber and oil palms. Erect shrubs can also be useful in erosion control, particularly where creepers might otherwise cause management problems, for instance in the establishment from cuttings of Gliricida as a shade tree for cocoa.
Research with Indifogera hirsuta in Malaysia has shown that, once established, the shrub can provide 70 percent surface cover and can control erosion as effectively as a mixture of grass species. The shrub grows to about 1-metre tall, provides useful mulch material and can re-seed itself.
Research has also shown Desmodium ovalifolium, Stylosanthes gracilis and Clitoria ternatea to provide useful ground cover, though establishment from seed can be slow. Once established, though, the shrubs spread horizontally quite quickly.
Source: Ghulam M. Hashim, Leguminous Shrubs for Erosion Control, in Contour, volume 22. 1990.
Controlling the loss of agricultural land
A major problem in the region is the loss of agricultural land for housing, industry, roads and other nonagricultural purposes. Unfortunately, many of the region's biggest and fastest growing cities are situated beside good agricultural land. As they expand, good quality land is converted, usually permanently, to other uses. To compensate for this, farmers are forced on to poorer land - frequently steeply sloping ground with shallow, poor soils which can quickly erode and lead to flooding, siltation of dams and waterways, and an accompanying cycle of poverty and yet more land degradation.
This problem is now recognized by countries such as Indonesia where a recently drafted National Soils Policy provides for the allocation of land to sustainable uses, either for forestry, agriculture, city expansion or other activities according to an Integrated Land-use Plan. Clearly any national land conservation programme should provide for regulations and zoning so that land-use changes are introduced in an orderly way and a country's best agricultural land is protected.
Providing farm inputs
The best way to protect soil from erosion is through a dense cover of living or dead vegetation. Healthy, densely growing crops not only produce high yields but they also provide good ground cover and protection from erosion. Any conservation programme should therefore promote good crop management.
The remarkable increases in crop production in the region over the past 30 years have been largely due to the widespread use of improved varieties and a large increase in the use of fertilizers. In 1961, fertilizer consumption by developing countries in Asia and the Pacific, in terms of plant nutrients, amounted to about 2 million tonnes or 7 percent of world fertilizer use. By 1992 this had risen to nearly 60 million tonnes - almost half the world total - and was still increasing. During this period fertilizer use increased from less than 10 kg/ha to about 120 kg/ha. However, there are considerable differences within and between countries, and the prevailing imbalanced application of fertilizers suggests that there is still considerable potential to increase yields and ground cover in the region through improved fertilizer use. Whether this will happen depends largely on the provision of supplies and their distribution. This also applies to other farm inputs such as fuel,
improved seeds and credit - without adequate inputs high productivity can neither be attained nor maintained. In this context, there is considerable potential for increasing the use of green manures in order to improve soil fertility and improve levels of organic matter in the soil.
Providing security of land tenure
Farmers who do not have long-term rights to the land they cultivate are seldom, if ever, interested in improving or protecting that land. This applies to millions of farmers in Asia and the Pacific. The largest group of farmers affected in this way are those that practice shifting cultivation - clearing small plots of land and cultivating them until the fertility of the soil decreases, and then moving on to clear and cultivate another plot. A recent estimate shows that there are now approximately 23 million people practicing shifting cultivation in the Asia and Pacific region.
Shifting cultivators are among the poorest population groups in the region and can do little without help to better their lives or farming practices. Many are now illegally farming in forest reserves. Without any rights to the land that they are using, they hav