<title>FAO Fisheries Circular No. 898 FID/C898. Structure and Process of the 1993-1995 United Nations Conference on Straddling </title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The need to foster rational conservation and management of marine living resources of the high seas has become a matter of considerable international concern. This concern principally stems from the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the exploitation of these resources and the fact that many of them are considered by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to be fully-exploited if not depleted. This situation has arisen because non-sustainable fishing practices have been used and, in some instances, non-parties to internationally agreed fisheries conservation and management arrangements have operated in management areas and undermined the effectiveness of those arrangements. This has led to resource use conflicts, and the possibility of some States resorting to unilateral measures to try to protect fish stocks that are harvested both within exclusive economic zones (EEZs) and on the high seas.
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 Convention) prescribes the rights and obligations of States relating to the exploitation of high seas marine living resources. However, these prescriptions are framed only in general terms. It was thus agreed at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) that measures were required to more effectively promote the implementation of the 1982 Convention and to ensure that high seas marine living resources were exploited in a rational manner and that fishermen and their respective flag States, operating on the high seas, acted in a responsible and accountable manner.
The 1982 Convention defines EEZ and high seas. Article 55 of this Convention states that the EEZ is "...an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea, subject to the specific legal regime established in this Part, under which the rights and jurisdiction of the Coastal State and the rights and freedoms of other States are governed by the relevant provisions of this Convention." High seas, on the other hand, are defined in Article 86 of the 1982 Convention as being "...the seas that are not included in the exclusive economic zone, in the territorial sea or in the internal waters of a State, or in the archipelagic waters of an archipelagic State. ..." It was against the background of these two definitions that discussion and negotiation at the UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks centred with respect to the elaboration of more effective conservation and management arrangements for these two types of fish stocks.
<section>2</section>
2. UNCED BACKGROUND
The non-sustainable use of the world's natural resources and environmental degradation prompted the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) on 22 December 1989 to adopt resolution 44/228. This resolution called for a global meeting to devise integrated strategies that would halt and reverse the negative impact of human behaviour on the physical environment and promote environmentally long-term sustainable economic development in all countries.
UNCED, the meeting called for in UNGA resolution 44/228, was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 3 to 14 June 1992. The Conference, attended by more than 178 heads of government, deputy heads of government, or ranking government ministers committed their respective governments to the 27 principles contained in the Declaration of Rio on Environment and Development (Rio Declaration) and the carefully negotiated text of Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable Development (Agenda 21). The Rio Declaration was endorsed by the UNGA in resolution 47/190 of 22 December 1992.
The Rio Declaration and Agenda 21 were negotiated largely in a preparatory commission, consisting of four sessions between 1990 and 1992, at United Nations headquarters in New York. Most of the text was agreed at the officials level in the preparatory commission, though a number of important issues, and in particular those matters relating to the funding for the implementation of Agenda 21, were addressed, if not resolved, at a political level at the Rio Summit. Although the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21 do not have legally binding effect, both texts, nonetheless, carry a strong moral obligation for States to ensure that they are fully and effectively implemented.
As a means of demonstrating the international resolve to ensure that positive and effective steps were taken to implement the principles contained in the Rio Declaration and the programme of action in Agenda 21, UNCED requested the UNGA to establish a United Nations Commission for Sustainable Development (CSD). The CSD was established at United Nations headquarters in 1992. The Commission consists of representatives of member States of the United Nations and serves as the principle 'watch dog' to monitor progress on the implementation of the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21.
The CSD met for the first time in June 1993. In subsequent years, the CSD will consider chapters of Agenda 21 on a four-year rotating basis. In its resolution 47/190 the UNGA, upon the recommendation of the CSD, decided to convene, not later than 1997, a special session for the purpose of an overall review of the implementation of Agenda 21.
Agenda 21 is a comprehensive action plan with a preamble, four sections and a total of 40 chapters. It also includes a Statement on Forest Principles. The four sections of Agenda 21 address:
(i) social and economic dimensions;
(ii) conservation and management of resources for development;
(iii) strengthening the role of major groups, and
(iv) the means of implementation.
Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 deals with "Protection of the oceans, all kinds of seas, including enclosed and semi-enclosed seas, and coastal areas and the protection, rational use and development of their living resources". There are seven programme areas in this chapter. These are:
(A) integrated management and sustainable development of coastal and marine areas, including exclusive economic zones;
(B) marine environmental protection;
(C) sustainable use and conservation of marine living resources of the high seas;
(D) sustainable use and conservation of marine living resources under national jurisdiction;
(E) addressing critical uncertainties for the management of the marine environment and climate change;
(F) strengthening international, including regional, cooperation and coordination, and
(G) sustainable development of small islands.
Each programme of Chapter 17 is set out in terms of the basis for action, objectives, activities (management-related activities, data and information, and international and regional cooperation and coordination), and the means of implementation (financing and cost evaluation, scientific and technological means, human resource development and capacity building).
Under Programme Area C of Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, States should take effective action to ensure that high seas fisheries are managed in accordance with the 1982 Convention. In part, States are required to:
"(d) Define and identify appropriate management units;
17.50 States should convene, as soon as possible, an intergovernmental conference under United Nations auspices, taking into account relevant activities at the subregional, regional and global levels, with a view to promoting effective implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. The conference, drawing, inter alia, on scientific and technical studies by FAO, should identify and assess existing problems related to the conservation and management of such fish stocks, and consider means of improving cooperation on fisheries among States, and formulate appropriate recommendations. The work and the results of the conference should be fully consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, in particular the rights and obligations of coastal States and States fishing on the high seas. ..."
In terms of the conservation and management activities necessary to achieve this objective, Programme Area C of Agenda 21, recommends that States should cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, at the subregional, regional and global levels to ensure that high seas fisheries are managed in accordance with the provisions of the 1982 Convention. In particular States should:
(i) give full effect to the provisions of the 1982 Convention with respect to straddling stocks and highly migratory species;
(ii) negotiate, as appropriate, international agreements for the effective conservation and management of fish stocks;
(iii) define and identify appropriate management units, and
(iv) convene a UN intergovernmental conference focusing on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks.
In Programme Area C, States are further called upon to:
(i) ensure that incidental catches on the high seas are minimized;
(ii) enact effective monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) measures to ensure compliance with applicable conservation and management measures, including full, detailed, accurate and timely reporting of catch and effort data;
(iii) deter reflagging of fishing vessels to avoid compliance with applicable conservation and management measures for high seas fishing activities;
(iv) prohibit destructive fishing practices;
(v) fully implement United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) resolution 46/215 on large-scale pelagic driftnet fishing, and
(vi) take measures to increase the availability of marine living resources as human food.
Because of the size and complexity of the ocean issues, an Administrative Committee on Coordination/Sub-Committee on Oceans and Coastal Areas (ACC/SC) has been established in 1994 by the Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development (IACSD) as Task Manager, inter alia, to mmonitor and review the implementation of Chapter 17. The ACC/SC is chaired by FAO until 1996. IOC/UNESCO provides the secretariat for the ACC/SC.
Depending on their respective mandates, the different United Nations agencies of the ACC/SC have been assigned responsibility as sub-task managers to oversee and report to the CSD on progress with the implementation of Chapter 17 of Agenda21. With respect to fisheries, FAO and the United Nations have been assigned joint responsibility for overseeing the implementation of Programme Area C (marine living resources of the high seas) while FAO, in its own right, has responsibility for Programme Area D (marine living resources under national jurisdiction). Other United Nations agencies, as appropriate, will also work closely with FAO and the United Nations in executing these assigned tasks.
<section>3</section>
3. CONFERENCE MANDATE
The Forty-seventh Session of the UNGA in 1992 addressed the issue of a UN-sponsored intergovernmental conference on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, as called for in Agenda 21. The UNGA decided, inter alia:
"... to convene in 1993, under United Nations auspices and in accordance with the mandate agreed upon at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, an Intergovernmental Conference on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, which should complete its work before the Forty-ninth Session of the General Assembly; ..."
UNGA resolution 47/192 provided the terms of reference for the Intergovernmental Conference and defined the scope and nature of its work. The Conference was given the primary tasks of:
(i) identifying and assessing existing problems related to the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks;
(ii) considering means of improving fisheries cooperation among States, and
(iii) formulating appropriate recommendations.
The Forty-eighth Session of the UNGA, noting progress made in the first two sessions of the Conference in 1993, agreed to extend the mandate of the Conference for a further year without any alteration to its terms of reference. However, this agreement was not without considerable debate in the UNGA. The debate centred principally on an attempt by States with distant-water fishing interests to remove the reference to 'high seas' in UNGA resolution 47/192. Such a change to the resolution was opposed vigorously by coastal States who maintained that the deletion of 'high seas' would be inconsistent with the spirit and intent of the Rio Declaration and Chapter 17 of Agenda 21. However, more importantly, coastal States viewed this move by distant-water fishing nations (DWFNs) to undermine the national sovereignty and integrity of coastal States within their respective EEZs. Such an erosion of national sovereignty, as enshrined in Part V (Articles 55 to 75) of the 1982 Convention,
was not acceptable to these States on any terms.
A further extension of the Conference was granted by the UNGA on the basis of its resolution 49/121. In this resolution, inter alia, two further sessions of the Conference in 1995 were agreed, the Conference was urged to complete its work before the Fiftieth Session of the UNGA, and the Secretary General of the United Nations was requested to provide a final report on the work of the Conference to the UNGA at its Fiftieth Session.
<section>4</section>
4. CONFERENCE SESSIONS
The Conference had a total of six sessions, one of which was organizational and the remaining five substantive.
In February 1993, prior to the organizational session of the Conference, Canada took the initiative to organize in St. Johns Newfoundland, a meeting of coastal States to consider issues relevant to the Conference. The purpose of the meeting was essentially to foster solidarity among coastal States and to raise the level of consciousness on issues germane to UNGA resolution 47/192.
In this pre-Conference meeting, coastal States were encouraged to review a range of issues of common concern relating to straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, to exchange information and ideas concerning likely negotiating positions and scenarios in the Conference, together with possible Conference outcomes. Canada prepared documents for the meeting and also made available a range of other papers for participating States.
4.1 Organizational session (19-23 April 1993)
In line with UNGA resolution 47/192, the Division for Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea (DOALOS) of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, was assigned the responsibility of providing the Secretariat to the Conference. In turn, DOALOS set in train arrangements for an organizational session in April 1993.
At this session Ambassador Satya Nandan of Fiji was elected Chairman of the Conference. Widely acclaimed internationally as a jurist and Law of the Sea Expert, Ambassador Nandan had previously been closely involved in the negotiation of the 1982 Convention, inter alia, acting as rapporteur of the Second Committee of the 1973-82 United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and chairing its Negotiating Group on item 4. He subsequently served as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Law of the Sea from 16 January 1984 to 29 February 1992.
The Conference also elected, by acclamation, three vice-chairmen from Mauritania (African States), Italy (Western European and other States) and Chile (Latin American and Caribbean States). It was agreed that consideration of the appointment of a fourth vice-chairman should be deferred until the second session.
Rules of procedure were adopted, and the organization of work for the second session of the Conference was agreed. In addition, a credentials committee consisting of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Burundi, China, Kenya, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Russian Federation, and USA, was appointed. The rules of procedure required that the credentials committee meet at each session of the Conference and duly report to the Conference prior to the conclusion of each session. At each session, under the chairmanship of Argentina, the credentials committee met and reported, as required by the rules of procedure.
Attendance at the organizational session was strong, and in addition to UN Member States and IGOs, a large number of NGOs were represented. A significant part of the session was taken up with debate relating to the role of the European Economic Community (EEC) in the Conference. However, it was finally agreed that:
"The representative of the European Economic Community shall participate in the Conference in matters within its competence without the right to vote. Such representation shall in no case entail an increase of the representation to which the member States of the European Economic Community would otherwise be entitled."
With respect to the organization of work of the Conference, it was agreed in the first session, on the basis of recommendations from the Chairman, that all substantive issues would be considered in plenary, though it was recognized that ad hoc working or negotiating groups would need to be established to consider specific issues.At this session, the Chairman sought assistance from participants in elaborating the substantive issues to be considered by the Conference. In particular, the Chairman requested participants to provide him with a listing of issues that should be addressed. In the inter-sessional period prior to the second session a large number of submissions were received by the Chairman. These submissions were distributed by the Secretariat for the information of the Conference participants.
In recognition of FAO's mandate for fisheries matters within the UN system, and in accordance with paragraph 11 of UNGA resolution 47/192, an FAO staff member joined the Conference Secretariat as Scientific and Technical Adviser.
At the organizational session, FAO indicated that it would make available a number of technical documents for the second session, including the report and documents of the 1992 FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing; the Declaration of Cancún adopted by the 1992 International Conference on Responsible Fishing in Cancún, Mexico; the Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development adopted by the 1984 World Conference for Fisheries Management and Development; the draft Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, and the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (Compliance Agreement), at that time available in draft form.
At the conclusion of the organizational session, FAO was requested by the Group of South Pacific States to provide a paper for the second session of the Conference. The South Pacific States pointed out that FAO had done much valuable work in technical assessments on key fisheries issues and requested that an updated report summarising the characteristics of the main high seas fisheries, covering details of current stock status, characteristics of the fleets operating in the fisheries and recent trends in catch and effort, be provided as a document of the Conference.
4.2 Second session (12-30 July 1993)
In his opening statement at this session, the Chairman reminded the Conference that many of the world's fish stocks were not being harvested in a sustainable manner and that this situation, if allowed to continue, could threaten the long-term supply of this important source of food and adversely affect the fishing industry. He also noted that there was a need to secure an internationally agreed solution if the conservation and management of high seas fisheries resources was to be successful. The Chairman underscored the importance of technical work being initiated by FAO with respect to high seas conservation and management but pointed out that such work required reinforcing by the Conference through the clear definition of a legal and political framework.
At the beginning of the second session States, IGOs (including regional fishery bodies) and NGOs were invited to make general statements, but focusing specifically on matters to be addressed by the Conference. These statements permitted participants to outline their national and organizational positions on the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. Depending on their respective interests in high seas fishing and the degree of interaction with high seas fisheries, the positions of States fell clearly into two groups: coastal States and DWFNs.
On 12, 13 and 14 July 1993 general statements were made by Australia, EC, Peru, Chile, China, Russian Federation, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, USA, Korea, Japan, Argentina, Solomon Islands (on behalf of the 16 member States of the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA)), Fiji, Poland, UK (on behalf of its territories in the Caribbean and the Southern Atlantic), Brazil, Sweden, Sri Lanka, Mexico, Ukraine, Tanzania, Sierra Leone, Colombia, Cook Islands, Trinidad and Tobago (on behalf of the 12 member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)), Indonesia, Philippines, Ecuador, India, Iceland, Costa Rica, Latvia, Cuba and Kiribati. In addition, the following IGOs and NGOs made statements: FAO, IOC-Unesco, FFA, Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), Greenpeace International, World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) UK (on behalf of the National Audubon Society and the Council for Oceans Law of the USA), Alaska Marine Conservation Council, Oceans Institute of Canada, Fogo
Island Fish Cooperative, and the Four Directions Council.
At the conclusion of the general statements, and on the basis of written submissions provided by some States, the Chairman identified those key issues before the Conference where there was some measure of agreement. The issues identified by the Chairman included the following:
(i) the 1982 Convention to be the framework within which conservation and management measures for the two types of stocks would be developed;
(ii) a clear need for conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and that such conservation and management should be compatible over stock ranges;
(iii) international cooperation is required for effective conservation and management;
(iv) a need for an international code of conduct for international fishing;
(v) effective flag-State enforcement to be exercised on the high seas in respect of the two types of stocks;
(vi) data and information are essential for the development of conservation and management measures and that in the absence of such data a precautionary approach to management should be invoked;
(vii) regional conservation and management practice should be based on globally agreed principles to ensure uniformity and consistency;
(viii) the principle of resource sustainability is an essential component of conservation and management;
(ix) proper monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) is necessary for effective conservation and management;
(x) effective conservation and management to be underpinned by proper dispute settlement mechanisms;
(xi) conservation and management measures not to be undermined by the activities of States not party to regional management arrangements and new entrants to fisheries need to be accommodated inasmuch as this is possible, and
(xii) technical cooperation to be extended to developing countries to enhance their capabilities in fisheries conservation and management.
After providing this summary, the Chairman pointed out that the Conference had discharged the first component of its mandate in that existing problems relating to straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks had been identified and their relative importance assessed.
Having made this assessment, the Conference commenced to consider in greater detail the issues before it. This was done on the basis of a comprehensive and well-structured guide to the issues prepared by the Chairman.
The guide to the issues was presented in two sections: (i) the purpose of the Conference, and (ii) issues to be addressed by the Conference. The latter section included:
(i) the nature of conservation and management measures to be established through cooperation;
(ii) the mechanisms for cooperation;
(iii) the responsibilities of regional fisheries organizations or arrangements;
(iv) compliance with conservation and management measures;
(v) enforcement of high seas fisheries;
(vi) conservation and management measures;
(vii) non-parties to a regional agreement or arrangement;
(viii) the settlement of disputes on matters of a technical nature, and
(ix) compatibility and coherence between national and international conservation measures for the same stock.
The importance and practical benefit of the Chairman's paper on the issues before the Conference was that it sharply focused discussion on the range of complex and difficult issues under consideration, facilitating forward movement in debate and negotiation. In a structured and methodical way participants were invited to outline their respective positions on the various issues. Some of the issues were considered in informal sessions as a means of giving States maximum flexibility in discussion and debate.
As the basis for a negotiating strategy the Chairman sought initially to develop points of agreement and preliminary text on relatively non-controversial technical straight-forward issues such as data and information requirements for effective conservation and management. With some technical points and text virtually agreed, the informal sessions then progressed to consider more difficult matters such as the question of compatibility in conservation and management between EEZs and the high seas. On issues such as these, no clear consensus existed between coastal States and DWFNs.
Drawing on national positions outlined by States both in plenary and in informal sessions, and taking account of other information (e.g., statements of NGOs and subregional or regional fishery organizations) before the Conference, the Chairman elaborated the first draft of a negotiating text. The text paralleled closely the issues identified by the Chairman in his discussion paper. After the introduction, the negotiating text addressed:
(i) the nature of conservation measures to be established through cooperation;
(ii) mechanisms for international cooperation;
(iii) regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements;
(iv) flag State responsibilities;
(v) compliance and enforcement of high seas fisheries conservation and management measures (compliance and enforcement by flag States and regional arrangements for compliance and enforcement);
(vi) port States;
(vii) non-parties to a subregional or regional agreement or arrangement;
(viii) dispute settlement;
(ix) compatibility and coherence between national and international conservation measures for the same stock;
(x) special requirements of developing countries, and
(xi) review of the implementation of conservation and management measures.
After the Chairman tabled his negotiating text, the Conference moved to consider it in depth, and as a consequence of having text with which to work, discussion became even tighter and more focused than it had been previously. It was essentially at this point in the Conference that serious negotiations among States commenced, as opposed to national posturing and the delivery of general statement and the reiteration of national positions.
While the form of the outcome of the Conference had not been considered previously in detail, it was evident from discussion on this matter that there were markedly differing positions among States. Some States, and most notably coastal States, expressed the view that the conservation and management of high seas resources could not be guaranteed, nor would conservation and management be effective, in the absence of a legally binding instrument to govern the exploitation of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks.
Indeed, early in this session a group of 'like-minded States' sponsored a paper, drafted in convention format, for consideration by the Conference. However, some coastal States and DWFN delegations expressed the view that the tabling of the document was premature, and even ill-timed, because all the issues before the Conference had not been considered in sufficient depth. For this reason, this draft convention failed to gain the attention it probably deserved, nor to have a significant and sustained impact on the Conference's deliberations.
On the question of form, other States, and especially those with distant-water fishing interests (e.g., China, EC, Japan, Korea and Poland) indicated that a declaration on conservation and management or UNGA resolution, for example, would be a more appropriate form of the outcome of the Conference.
At the end of the second session the Chairman submitted that substantial progress had been made in fulfilling the mandate set out in UNGA resolution 47/192. He summarized briefly the status of the issues that had been discussed during the session, and proposed that the Conference agree that:
(i) there should be two further sessions during 1994 with dates to be confirmed by the UNGA at its forty-eighth session;
(ii) facilities be made available to permit two simultaneous meetings during the session, and
(iii) FAO be requested to provide two information papers on the precautionary approach to fisheries management and reference points for fisheries management, in advance of the third session.
These three proposals were endorsed by the Conference.
Closing statements on 30 July 1993 were made by Solomon Islands (on behalf of the 16 members States of the FFA), Peru, Colombia, Russian Federation, Japan, Argentina, UK (in response to a query by Argentina concerning the composition of the UK delegation), Korea, Canada, Norway, New Zealand, Australia, EC (on behalf of its 12 member States), Trinidad and Tobago (on behalf of the 12 member States of CARICOM), China, Iceland, South Pacific Permanent Commission (CPPS), Fiji, Women's Fisheries Network, Fishermens' Food and Allied Workers of Canada, and the Japan Federation of Tuna.
At its Forty-eighth Session in 1993, the UNGA received a progress report on the Conference. Following considerable and substantial debate, the UNGA resolved that the three proposals endorsed by the Conference at its second session be accepted and requested the United Nations Secretary-General to report again on progress at the Conference at the Forty-ninth Session of the UNGA in 1994.
4.3 Third session (14-31 March 1994)
At the third session of the Conference, the Chairman in his opening statement again emphasized the need for the Conference to achieve international cooperation for the effective conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. He also informed the Conference, inter alia, that FAO's Compliance Agreement was open for signature, that FAO had convened an Ad hoc Consultation on the Role of Regional Fishery Agencies in Relation to High Seas Fishery Statistics (Ad hoc Consultation), and that work was progressing in FAO on the development of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The Chairman pointed out that all of these initiatives were relevant to the work of the Conference.
On 14 March 1994 opening statements were made by EC, Peru, Canada, Korea, Argentina, Japan, China, USA, Samoa (on behalf of the 16 member States of the FFA), Ecuador, Russian Federation, New Zealand, Poland, Australia, FAO, Greenpeace International, and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT).
It was agreed by the Conference that the work of the third session would commence with general remarks by States, IGOs and NGOs and be followed, in informal sessions, by a section-by-section examination of the Chairman's negotiating text. The form of the outcome of the Conference would then be considered and a revised negotiating text would be issued by the Chairman. Concurrent with the plenary or informal sessions, it was further agreed that two working groups would be convened to consider the two critical issues of the precautionary approach to fisheries management, and reference points for fisheries management. Discussion would start from, and be based on, the two documents prepared for the Conference by FAO, as called for in UNGA resolution 48/194.
The informal sessions prompted intense discussion and negotiation and provided ample scope for the Chairman to refine substantially his negotiating text. While retaining the essential elements, features and structu