<title>A system of economic accounts for food and agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
A Handbook of Economic Accounts for Agriculture (EAA) was released in 1974 "to help statisticians compile agricultural accounts in the most useful and standardized form that is possible ... and to provide world guidelines in the construction of economic accounts for agriculture". This Handbook, which was based on the 1968 United Nation System of National Accounts, referred mainly to the productive activities of crop and livestock producers. The present revision of the Handbook entitled "A System of Economic Accounts for Food and Agriculture" (SEAFA), provides a broader framework to bring together various kinds of databases relating to food and agriculture (including forestry and fisheries) in an integrated system. The concepts and accounting structure of the system are based on the revised System of National Accounts ( 1993). The present Handbook, in addition to describing the system, includes details of crop and livestock production and linkages with the FAO's Food Balance
Sheets. It is planned to extend the coverage of SEAFA to include similar information about forestry, logging and fisheries together with some natural resource accounts or environmental accounts. The revised system is intended to be helpful for all countries, irrespective of their stage of development.
In view of the status of statistical development in some developing countries, a section on methods and techniques of estimation has also been included to facilitate the compilation of SEAFA. It is also planned to make the section on methods and techniques more comprehensive by including suggested solutions for problems faced by various countries in the compilation of SEAFA. Comments and suggestions for improving the Handbook and making it more comprehensive would be greatly appreciated. These comments should be sent to the Director, Statistics Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalle, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Director
Statistics Division
<section>2</section>
PART ONE: THE SYSTEM
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Why a separate system?
The role of the system
The arrangements of the handbook
Acknowledgements
Why a separate system?
1.1 A System of Economic Accounts consists of a coherent, consistent and interrelated set of economic accounts for sectors or sub-sectors of the economy, industries or the economy as a whole. It provides a set of concepts, definitions and classifications within a broad accounting framework. It is designed for purposes of economic analysis and policy-making, including the formulation and monitoring of economic programmes and development planning. Data of a scientific, technological or social nature can be systematically related to economic data within the framework of an overall system of accounts. Work on the formulation of such a system started at individual research level well before the Second World War. The first United Nations System of National Accounts (SNA) was published in 1953. The UN recommended countries to compile their economic accounts within the SNA framework to achieve consistency and facilitate international economic comparison. However, the interest of
policy-makers in relating the outcomes of various scientific and technological studies, plans and programmes to the socio-economic status of the population, encouraged the further elaboration of the system. This elaboration included the establishment of links with the distribution of income and consumption; stocks of tangible and non-tangible assets; a balance sheet; stocks of human capital; and various other monetary and quantitative databases relating to different types of activities. SNA has been revised several times to take account of these wider concerns. The latest version' of the system was completed in 1993 and provides measures of production, income, consumption, savings, capital formation and their financing for individual sectors and not only for the economy as a whole. It also provides linkages with various monetary and quantitative databases relating to different types of activities through Satellite Accounts. SNA is a powerful and flexible tool to provide the
detailed economic information required to meet analytical and policy needs. A System of Economic Accounts for Food and Agriculture (SEAFA) can be viewed as a specific application of SNA to meet the requirements of analysts, policy-makers and planners dealing with various economic activities relating to food and agriculture.
1.2 Policy-making and decision-taking with increasing socio-economic linkages and interdependencies within and between nations, is a necessary activity of every government. Agricultural development, like many other activities, has also become complex and comprises a number of separate but interrelated subjects. In many developing countries a large share of agricultural land is held in the form of small and marginal holdings. In most such countries the population is rising. Although new jobs may be created in non-agricultural activities the rate of increase in employment opportunities may be far less than the growth of population, giving rise to increasing poverty. Very often the resources at the disposal of primary agricultural workers diminish. On the one hand, the worker is forced to follow traditional production techniques while, on the other hand, the economy increases its demands on food production. An economy may also be faced with a situation in which the prices of
food are high but farm incomes are low. Scarce foreign exchange is often used to pay for food imports. Diets are below the normal level and contain insufficient quantities of protein and fat. Animal husbandry activity and fisheries are inadequately developed because of a lack of resources. There is increasing pressure on land. Labour moves out of agriculture not because of the mechanization of farm activity but because of uncertainty and lack of resources. The high risk leads to agricultural credit being in short supply. Marketing systems, transportation and communication networks are inadequate. These factors, combined with social factors, hinder the commercialization of agriculture. In countries endowed with large forest resources, government policies frequently fail to secure the maximum benefits and efficient resource use. This results in economic and fiscal losses and contributes to the wastage of forest resources. Scarcely any resources are devoted to the development
of the eco-system and the conservation of natural resources. The list of topics could be extended further but it is already sufficiently long to illustrate the complex and interrelated nature of the problem. In the face of this situation, however, the decision-maker has very little reliable data or information available for analysis. To solve such problems an information system is needed that keeps in close touch with various aspects of agriculture and shows the place and role of agriculture in the total economy. SEAFA is intended to meet this need. A separate system of economic accounts for food and agriculture is proposed for the following reasons:
(a) The basic needs of human populations for food, fibre, fuel and shelter are supplied by a combination of agriculture, fishery and forestry activity. Policy-makers need a comprehensive integrated view of the system as a whole to emphasize the importance of the subject and to make optimum use of resources in the long term.
(b) The activity of agriculture defined by the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) under Divisions 01, 02 and 05 covers crop production, animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries, but for day-to-day decision-making, policy-makers and planners require information on many other areas in order to have a comprehensive view. These areas include the availability of food production, the impact of food and agricultural activities on the eco-system and the current status of natural resources.
(c) Planning exercises require information on numerous topics such as labour force participation, research and development, agro-industries, the management and production of inputs, the balance of trade and the balance of payment, the depletion of natural resources and impacts on other sectors.
(d) Agriculture, being an important part of economic activity, is recognized in the ISIC and SNA classification of economic activities as a separate activity. " Food production", however, is not specifically identified. Food production cuts across ISIC by combining economic activities covered under agriculture, forestry, fishery and manufacturing (food processing).
(e) Food availability and consumption may be expressed in terms of physical quantities of food or in terms of the nutritional level provided by the basket of food consumed, which is expressed in terms of calories (number), protein (grams), fat (grams), etc., for specific analytical use.
1.3 The economic accounts for food and agriculture have been designed to cover all these aspects. FAO thought it appropriate to provide a comprehensive framework for the economic accounts for food and agriculture in order to present traditional agricultural statistics on output, input, capital formation and uses of agricultural products in a logical consistent framework together with other information required by users either directly or through satellite accounts as recommended by the 1993 SNA.
1.4 In order to take coherent decisions regarding the availability of food, the level of nutrition of the population, the economic condition of the rural population (especially those engaged in agricultural production), the preservation of the ecosystem and the improvement of the efficiency of production, a comprehensive system is required. Such a system should provide information on the various subjects listed above and link the information system of agriculture with that of the rest of the economy and the rest of the world. The system would have both physical as well as monetary databases, as analysts and policy-makers need to know the impact of changes in one on the other. Thus, to provide a sufficiently flexible tool to policy-makers, it is necessary to formulate a comprehensive system of economic accounts for agriculture linked to the 1993 SNA. With such a framework it would also be possible to make international comparisons.
1.5 SEAFA has been designed to meet analytical needs and requirements for the formulation of plans and policies relating to food and agriculture. The framework of the System has been formulated using the concepts recommended by the 1993 SNA for establishing a system of economic accounts and by FAO for the collection of various data.
The role of the system
1.6 SEAFA recommends covering a large number of productive activities that are of interest to decision-makers. These activities fall under ISIC Divisions 01, 02 and 05 dealing with crop and animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries, and also under other divisions dealing with the production of fertilizer and pesticides, machinery and equipment, research and development, education and health, recreation, etc. SEAFA does not, however, propose that the accounts should be prepared for all activities. It suggests that part of the information should be presented in the form of supplementary tables of statements. The basic objective of this Handbook (SEAFA) is to illustrate how to organize useful information in an integrated manner for decision-making in FAO Member Countries. This Handbook is not a questionnaire for the collection of data on food and agriculture by FAO and it is proposed to address this matter separately.
The arrangements of the handbook
1.7 The Handbook has been divided into two parts. The first part deals with the structure of the system. As well as this introductory Chapter, it includes three more Chapters. Chapter 2 presents an overview of the System and includes the structure and formats of various accounts as well as illustrative list of statements recommended for different activities. FAO's traditional Food Balance Sheets are linked with SNA's supply and use accounts for food products. The linkage of SEAFA with the 1993 SNA has also been illustrated in this chapter. In Chapter 3, the basic national accounting concepts and definitions of the main flows used in the System are presented together. Obviously, this Chapter entirely depends on the 1993 SNA and many relevant portions have been extracted from SNA's text and reproduced. The concepts listed in this Chapter are uniformly applicable to all the economic activities covered in SEAFA. Readers familiar with the 1993 SNA may omit this Chapter. Chapter 4
covers the various uses of the System. Part TWO of the Handbook, which is intended primarily for compilers in developing countries, consists of two Chapters. The first chapter of Part TWO is devoted to crop and animal husbandry activities and discusses the application of the concepts given in Chapter 3 in Part ONE as well as describing the various sources of the data required to compile the accounts. The second Chapter of Part TWO presents a schematic classification of available data used to prepare SEAFA, keeping in view the reliability of resultant estimates. This chapter also includes some discussion of simple statistical techniques which are generally used by official statisticians to process primary data and impute missing data or observations. This discussion explains the assumptions underlying the techniques used. It is proposed to provide similar details about the structure of accounts and sources of data for other activities included in SEAFA in separate supplements
to the Handbook.
Acknowledgements
1.8 This Handbook on SEAFA has greatly benefited from the comments and suggestions offered by various subject matter specialists and economists at FAO and in other international organizations on the first draft issued in March 1995 and also from the views expressed at the seminar on the 1993 System of National Accounts organized by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Canberra, September 1994), the Expert Consultation on Use and Analysis of Food and Agricultural Data organized by FAO (Bangkok, June 1995) and the Study Group on Food and Agricultural Statistics in Europe, Conference of European Statisticians, organized jointly by the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) and FAO (Geneva, July 1995) where the draft Handbook was presented. The basic concepts and structure of accounts were also discussed with the representatives of ECE, the Statistical Office of the European Communities (EUROSTAT), the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) and the Ministry of Agriculture of France. Their contribution in suggesting improvements to the draft is gratefully acknowledged. Some editing of the final draft was also undertaken by Mr. Peter Hill working as a consultant to the FAO and his help is also gratefully acknowledged.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 - The system of economic accounts for food and agriculture
What are the requirements?
The contents of SEAFA
The relationship of SEAFA to SNA
The agricultural household sub-sector
The sequence of accounts for the agricultural household sub-sector
Accounts for the other sub-sectors
The accounts for agriculture as a productive activity
Agricultural activity accounts
Goods and services accounts
Satellite accounts and supplementary tabulations relating to food (food balances)
What are the requirements?
2.1 The contents and structure of a system of economic accounts depend on the requirements for which the system is being designed. The requirements cover two aspects: which economic activities and transactions; and whose economic activities and transactions? Although general answers to these questions are given by the 1993 SNA for the economy as a whole, in the present Handbook a specific system is proposed to serve analysts and decision makers dealing with food and agricultural activities.
2.2 SEAFA is intended to serve policy-makers dealing with the preparation of production plans for agriculture and food designed to optimize the use of domestic resources, minimize the import of essential agricultural goods and stabilize the level of prices of food and agricultural products, while keeping in view the impact of these policies on the living standards of the rural population dependent on agriculture. The plans may be formulated for product diversification to achieve the desired level of nutrition for the country's population or to maximize the economic benefits. Policy-makers are generally not concerned with other matters, such as the financial assets and liabilities of the units engaged in the activities. The main objectives of agricultural policies can be divided into three broad groups as follows:
(a) securing improvements in the efficiency of the production and distribution of food and agricultural products;
(b) improving the condition of the rural population;
(c) raising people's level of nutrition and standard of living.
The two questions raised in paragraph 2.1 are examined in the following discussion keeping these objectives in view.
2.3 The economic activities covered in SEAFA relate to various aspects of the food and agricultural production of a country or region. Such a system needs to incorporate all the economic statistics relating to agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and nutrition in one framework. This is necessary because these activities are interrelated and also because it allows the study of the impact of changes induced in the system through various policy measures. Such a framework may include detailed information for making recommendations on subject matters such as improved methods of producing, processing, marketing and distributing food and agricultural products, import substitution, improvement in nutritional intake, financing requirements and conservation of natural resources. The system, therefore, requires the following types of data:
· production, productivity and income accruing from the activities of agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food production;
· the inputs and labour required for carrying out the activities;
· consumption patterns and food habits, along with the nutrient content of the food;
· the status of infrastructural development related to agricultural and food production activities and their financing requirements.
2.4 The data included in the system depicts such issues as labour force participation, development of a skilled workforce, extension and research activities or cover the economic, social and scientific aspects of the utilization of natural resources. These data establish the relationships between domestic production and foreign trade (import and export), the relationship of land and other assets with size of holding and production, the relationship of agro-climatic factors with the genetic characteristics of crops and animals and with their production, etc.
2.5 For purposes of economic planning, the system also needs to have clear linkages with other related economic activities such as the processing of agro-based products and the production, import and export of intermediate inputs, machinery and equipment used in agriculture, as well as other activities that have an indirect impact on agriculture. This latter group includes the development of infrastructure (e.g. power, communication and storage) and services activities such as distribution. In view of these requirements, SEAFA (like SNA) is based on the structure of inter-industry transaction tables. This structure links targeted output not only with inputs required but also with the level of consumption, imports, exports and changes in stocks of food and agriculture products as well as with other economic activities not covered by SEAFA.
2.6 The second question from paragraph 2.1 (whose activity and transaction) could more specifically be answered by taking each of the objectives separately. For example in case of the first objective, namely, "securing improvements in the efficiency of production and distribution of food and agricultural products" it is necessary to cover all units that are responsible for taking the decisions to carry out the economic activity, i.e. all institutional units engaged in agricultural activity, as well as the units of location (physical) where the economic activity actually takes place. This also partially satisfies the second objective (improving conditions of the rural population) because it applies to the income of all households with agriculture as their principal activity. In the case of developing countries, for which this objective is relevant, a major share of the total rural population depends on such agricultural activities. A regular set of information for rural areas
has not been included in SEAFA as the area that can be described as rural area changes very frequently even if the concept remains the same. To study the third objective (i.e. raising the level of nutrition and standards of living of the people) within the total consumption of the population, it is necessary to study food as one sector. In this respect SEAFA may include the activity of establishments engaged in production of food products as well as in the supply and use of food products. In other words, to take policy decisions on the above questions, the system needs to cover the transactions of two types of units, viz. institutional units and establishments whose principal activity is production of food and agricultural products. These transactions may relate to economic activities of production, income generation and supply and use of food and agricultural products and the composition of food items for the total population along with its nutrition content. While
designing SEAFA these aspects have been kept in mind and are discussed in more detail in the following presentation.
The contents of SEAFA
(a) The coverage of economic achvity
(b) Units used in SEAFA
(c) The system of accounts of SEAFA
2.7 The contents and coverage of SEAFA can be presented in terms of economic activities using the ISIC codes, units used in the system and the type of economic accounts that are described below.
(a) The coverage of economic activity
2.8 The System as a whole is concerned with the following types of economic activities:
(1) Crop and animal husbandry: agriculture covering crop husbandry, animal husbandry and related activities (ISIC Division 01);
(2) Forestry, logging and related activities (ISIC Division 02);
(3) Fishing (ISIC Division 05);
(4) Food production: includes (i) food production covered under ISIC Divisions 01, 02 and 05, (ii) production of food covered under ISIC Division 15, i.e. the manufacture of food products and beverages;
(5) Environmental protection activities: such as desertification control, water resource protection, marine pollution control erosion control, flood prevention or control and natural reserves (action to preserve biodiversity).
(6) Other activities: includes (i) research and development relating to crops, livestocks, forestry, fisheries and food production included in ISIC class 7310; (ii) veterinary activities, ISIC class 8520; (iii) technical and vocational and higher education relating to agriculture, forestry and fishery included in ISIC classes 8022 and 8030; (iv) agro industries other than food products covered under ISIC Divisions 16, 17, 19 and 20; (v) production of inputs for intermediate consumption and machinery and equipment for use in the agricultural sector covered under ISIC class 2412 (manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides), ISIC class 2921 (manufacture of agricultural and forestry machinery), ISIC class 2925 (manufacture of machinery for food, beverage and tobacco processing) and ISIC class 3511 (building of fishing boats and fish processing factory vessels, development of infrastructure for rural areas).
(b) Units used in SEAFA
2.9 The following three kinds of units are used both in SNA and SEAFA:
· institutional units
· establishments
· products, i.e., goods and services.
A brief description of the 1993 SNA's concepts applied to SEAFA with special reference to agriculture is given below. Although the same units are used for preparing accounts or tables for other activities listed in paragraph 2.8 above, a similar activity-specific description will be included in the proposed supplements to the Handbook.
1. Institutional Units
2.10 An institutional unit is defined as:
"an economic entity that is capable, in its own right, of owning assets, incurring liabilities and engaging in economic activities and in transactions with other entities" (1993 SNA paragraph 4.2).
An institutional unit is therefore a real economic unit. It is an economic agent or transactor. SNA distinguishes four main kinds of institutional unit: households; corporate and quasi corporate enterprises, government units and non-profit institutions (NPIs). It is possible to compile a complete set of accounts, including balance sheets, for an institutional unit because, by definition, it is capable of owning assets and incurring liabilities in its own right. It can receive and spend income, borrow and lend, and so on.
2.11 Sectors and sub-sectors in SNA are groups of resident institutional units and SNA recommends the compilation of a complete set of accounts for each sector. SEAFA proposes to identify a sector of the economy consisting of institutional units whose principal activity is agricultural production. Such a sector is not specifically identified in the 1993 SNA and it is useful to see how the agricultural sector relates to the standard sectors defined in SNA. The agricultural sector consists of three sub-sectors each of which is, in turn, a sub-sector of a standard SNA sector namely:
· agricultural households as defined below;
· agricultural corporate or quasi-corporate enterprises;
· government-owned NPIs by whose principal activity is agricultural production or research.
2.12 Within the agricultural sector, SEAFA's primary concern relates to agricultural households. From the SNA point of view, these constitute a sub-sector of the household sector and SNA defines a household as:
"a small group of persons who share the same living accommodation, who pool some, or all, of their income and wealth and who consume certain types of goods and services collectively, mainly housing and food". (1993 SNA paragraph 4.132)
This definition is essentially the same as that used in population and housing censuses and quoted in paragraph 5.28 of FAO's Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. An agricultural household is one whose principal source of income, whether in cash or in kind, is derived from its own agricultural production (see paragraph 2.20 below for a more precise definition). SEAFA proposes to compile SNA-type accounts for the sub-sector consisting of agricultural households because of the policy interest not only in their agricultural production, but also in their total income and general welfare.
2.13 SNA treats institutional units as integral, indivisible units. For example, the production account for a household covers the productive activities of all the members of the household who may not necessarily all be engaged in the same activity. The production account for an agricultural household is not necessarily confined to agricultural production, although in practice this may often be the only kind of production undertaken. Similarly, the primary income of a household may include wages received by one or more members of the household from outside employment and is not necessarily confined to the income generated by the household's agricultural production. The gross capital formation of an agricultural household covers all its capital formation, including net acquisition of valuables, and not only the gross fixed capital formation in its agricultural activities.
2.14 Apart from agricultural households, the other main type of institutional unit within the agricultural sector consists of a corporate or quasi-corporate enterprise whose principal activity is agricultural production. Most such enterprises are likely to have large production units, such as plantations growing rubber, tea, coffee or cocoa or specialized farms raising turkeys, which may be owned by resident units, including government units, or non-resident units. From the SNA viewpoint, this group of institutional units is a sub-sector of the non-financial corporations sector.
2.15 There may also be some NPIs owned and controlled by government units that are engaged in agricultural production. These would constitute a third sub-sector, which is also part of the SNA general government sector.
2. Establishments
2.16 Establishments are units which are identified only for purposes of measuring production. An establishment is intended to be a unit whose production is as homogeneous as possible and ideally it should be engaged in only a single type of production activity. It may, therefore, correspond to only part of an enterprise where an enterprise is to be understood as an institutional unit engaged in production. It is not itself an institutional unit. An establishment is defined in SNA as:
"an enterprise, or part of an enterprise, that is situated in a single location and in which only a single (non-ancillary) productive activity is carried out or in which the principal productive activity accounts for most of the value added". (1993 SNA paragraph 5.21)
This definition is essentially the same as that given in ISIC Rev. 3 and the concept of the establishment is the same in SNA and ISIC. An agricultural establishment is one whose principal activity is agricultural, as defined in Division 01 of ISIC. As in the case of industrial and service establishments, an agricultural establishment may have one or more secondary activities which it would not be feasible to separate from the principal activity. For example, an establishment engaged mainly in growing cereals or other crops (ISIC 0111) may raise domesticated animals (ISIC 0122) as a secondary agricultural activity. Alternatively, the secondary activity may not even be agricultural; for example, grain milling (ISIC 1531) or slaughtering (ISIC 1511) which are classified as food manufacturing in ISIC. Thus, the total output of a set of agricultural establishments, including Division 01 of ISIC as a whole, will in practice tend to include some non-agricultural products produced
as outputs from secondary activities within those establishments.
2.17 In the context of agriculture and SEAFA, the establishment may, in most cases, be equated with the agricultural holding as defined in paragraph 5.7 of FAO's Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. This is the unit traditionally used in agricultural censuses and surveys. However, it is possible that some agricultural holdings ought to be divided into two or more separate establishments if there are two or more different types of agricultural activity, as defined in ISIC, taking place on the holding and if it is possible to compile separate production accounts for them.
3. Products: goods and services
2.18 The third type of unit used in SEAFA consists of a product, i.e. a good or service produced as output by a process of production. Goods and services accounts are compiled for individual products or groups of products. These accounts may also be described as balances of supplies and uses.
2.19 The general classification of products corresponding to ISIC is the Central Product Classification (CPC). Agricultural products may be identified with products in Divisions 01 and 02 of CPC and manufactured food products with Divisions 21 to 23. FAO has its own more detailed draft classification of agricultural and food commodities (FAO, 1994). The goods and services accounts in Part TWO of SEAFA refer to agricultural or food products as just defined.
(c) The system of accounts of SEAFA
2.20 SEAFA consists of three types of accounts or tables for food and agriculture:
Part I Selected accounts for Agriculture defined as a sector of the total economy including, in particular, production and primary income accounts for the sub-sector of the SNA household sector consisting of Agricultural Households, and also their capital formation;
Part II Production and generation of income accounts for all establishments whose principal activity is agricultural production; also goods and services accounts for food and agricultural products;
Part III Satellite accounts and supplementary tabulations relating to food and agriculture.
Each set of accounts or tables is described below. First, it is useful to clarify t