<title>Manual of the Diagnosis of Rinderpest. (FAO Animal Health Manual - 1). Manual on the diagnosis of rinderpest</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Since the Manual on the diagnosis of rinderpest was first published in 1986 the geographical distribution of the disease has shrunk dramatically. The first edition was commissioned by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to support international and national rinderpest eradication campaigns that were about to be launched in Africa, India, West Asia and South Asia in response to the widespread recrudescence of the disease in the early 1980s. The Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC), the Indian Rinderpest Operation Zero and the Western Asia Rinderpest Eradication Campaign (WAREC) achieved spectacular success completing their strategic phases of mass vaccination; clinical rinderpest has been largely eradicated from East and West Africa, leaving only one persistent focus in an area north of Lake Turkana and a second in the Awash Rift Valley of Ethiopia; northern India, likewise, is essentially free of the disease and Operation Rinderpest Zero is
currently concentrating its efforts in southern India; and, similarly, within four years of launching the campaign, the WAREC coordinators announced in 1993 that all 11 participating countries in the Near East were free of overt rinderpest. These successes have stimulated FAO, in collaboration with the International Office of Epizootics (OIE), to establish a Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme (GREP); given peace on earth this is likely to be achieved. Mass vaccination has stopped in the operational areas and the eradication campaigns have now entered the technically more difficult and demanding phase of "active disease surveillance". The keystone for success in disease surveillance is rapid, accurate diagnosis. In the eight years that have elapsed since the first edition of the manual was distributed, a veritable flood of new diagnostic procedures have been developed, resulting from the exponential advances in molecular biology and immunology. Although it is too early
for many of the new techniques to have become routine, several are now available, for example monoclonal antibodies that identify specific rinderpest antigens and differentiate between closely related morbilliviruses. Specialist laboratories now have techniques to amplify virus genome from field samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and obtain the nucleotide sequence from the PCR product, enabling rapid identification of the geographic origin of the isolate. A seminal development has been the promotion and international standardization of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for rinderpest antibodies by the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria, in collaboration with the Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United Kingdom. All the countries where rinderpest is enzootic have the resources and expertise to run the ELISA which, together with the availability of specific monoclonal antibodies, allows
differentiation between antibodies to the viruses of rinderpest and peste des petits ruminants.
Containment is part and parcel of the active disease surveillance phase. The objective is to prevent spread of rinderpest virus from a newly detected focus, the main methods being an enforced total ban on animal movement within the vicinity of the focus and ring vaccination around the focus. Currently used vaccines based on Plowright's attenuated cell culture-adapted RBOK strain or cell-culture derivatives of Nakamura's attenuated lapinized strain are excellent and safe immunogens, but they are labile at ambient temperatures. This weakness has been overcome with the development of Mariner's ultra-dry Vero-cell derivative of Plowright's strain (Thermovax); vials of Mariner's vaccine are still potent after exposure to 30°C for 30 days. Meanwhile, the new breed of molecular engineers have exploited the known high immunogenicity of rinderpest virus to hone their skills in fashioning recombinant virus vaccines. Three groups - one in the United States, a second in Japan and the
third in the United Kingdom - have succeeded, and it is likely that one or more of these recombinant rinderpest vaccines will fill the need for a safe non-infectious rinderpest vaccine for use in immune-barrier zones and in ring vaccination.
This edition of the manual has the same organization as the first edition - three parts and appendixes. Part I deals with the presumptive field diagnosis, Part II contains guidelines for the collection and submission of specimens for diagnosis and Part III, the longest section, describes proven confirmatory diagnostic methods .The appendixes outline the preparation of hyperimmune anti-rinderpest serum, cite recipes of stock solutions and demonstrate the calculation of 50 percent end-point dilutions.
Rapid, accurate diagnosis is an essential precursor for the global eradication of rinderpest virus. It is hoped that this second edition of the Manual on the diagnosis of rinderpest will enable personnel of the active disease surveillance teams and district and central laboratories to refresh their diagnostic skills and help rid the world of rinderpest. A rinderpest-free world would be of immense economic benefit to developing countries currently threatened by the disease.
<section>2</section>
Preface to first edition
When Professor John Gamgee convened the First International Veterinary Congress in Hannover in 1863, rinderpest was devastating the cattle herds of Europe. He told the congress, which had called him to discuss the measures necessary to control and eradicate the disease, that "under existing circumstances a work on cattle plague [rinderpest] does not demand an elaborate explanation of the reasons which have prompted its preparation". Since that time many studies have been made in rinderpest control, and now Europe, as well as much of Asia and Africa, is free of the disease. Nevertheless, the recent resurgence of rinderpest in equatorial Africa threatens the cattle population of an entire continent, while the possibility of a permanent enzootic focus being established on another continent is also the cause of great concern.
Twenty-eight African nations, under the aegis of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), have responded to the threat by launching a new Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC). This Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign is supported by the European Economic Community (EEC), FAO, the International Office of Epizootics and several other donors. The role of FAO in the campaign has been and will be to mobilize donor inputs, to provide technical support and to monitor the progress of the campaign. Recently, the countries of South Asia have taken initial steps to launch a similar, internationally coordinated campaign under the aegis of the Animal Production and Health Commission for Asia, the Far East and the Southwest Pacific (APHCA). The countries of the Near East region are also greatly concerned about the frequent outbreaks of rinderpest in that region, and the FAO Middle and Near East Regional Animal Production and Health Project (MINEADEP) is therefore preparing proposals for an
international campaign in the Arabian Gulf region and the Arabian Peninsula.
This manual is an attempt to describe the proven techniques in the diagnosis of the disease. It is intended to be of assistance to both field and laboratory personnel and for this purpose is divided into three parts. Part I deals with presumptive field diagnosis; Part II provides guidelines for the collection and transport of specimens for diagnosis; and Part III, which constitutes the major part of the manual, consists of a treatise on confirmatory diagnostic methods.
It is hoped that the manual will be of assistance to those involved in the above-mentioned rinderpest campaigns and also to those countries trying to improve their diagnostic capabilities in order to prevent catastrophic outbreaks of the disease arising from the movement of livestock and livestock products.
<section>3</section>
Abbreviations
a.c.
alternating current
AGID
agar-gel immunodiffusion
APHCA
Regional Animal Production and Health Commission for Asia and the Pacific (FAO)
BK
bovine kidney
BSA
bovine serum albumin
BVD
bovine virus diarrhoea
BVDV
bovine virus diarrhoea virus
°C
degrees Celsius
C'
complement
CCL-44
bovine turbinate cells (American Type Culture Collection)
CDV
canine distemper virus
C-ELISA
competitive elisa
CF
complement fixation
CIEP
counterimmunoelectrophoresis
cm
centimetre
CMFS
calcium-and magnesium-free saline (PBSA)
CO[2]
carbon dioxide
CPE
cytopathic effect
DAB
3,3'- diaminobenzidinetetra-hydrochloride
dATP
d-adenosine 5'-triphosphate
d.c.
direct current
dCTP
d-cytidine 5'-triphosphate
DEAE
diethylaminoethyl
dGTP
d-guanosine 5'-triphosphate
DMV
dolphin morbilivirus
DPX
distrene 80, plasticizer, xylene
dTTP
d-thymidine 5'-triphosphate
E/199
medium 199 with Earle's salts
ED[50]
50 percent effective dose
EDTA
ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
EEL
Evans Electrosolenium Ltd
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EM
electron microscopy
FCS
foetal calf serum
FITC
fluorescein isothiocyanate
FMD
foot-and-mouth disease
g
gram; gravity unit
GMEM
Glasgow modification of Eagle's minimal essential medium
HCI
hydrochloric acid
HEPA
high-efficiency particle air filter
HRP
horseradish peroxidase
HSLS
high-sugar low-amino acid supplemented medium
IATA
International Air Transport Association
ID[50]
50 percent infectious dose
IF
immunofluorescence
IgA
immunoglobulin A
IgG
immunoglobulin gamma
IgM
immunoglobulin macro
IIF
indirect immunofluorescence
IIP
indirect immunoperoxidase
IP
immunoprecipitating
IPS
immunoperoxidase staining
IU
international units
kHz
kilohertz
M
molar
MAb
monoclonal antibody
MCF
malignant catarrhal fever
MEM
minimal essential medium
2ME
B-2-mercaptoethanol
mg
milligram
MHI
measles haemagglutination inhibition
MINEADEP
Middle and Near East Regional Animal Production and Health Project (FAO)
ml
millilitre
mm
millimetre
mM
millimolar
mol
gram-molecule
MV
measles virus
m g
microgram
m 1
microlitre
m m
micrometre
nm
nanometre (10^-9m)
NADL
National Animal Diseases Laboratory, Ames, Iowa, United States
OAU
Organization of African Unity
OD
optical density
OIE
International Office of Epizootics, Paris, France
OPD
orthophenylene diamine
OS
ox serum
OSD
optimal sensitizing dose
PAP
peroxidase-antiperoxidase
PBMCs
peripheral blood mononuclear cells
PBS
phosphate-buffered saline
PBSA
phosphate-buffered saline (Dulbecco's solution A)
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PCV
packed cell volume
PDV
phocine distemper virus
pH
hydrogen-ion concentration
PHA
passive haemagglutination
PI
post-inoculation
PPRV
peste des petits ruminants virus
RBC
red blood cell
RBOK
rinderpest bovine "O" Kabete
RPV
rinderpest virus
RT
reverse transcriptase
RZ
Reinheitszahl
S
Svedberg
SK
sheep kidney
TBS
tris-buffered saline
TCID[50]
50 percent tissue culture infectious dose
TPB
tryptose phosphate broth
UV
ultraviolet
v
volt
VBS
veronal buffer saline
Vero
african green monkey kidney cell line
VIC
veterinary investigation centre
VN
virus neutralizing
VN[50]
50 percent neutralizing titre
VNT
virus neutralization test
VT
versene-trypsin
v/v
volume to volume
WHO
World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
WRLRP
World Reference Laboratory for Rinderpest
w/v
weight to volume
ZST
zinc sulphate turbidity
<section>4</section>
PART I - THE PRESUMPTIVE DIAGNOSIS
Chapter 1. Epizootiological background
Chapter 2. Clinical signs
Chapter 3. Clinical pathology
Chapter 4. Post-mortem findings
Chapter 1. Epizootiological background
The causative virus
Natural host range
Transmission
From time immemorial into the twentieth century, waves of rinderpest have regularly devastated buffalo and cattle in Asia and Europe and have occasionally caused havoc in North Africa. Animals in sub-Saharan Africa were hit severely, perhaps for the first time, when rinderpest was unwittingly introduced into the Horn of Africa in 1887. The resulting panzootic swept north to the Mediterranean, west to the Atlantic and south to the Cape of Good Hope, permanently changing the flora and fauna of the continent. It burnt itself out in southern Africa in the early 1900s, but lingered on in northern equatorial Africa until very recently.
Today, Europe and most of Asia are free of the disease except for a pocket of infection that exists in southern India affecting buffalo, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs and wildlife. In Africa, a focus persists north of Lake Turkana in the borderlands of Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda, an area of civil unrest. At the time of writing, rinderpest is known to be active in the northern part of the Awash Valley in Ethiopia as well as in Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Three disquieting episodes have occurred in recent years in the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. In 1990 rinderpest was diagnosed in cattle in Georgia, the first penetration of the disease into Europe since 1949. Fortunately it was quickly recognized and stamped out. The source of the outbreak was not identified, but Georgia and its neighbours were and are still embroiled in civil wars, a proven seed bed for rinderpest to flourish. The second episode occurred on Mongolia' s northeastern border with Russia in
1991, when transhumant Russian cattle grazing in Mongolia developed clinical signs of rinderpest; 64 percent of those affected died. Several months later the third episode occurred on the Russian side of Mongolia's northwestern border with that country in which 265 out of the 389 yaks affected died. Tissue samples were forwarded to the Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Surrey, United Kingdom, and the presence of two distinct rinderpest strains of rinderpest virus was demonstrated, one related to Plowright's cell-cultured vaccine virus and the other related to virulent Asiatic field strains (Barrett et al., 1993a).
Historically, the Near East has experienced occasional invasions of rinderpest imported with slaughter stock from Africa and the Indian subcontinent. In September 1991, there was a major outbreak in Turkey, the first since 1971. The disease spread rapidly, affecting 516 herds in 44 localities within two months, but prompt action by the Turkish veterinary authorities eradicated the disease within four months. In the end, 2 700 cattle died, 12 000 were slaughtered and 12.5 million were vaccinated (Sahal, 1992). During March/April 1994, outbreaks of rinderpest were reported from eastern Turkey, northern Iraq and northwestern Iran. This raised the possibility of an endemic focus in the Kurdish areas of Iraq and Turkey. Emergency efforts quickly eliminated infection from Iran and similar action taken in Turkey and Iraq seems to have been effective. Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates continue to be exposed to periodic invasion of rinderpest with live
animals imported from South Asia. Thanks to constant vaccinations, recent outbreaks in this area have been of limited spread.
Recovery from an attack of rinderpest has long been known to confer lifelong immunity to the disease. Early attempts to immunize cattle artificially were unpredictable and often disastrous. In the pre-Jennerian manner, used to protect humans against smallpox, cloth setons soaked in "matter" from a sick animal were inserted into the subject's skin. The discovery in Russia in the late nineteenth century of the protective powers of serum drawn from a recovered animal (Semmer, 1893) led shortly thereafter to the development in South Africa of the serum-virus simultaneous immunization method (Kolle and Turner, 1897). The method was in vogue for nearly 35 years. As the source of the virus for immunization was the blood of a reacting ox, the risk of inadvertently injecting other bovine pathogens was high. Edwards (1928) attempted to obviate the risk by passaging the virus serially in goats and, in me process, fortuitously developed an attenuated goat-adapted virus that could be
injected alone into cattle without serum. This vaccine, together with the development of lyophilization (freeze-drying) techniques in the late 1930s, revolutionized the control of rinderpest. Mass national and continental campaigns followed. The global prevalence of rinderpest reached its lowest level in 1976, when its presence was reported from only three countries. There has since been a resurgence in Africa, India and the Near East. Vigorous application of multinational eradication campaigns has curbed the resurgence so successfully, however, that active disease is restricted to defined pockets in Africa and Asia. The incidence today is the lowest it has ever been.
The causative virus
Rinderpest was one of the first diseases to be recognized as being caused by a filterable virus. It is now classified as a paramyxovirus in the genus Morbillivirus, whose terrestrial members - bovine rinderpest, canine distemper and human measles viruses - have been chronicled for centuries as virulent plagues of their host species.
In contrast, the fourth terrestrial morbillivirus - peste des petits ruminants (PPR) virus - was only recognized in the 1940s. At first the PPR virus was thought to be a variant of rinderpest virus, but it has now been identified as a distinct member of the genus (Gibbs et al., 1979). Since 1987 a clutch of previously unknown morbilliviruses has emerged and plagued populations of marine mammals such as seals, porpoises and dolphins in the Northern Hemisphere. More recently, morbillivirus antibodies - although not disease - have been detected in the sera of Atlantic pinniped and many cetacean species (Duignan et al., 1994). The relationships between these newly discovered viruses are shown in Figure 1.
The most-studied and best-known morbilliviruses not only look alike but they also have similar physico-chemical properties, produce similar cytopathic effects in cell cultures and share antigens. They are all negative single-stranded, non-segmented ribonucleic acid (RNA) viruses possessing six structural proteins and two non-structural proteins (Diallo, 1990). Sequence analyses of parts of the F protein gene of rinderpest virus have revealed distinct lineages of the virus that reflect the geographical location of then-isolation in Africa and Asia (see Figure 2).
Structure
Morbilliviruses are pleomorphic. The common shape is an enveloped spheroid, 100 to 300 nm in diameter, while less common are enveloped filaments up to 1 m m long. The serrated nucleocapsids are tightly coiled in the spherical particles and regularly coiled along the length of the filamentous virions. The envelopes are covered with minute projections, which are the surface glycoproteins (H and F proteins) responsible for cell attachment and fusion. Only these proteins stimulate the virus neutralizing antibody response.
FIGURE 1. Phylogenetic relationships between the differed morbilliviruses
Stability
Rinderpest virus is not robust. Outside its hosts it survives best at low or high relative humidities and is readily destroyed when the relative humidity lies between 50 and 60 percent. It is sensitive to heat, light and ultrasonic waves. High and low hydrogen-ion concentrations (pH) denature the virus; consequently, rinderpest-infected carcasses are rendered safe relatively quickly by the hydrogen-ion changes that follow autolysis and putrefaction, together with the inactivating effect of high ambient temperatures. Being enveloped, rinderpest virus is destroyed by lipid solvents; lipophilic disinfectants, therefore, are recommended for cleansing contaminated premises. In the presence of organic matter, the most effective disinfectants are 5 percent sodium hydroxide and 50 percent lysol (Wamwayi ,1989).
The stability of viral suspensions is enhanced by the addition of salt. For example, a molar concentration of magnesium sulphate heptahydrate (25 g in 100 ml) will slow down inactivation of the virus in water at 50°C by a factor of 3 to 4.
Natural host range
The 1981 checklist (Scott, 1981) of natural hosts of rinderpest virus requires updating. Although strains of the virus vary widely in their host affinities and in their virulences for particular hosts, natural infections are restricted to the even-toed ungulates belonging to the order Artiodactyla. It should be emphasized, however, that rinderpest virus may not attack all the susceptible species at risk. Moreover, host preferences have been known to change with time; in the great African panzootic, wildebeest was the last species to sicken, with none dying until after all the cattle were dead.
FIGURE 2 Geographical grouping of isolates by sequence data
Disease is most commonly observed in domestic ungulates, particularly buffaloes and cattle. Sheep are reported to contract mortal rinderpest in India, but elsewhere the disease has been recognized in this species only sporadically; the common rinderpest-like disease of sheep in southern India may be PPR. In contrast, in northern equatorial Africa and the Near East, overt disease from PPR is more frequently observed in goats. The Asian domestic sway-backed pig suffers from and succumbs to rinderpest, while European pigs experience inapparent infections when exposed experimentally. The first demonstration of natural infection in European-type pigs was belatedly reported from Egypt in 1991; blood samples were collected from 128 pigs slaughtered in 1982, when severe outbreaks of rinderpest were affecting Egyptian buffaloes and cattle. Rinderpest neutralizing antibodies were detected in the sera of 36 (28 percent) pigs (Youssef et al., 1991).
Fulminating peracute infections occur in free-ranging African buffalo, eland, kudu and warthog. Acute infections that usually end fatally have been observed in Africa in bongo, bushbuck, bush pig, chevrotain, dik-dik, duiker, giant forest hog, giraffe, sitatunga and wildebeest, and in Asia in banteng, blackbuck, gaur, nilgai and sambar.
Inherited innate resistance to rinderpest markedly influences the epizootiological character of the disease. In countries where the disease has long been enzootic, cattle possess a high innate resistance that slows the spread of the disease, lessens the clinical response and ensures the survival of most of the afflicted animals. In contrast, in countries long free of the disease, introduction of an apparently a virulent strain from an enzootic area often results in a fast- moving, explosive epizootic with many deaths. Nevertheless, on occasion, virgin-soil epizootics have failed to explode. For example, the 1920 epizootic in Belgium that provided the stimulus to found the international office of Epizootics (OIE) was relatively benign, delaying diagnosis for three to four weeks (Curasson, 1932).
Attacks in enzootic areas tend to be restricted to immature and young adult stock since the mature adults are immune either as a result of disease recovery or vaccination and the sucking young are protected through the ingestion of antibodies in their dam's colostrum. Attacks in previously disease-free areas affect livestock of all ages.
Transmission
Rinderpest virus spreads when healthy, susceptible animals are exposed to infected droplets, either in the breath of a sick animal or in its virus-rich secretions or excretions. As the droplets are large and short-lived, the contact between sick and healthy animals must be close for transmission to occur.
Attenuated vaccine strains of rinderpest virus do not spread because they are not released into the expired air or in the faeces, having lost their epitheliotrophism.
On rare occasions, transmission has allegedly occurred through indirect contact with contaminated bedding, fodder or water. An analysis of valid records of virgin-soil epizootics from 1851 to 1950, however, clearly revealed that all instances were traceable to the importation of live animals. In short, the most likely source of a fresh focus is a newly arrived live animal.
Controlled experiments have shown that pigs also acquire infection through eating uncooked infected meat scraps. The practical significance of this mode of transmission, however, is not clear and warrants investigation.
Chapter 2. Clinical signs
Buffalo and cattle infections
Goat and sheep infections
Domestic pig infections
Many authors have described the clinical signs of rinderpest, the most comprehensive description being that given by Curasson (1932) in his book La peste bovine. Most of the descriptions, however, are misleadingly dramatic, having been based on observations made during virgin-soil panzootics. The classic syndrome is manifested by an incubation period of three to nine days, a short sharp fever, erosive stomatitis, gastroenteritis, fetid odour, dehydration and death. The enzootic disease in livestock with a high inherited innate resistance is much less dramatic and less typical, often with one or more of the cardinal features of the classic syndrome modified or absent.
Buffalo and cattle infections
Clinical reactions in buffalo and cattle are similar and may be peracute, acute, subacute or even inapparent.
Peracute reactions
The onset of a peracute reaction is sudden and unexpected. It is manifested by inappetence, high fever, depression, deep congestion of visible mucosae, severe panting and racing pulse. Death supervenes within two or three days, even before mucosal erosions develop. Fortunately, peracute reactions are not common, occurring most frequently in young calves and exotic animals.
Acute reactions
The classic syndrome is divided into five phases: an incubation period, a prodromal fever, an erosive-mucosa phase, a diarrhoeic phase and convalescence in surviving animals (see Figure 3).
Although the onset of the prodromal fever is sudden, it is frequently missed because other clinical signs are minimal, except in lactating cows whose milk yield falls. Overt illness is clearly evident 24 to 48 hours later, when the animal becomes restless and then stands depressed, apart and alone. Respirations are shallow and rapid. The coat hairs stand erect, the muzzle dries, tears are wept and the nose runs. Appetite is impaired, rumination is retarded and defecation stops. Visible mucous membranes are congested but intact.
The first suggestive sign of rinderpest occurs two to five days after the onset of the prodromal fever, when raised pinheads of necrotic epithelium emerge from the surfaces of the mucous membranes lining the mouth, nasal passages and urogenital tracts. These are readily abraded to expose a haemorrhagic layer of basal cells (see Figure 4). Salivation is profuse. The erosions enlarge and coalesce. Thick yellow patches of necrotic cells begin to coat the nasal passages and mix with the nasal secretions, producing a fetid mucopurulent discharge. Lacrimal secretions likewise become mucopurulent. Thirst is intense but the appetite is lost. Soft faeces are voided frequently.
The diarrhoea proper begins as the fever falls, two to three days after the first appearance of the mucosal erosions. The dark, fluid faeces contain excess mucus and shreds of epithelium and necrotic debris streaked with blood. The smell is memorably sweet, fetid and offensive. Affected animals arch their backs and strain frequently, exposing congested and eroded rectal mucosae. Respirations are laboured and painful, characterized by an audible grunt when exhaling.
FIGURE 3 The clinical phases of classic rinderpest
In fatal cases the diarrhoea worsens progressively, causing rapid dehydration. Affected animals waste visibly; they have sunken eyes and stand with lowered heads and arched backs. Most collapse and die six to 12 days after the onset of the prodromal fever. Some, however, linger on for three weeks.
In surviving cases, the diarrhoea stops within a week of its onset. Pregnant animals, however, will abort during convalescence, which is prolonged, and a return to full health will take many weeks.
Subacute reactions
Subacute reactions are encountered in immature and young adult stock indigenous to a country where the disease is enzootic. The incubation period tends to be longer than that of the acute syndrome and may even last 15 days .The clinical signs are muted and often one or more of the cardinal features of the classic disease, such as fever, mucosal erosions, mucopurulent nasal and ocular discharges or diarrhoea, are absent. Most affected animals survive. Diagnostic suspicions of rinderpest, therefore, are often not aroused.
FIGURE 4 Rinderpest erosive stomatitis
Sequelae
Rinderpest virus selectively destroys T- and B-lymphocytes, but not memory cells. Thus, latent pathogens are commonly activated and supra-infection is encouraged. Both processes induce clinical signs that mask even those of the classical rinderpest syndrome (see Figure 5). However, it is in areas where subacute rinderpest is encountered that activated latent infections and suprainfections create the greatest diagnostic confusion.
Goat and sheep infections
Acute, subacute and inapparent rinderpest reactions occur in goats and sheep. Many of the clinical signs mimic those evident in cattle, but the course of the disease is shorter and pneumonic symptoms are more prominent. Affected animals develop high fevers and, almost concurrently, mucosal erosions. Sometimes, however, the erosive stomatitis is fleeting or even absent. Inappetence and depression quickly follow and the animals stand, hair-on-end, with their heads thrust forwards and downwards and their backs arched. They pant and cough. Serous nasal and lacrimal secretions increase in volume and induce sneezing but soon become mucopurulent. The nasal discharges tend to encrust and block the nasal passages, causing oral breathing. Auscultation reveals pleurisy and partial consolidation of the lungs. At first the faeces are hard, well formed and dark, but they quickly turn soft and pasty before becoming fluid and fetid. Acute cases die six to seven days after the onset of
illness, whereas survivors show signs of recovery within two weeks.
FIGURE 5 Activation of latent babesiosis by rinderpest virus
Subacute reactions in goats and sheep are common and may be the norm. In spite of transitory fever, systemic disturbance is not obvious and affected animals continue to feed. Rinderpest is seldom suspected unless frank clinical cases occur simultaneously.
Domestic pig infections
Clinical disease has only been observed in Asiatic sway-backed domestic pigs. Peracute reactions are characterized by sudden sharp fevers and death before other premonitory signs develop. Acute cases have a similar sudden onset, manifested by fever, inappetence and depression. Within a further 48 hours, affected pigs are shivering, vomiting and bleeding from the nose. Shallow erosions emerge in the oral mucosa while vesicles erupt in the perineal skin. Diarrhoea soon supervenes, the fluid faeces being fetid and heavily streaked with blood. Dehydration and emaciation thereafter are rapid and progressive .The diarrhoea persists until death - five to nine days after the onset of illness - or for ten to 12 days in pigs that survive. Pregnant sows abort. Subacute reactions are non-fatal fevers with partial inappetence and fleeting cutaneous eruptions.
Chapter 3. Clinical pathology
Haematological changes
Biochemical changes
The study of the clinical pathology of rinderpest has been neglected and its potential role in aiding the formulation of a presumptive diagnosis by the clinician has been largely ignored. Both the haematological and biochemical changes are characteristic, although not pathognomonic.
Haematological changes
The selective destruction of lymphocytes by rinderpest virus induces significant haematological changes, and the severity of the changes appears to be linked to the degree of virulence of the virus strain involved. All infected species react in a similar manner.
FIGURE 6 Total leucocyte counts in cattle infected with rinderpest virus
Total leucocytes
A transient leucocytosis often precedes the onset of fever but immediately thereafter there is a dramatic and profound leucopenia (see Figure 6). The lowest level, reached during the erosive-mucosa phase of the clinical reaction, is followed by a gradual return over several weeks to normal levels in survivors. The count does not rise significantly in fatal cases.
Lymphocytes
The total leucocyte pattern is attributable almost entirely to changes in lymphocyte numbers .These increase towards the end of the incubation period, fall precipitously during the prodromal fever and slowly return to normal levels in survivors (see Figure 7). Both T-and B-lymphoc