<title>Value-added products from beekeeping</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Many of the beekeeping activities in developing countries in the past have been oriented towards honey production. Wax usually was a by-product and other possible products have rarely found consideration. Such neglect of other products has a variety of reasons among which an easily accessible market or the lack of knowledge about production and further use are of major importance. While production methods of other primary products can be adapted from common beekeeping texts, the further elaboration and use of the same products can rarely be found. If so, descriptions range from highly specific scientific results to self-proclaimed experts fraudulently exploiting consumer ignorance. In order to present a comprehensive and practical review this bulletin tries to synthesize available information from scientific literature and practical, technical literature including the few in-depth reviews available on some of the primary bee products such as honey, Wax and propolis.
Worldwide the usage of such primary products as propolis, royal jelly and bee venom have increased mostly due to inclusion in cosmetic preparations. Medicinal use will increase once better and more detailed studies are completed, which however may not yet be in the very near future. The use of honey and other products has also increased in many countries because of the increasing health awareness and the high esteem of bee products in various processed and unprocessed forms.
In past publications the Agricultural Services Bulletins on beekeeping have sought to increase technical knowledge of beekeeping itself. During the last decades, the level of beekeeping and production knowledge in many developing countries has increased considerably. It was therefore considered necessary to provide further information for the expansion of beekeeping activities in order to increase income generation and stability as well as access to healthier products. Thus, this volume is intended to provide information on the utilization of all primary beekeeping products and in this way improve the possibilities for diversification in beekeeping activities. The new perspective for additional income generating activities for beekeepers and non-beekeepers alike may, under the right circumstances, also increase beekeeping viability in an otherwise often marginal business environment.
Most of the described products can also be produced by non-beekeepers, thus indirectly benefitting beekeeping by increasing the market for primary beekeeping products and opening opportunities for small, often home-based business activities.
Many of the described products can be produced with traditional skills on a very small, home-based production level but also on a medium to large industrial scale and are adapt for a variety of cultural and economic environments. This is very important since primary beekeeping products and their value added, processed products will increasingly have to find local markets, since international prices are too often below local production costs and require quality standards not easily reached by a young, developing industry. Diversification with value-added products therefore offers an opportunity to strengthen local markets which then permit a more solid beekeeping production to expand from a broad base into exportation. In this sense it is hoped that the provided information not only increases the viability and production of beekeeping and with it local living standards, but that it also can contribute to healthier products, import substitution and eventually increased
incentives for regional and global trade.
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wants to express his appreciation and gratitude to all those who have contributed to the writing of this bulletin either directly or indirectly.
Very special thanks have to go to Lucia Piana for writing chapter 6 (Royal Jelly) and most of Chapter 2 (Honey) in Italian and to Lorenza Manzi for translating chapter 6 and Livia Persano Oddo for translating much of Chapter 2. Luigi Rigano provided technical advice and many formulations to Chapter 9 (cosmetics).
Without access to the abundant bibliography and reprint collection of IBRA this work would not have been possible. Neither would the writing have come to an end without the tolerance and generous hospitality of Livia Persano Oddo, Mary Lopez and Chris Aubrey. Further substantial help with information, recipes or materials for photographs have been received from Raffaele Cirone (FAI, Federazione Apicoltori Italiani), Marco Vangelisti of Apicultura Vangelisti, Tiziana Palmieri of R.B. Natural Cosmetics, Daniel and Graciella Barral and others from SADA (Sociedad Argentina de Apicultores), Bradford S. Weeks of the American Apitherapy Society, the National Honey Board of the USA, Nina Ivanovska, B. König, J.H. Dustmann and many others. The helpful suggestions on the manuscript by Livia Persano Oddo, Miguel Martinez-Ball, and also Alfred Dietz and Bradford S. Weeks are very much appreciated, as is the editing of the final manuscript by Ian Leach and Lorna De Lucia. To Lorna Dc
Lucia my humble thanks for an apparently limitless patience with my never ending corrections. The responses from many national beekeeping associations to inquiries were encouraging. Those who responded were from the Netherlands, Norway, Danmark, Germany, Lebanon, Canada, South Africa, United Kingdom and India.
All photographs were taken by the author, unless otherwise mentioned. To those who supplied illustrative photographs my special thanks: Ron Davis, Francesco Intoppa, Livia Persano Oddo, Siwert Nilsson, Lucia Piana, Giancarlo Ricciardelli d'Albore, Labconco, Pressindustria, Ghimas and Dadant & Sons.
Dedication:
This book is dedicated to those ever laborious, wonderfiil little companions, the honeybees, that their labour will be appreciated with love by all those producing, using and consuming their unique products.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 What are "value added" products from beekeeping?
The best known primary products of beekeeping are honey and wax, but pollen, propolis, royal jelly, venom, queens, bees and their larvae are also marketable primary bee products. While most of these products can be consumed or used in the state in which they were produced by the bees, there are many additional uses where these products form only a part of all the ingredients of another product. Because of the quality and sometimes almost mystical reputation and characteristics of most primary bee products, their addition to other products usually enhances the value or quality of these secondary products. For this reason, the secondary products, which partially, or wholly, can be made up of primary bee products, are referred to here as "value added" products from beekeeping.
Many of the primary beekeeping products do not have a market until they are added to more commonly used, value added products. Even the value of the primary products may increase if good use is made of them in other products, thereby increasing the profitability of many beekeeping operations.
In some cases the traditional and early technological uses of primary bee products have been replaced by other (often synthetic products) because of better availability, lower cost and/or easier processing. But in regard to food or health products, there are no synthetic substances which can substitute for the wide variety of characteristics of primary bee products. Only when it comes to highly specialized applications and conditions, will synthetics sometimes outperform these unique and versatile products. In that sense, all products containing one or several of the primary bee products are value added products. Furthermore, the combination of several bee products synergistically increases their beneficial significance beyond their individual biological values.
Since monetary resources are limited in many societies the additional value cannot always be obtained in the form of higher prices, but may show itself in the form of preferred purchases. For the same reasons though, some products may not be able to compete against cheaper synthetic products. In such cases, the added value and cost may make a product unsuitable, unless other markets can be found.
1.2 The purpose of this bulletin
The purpose of this bulletin is to distribute and make available information on the manufacturing, processing and marketing of value added bee products. It is directed at beekeepers as well as non-beekeepers, small entrepreneurs, extension officers and those involved in small business development. Therefore, it tries to provide enough information to understand the primary products and their present and potential use. It should also enable the reader to properly buy, store, process, package and market the primary products, as well as the value added products derived from them.
Traditionally, honey is considered the major beekeeping product. Wax has played a considerable role in only a few parts of the world and propolis is even less known. However, with increasing knowledge about beekeeping and an awareness of the beneficial aspects of many bee products, the use and demand for other products is increasing. The inclusion of "natural" bee products in cosmetics, medicines and foods has improved consumer appeal. While such appeal is not always based on scientific evidence, more and more studies confirm at least some of the traditionally claimed benefits of primary bee products.
This bulletin cannot be a scientific review of the rapidly increasing volume of research available, but it attempts to give a brief yet comprehensive overview of the current state of knowledge. Thus the reader should be able to make conclusions about the myriad of sometimes miraculous effects and cures claimed for bee products. References to more detailed articles, reviews and speciality journals are made to guide those whose interests go further.
It is also impossible in the context of this bulletin to give more than a summarized description of all the primary bee products. However, an attempt has been made to give enough information for the reader, including non-beekeepers, to understand the products and to be able to draw conclusions on their proper use.
Some of the value added products mentioned in this bulletin require advanced manufacturing technology. Many, if not most can be made on a small-scale but, like cosmetics, would benefit from better processing technology and specialized training for the manufacturers. The general philosophy behind this bulletin, however, is to stimulate creative experimentation with new and old products suitable for local markets and customer needs.
In addition to presenting the multitude of possible uses for bee products, it is hoped that the information provided can lead to more diversified and increased income for beekeepers. It should help to create small business opportunities for non-beekeepers and improve the health, nutrition and economic situation of beekeepers and those who are willing to choose alternatives to today's abundance of over-processed and/or synthetic drugs, cosmetics and foods.
Finally, the bulletin should stimulate beekeeping as a hobby and so may be a valuable source of recreation and relaxation.
1.3 How to use the bulletin
In the same way that two cooks, using the same recipe to produce different tasting dinners, the recipes and guidelines in this bulletin will produce different results in different places. Availability and quality of ingredients will vary from country to country, as will working conditions, customer preferences and marketing possibilities for the products. Therefore, the given recipes and recommendations have to be tried under local conditions. Recipes, ingredients, flavours, colours, consistencies, packaging and quality have to be adjusted to local markets. Where possible, alternatives and variations have been suggested.
The reader who is considering making beeswax candles or cosmetics should find enough information to decide whether he or she can physically, technically and economically afford to start the particular kind of production. Furthermore, he or she should be able to produce a variety of simple, good quality products with the information provided.
For most product categories there are more detailed and specialized publications available, which should be used to expand or improve a chosen activity. Since many of these books are expensive and in some countries difficult to obtain, as complete a picture as possible is presented in this bulletin. In addition, addresses of sources for books, laboratory tests, information and marketing assistance are given.
The goals of this bulletin therefore are to serve as a resource guide, a source of ideas and as a practical "cookbook" on products made with primary bee products.
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 2
HONEY 1
2.1 Introduction
Honey is the most important primary product of beekeeping both from a quantitative and an economic point of view. It was also the first bee product used by humankind in ancient times. The history of the use of honey is parallel to the history of man and in virtually every culture evidence can be found of its use as a food source and as a symbol employed in religious, magic and therapeutic ceremonies (Cartland, 1970; Crane, 1980; Zwaeneprel, 1984) an appreciation and reverence it owes among other reasons to its unique position until very recently, as the only concentrated form of sugar available to man in most parts of the world. The same cultural richness has produced an equally colourful variety of uses of honey in other products (see Figure 2.1).
"Honey is the natural sweet substance produced by honeybees from the nectar of blossoms or from the secretion of living parts of plants or excretions of plant sucking insects on the living parts of plants, which honeybees collect, transform and combine with specific substances of their own, store and leave in the honey comb to ripen and mature. This is the general definition of honey in the Codex Alimentarius (1989) in which all commercially required characteristics of the product are described. The interested reader is also referred to other texts such as "Honey, a comprehensive survey" (Crane, 1975).
Honey in this bulletin, will refer to the honey produced by Apis mellifera unless otherwise specified. There are other honeybee species which make honey, and other bees and even wasps which store different kinds of honeys as their food reserves. More details on honey from other bees are given in section 2.11.
2.2 Physical characteristics of honey
Viscosity
Freshly extracted honey is a viscous liquid. Its viscosity depends on a large variety of substances and therefore varies with its composition and particularly with its water content (Table 2.1 and 2.2). Viscosity is an important technical parameter during honey processing, because it reduces honey flow during extraction, pumping, settling, filtration, mixing and bottling. Raising the temperature of honey lowers its viscosity (Table 2.3) a phenomenon widely exploited during industrial honey processing. Some honeys, however, show different characteristics in regard to viscosity: Heather (Calluna vulgaris) Manuka (Leptospermum scoparium) and Carvia callosa are described as thixotrophic which means they are gel-like (extremely viscous) when standing still and turn liquid when agitated or stirred. By contrast a number of Eucalyptus honeys show the opposite characteristics. Their viscosity increases with agitation.
A display of various products in which honey is an ingredient.
Figure 2.1: A display of various products in which honey
is an ingredient.
Table 2.1:
Variation of the viscosity of honey at 25^0C, containing 16.5% water, according to the botanical origin
and therefore the composition of the honey (Munro, 1943).
Type
Viscosity (poise)
Sage
White clover
Sweet clover
Table 2.2:
Variation of the viscosity of white clover honey at 250 C according to
its water content (Munro, 1943).
Water content
Viscosity
(poise)
Table 2.3:
Viscosity of sweet clover honey containing 16.1% water according to temperature (Munro, 1943).
Temperature
(°C)
Viscosity
(poise)
Density
Another physical characteristic of practical importance is density. Honey density, expressed as specific gravity in Table 2.4, is greater than water density, but it also depends on the water content of the honey (Table 2.4). Because of the variation in density it is sometimes possible to observe distinct stratification of honey in large storage tanks. The high water content (less dense) honey settles above the denser, drier honey. Such inconvenient separation can be avoided by more thorough mixing.
Table 2.4:
True specific gravity of honeys with different water content (White, 1975a).
Water content
Specific gravity at 20°C
Water
content
Specific gravity at 20°C
Water
content
Specific gravity at 20°C
Hygroscopicity
The strongly hygroscopic character of honey is important both in processing and for final use. In end products containing honey this tendency to absorb and hold moisture is often a desired effect such as, for example, in pastry and bread. During processing or storage however, the same hygroscopicity can become problematic, causing difficulties in preservation and storage due to excessive water content. From Table 2.5 it can be readily seen that normal honey with a water content of 18.3 % or less will absorb moisture from the air at a relative humidity of above 60%.
Table 2.5
Approximate equilibrium between relative humidity (RH) of ambient air and water
content of a clover honey (White, 1975a).
Air (%RH)
Honey (% water content)
Surface tension
It is the low surface tension of honey that makes it an excellent humectant in cosmetic products The surface tension varies with the origin of the honey and is probably due to colloidal substances. Together with high viscosity, it is responsible for the foaming characteristics of honey.
Thermal properties
For the design of honey processing plants its thermal properties have to be taken into account. The heat absorbing capacity, i.e. specific heat, varies from 0.56 to 0.73 cal/g/^0C according to its composition and state of crystallization. The thermal conductivity varies from 118 to 143 x 10-~ cal/cm^2/sec/^0C (White, 1975a). One can therefore calculate the amount of heat, cooling and mixing necessary to treat a certain amount of honey, i.e. before and after filtration or pasteurization. The relatively low heat conductivity, combined with high viscosity leads to rapid overheating from point-heat sources and thus the need for careful stirring and for heating only in water baths.
Colour
Colour in liquid honey varies from clear and colourless (like water) to dark amber or black (see Figure 2.2). The various honey colours are basically all nuances of yellow amber, like different dilutions or concentrations of caramelized sugar, which has been used traditionally as a colour standard. More modern methods for measuring honey colour are described below. Colour varies with botanical origin, age and storage conditions, but transparency or clarity depends on the amount of suspended particles such as pollen. Less common honey colours are bright yellow (sunflower) reddish undertones (chestnut) greyish (eucalyptus) and greenish (honeydew). Once crystallized, honey turns lighter in colour because the glucose crystals are white. Some of the honeys reportedly "as white as milk" in some parts of East Africa are finely crystallized honeys which are almost water white, i.e. colourless, in their liquid state.
The most important aspect of honey colour lies in its value for marketing and determination of its end use. Darker honeys are more often for industrial use, while lighter honeys are marketed for direct consumption. In many countries with a large honey market, consumer preferences are determined by the colour of honey (as an indication of a preferred flavour) and thus, next to general quality determinations, colour is the single most important factor determining import and wholesale prices.
Honey colour is frequently given in millimetres on a Pfund scale (an optical density reading generally used in international honey trade) or according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture classifications (White, 1975c and Crane, 1980):
USDA colour standards Pfund scale (mm)
- water white 0 to 8
- extra white > 8 to 17
- white > 17 to 34
- extra light amber > 34 to 50
- light amber > 50 to 85
- amber > 85 to 114
-darkamber > 114
Different coloured honeys of unifloral and multifloral origin. (courtesy of F. Intoppa)
Figure 2.2: Different coloured honeys of unifloral and
multifloral origin. (courtesy of F. Intoppa)
More recent but not widely practised methods of colour description use spectral colour absorption of honey (Aubert and Gonnet, 1983; Rodriguez L6pez, 1985).
Crystallization
Crystallization is another important characteristic for honey marketing, though not for price determination. In temperate climates most honeys crystallize at normal storage temperatures. This is due to the fact that honey is an oversaturated sugar solution, i.e. it contains more sugar than can remain in solution. Many consumers still think that if honey has crystallized it has gone bad or has been adulterated with sugar.
The crystallization results from the formation of monohydrate glucose crystals, which vary in number, shape, dimension and quality with the honey composition and storage conditions. The lower the water and the higher the glucose content of honey, the faster the crystallization. Temperature is important, since above 25 ^° and below 5 ^°C virtually no crystallization occurs. Around 14°C is the optimum temperature for fast crystallization, but also the presence of solid particles (e.g. pollen grains) and slow stirring result in quicker crystallization (see 2.12.2). Usually, slow crystallization produces bigger and more irregular crystals.
During crystallization water is freed. Consequently, the water content of the liquid phase increases and with it the risk of fermentation. Thus, partially crystallized honey may present preservation problems, which is why controlled and complete crystallization is often induced deliberately. In addition, partially crystallized or reliquified honey is not an attractive presentation for retail shelves (see Figure 2.3).
a) Figure a) fermentation in partially crystallized honey
b) Figure b) different stages of reliquification after previous crystallization due to storage over very long periods of time or at relatively high temperatures.
Figure 2.3: Honeys in different stages of crystallization, (a) fermentation in partially crystallized honey and (b) different stages of reliquification after previous crystallization due to storage over very long periods of time or at relatively high temperatures. These unattractive changes can be avoided by controlled crystallization, proper storage and possibly pasteurization. (courtesy of F. Intoppa)
2.3 The composition of honey
The average composition of American honeys, more or less representative of all honeys, is shown in Table 2.6. Table 2.7 lists the various components identified in honeys from all around the world.
Sugars account for 95 to 99% of honey dry matter. The majority of these are the simple sugars fructose and glucose which represent 85-95% of total sugars. Generally, fructose is more abundant than glucose (see Table 2.6). This predominance of simple sugars and particularly the high percentage of fructose are responsible for most of the physical and nutritional characteristics of honey. Small quantities of other sugars are also present, such as disaccharides (sucrose, maltose and isomaltose) and a few trisaccharides and oligosaccharides. Though quantitatively of minor importance, their presence can provide information about adulteration and the botanical origin of the honey.
Water is quantitatively the second most important component of honey. Its content is critical, since it affects the storage of honey. Only honeys with less than 18% water can be stored with little to no risk of fermentation. The final water content depends on a number of environmental factors during production such as weather and humidity inside the hive, but also on nectar conditions and treatment of honey during extraction and storage. It can be reduced before or after extraction by special techniques (see 2.6.9).
Among the minor constituents organic acids are the most important and of these gluconic acid, which is a by-product of enzymatic digestion of glucose, predominates. The organic acids are responsible for the acidity of honey and contribute largely to its characteristic taste.
Minerals are present in very small quantities, potassium being the most abundant. Dark honeys, particularly honeydew honeys are the richest in minerals.
Other trace elements include nitrogenous compounds among which the enzymes originate from salivary secretions of the worker honeybees. They have an important role in the formation of the honey. Their commercial importance is not related to human nutrition, but to their fragility and uniqueness. Thus their reduction or absence in adulterated, overheated or excessively stored honeys serves as an indicator of freshness. The main enzymes in honey are invertase (saccharase) diastase (amylase) and glucose oxidase.
Traces of other proteins, enzymes or amino acids as well as water soluble vitamins are thought to result from pollen contamination in honey.
Virtually absent in newly produced honey, hydroxvmethylfurfural (HMF) is a byproduct of fructose decay, formed during storage or during heating. Thus, its presence is considered the main indicator of honey deterioration.
Even though some of the substances responsible for honey colour and flavour have been identified (see Table 2.7) the majority are still unknown. It is more than likely that honeys from different botanical origins contain different aromatic and other substances which contribute to the specific colours and flavours and thus allow to distinguish one honey from another. Similarly, it is very likely that, depending on their botanical origin, honeys contain traces of pharmacologically active substances. Some of them have been identified, such as those responsible for the toxicity of certain honeys (see also section 2.9), but for the majority of possible substances, scientific verification requires further studies.
Table 2.6
Average composition of U.S honeys and ranges of values (White, et al., 1962)
Component
(% except pH and diastase valute)
Average
Standard deviation
Range
Water 
Fructose 
Glucose 
Sucrose 
Maltose (reducing disaccharides calculated as maltose)
Higher sugars 
Free acids (as gluconic acid) 
Lactone (as glucolactone) 
Total acid (as gluconic acid) 
Ash 
Nitrogen 
pH 
Diastase value 
2.4 The physiological effects of honey
2.4.1 Unconfirmed circumstantial evidence
For thousands of years honey was the only source of concentrated sugar. uniqueness, scarcity and desirability connected it to divinity very early in human history thus ascribing to it symbolic, magic and therapeutic significance. Much of the myth many of the traditional medicinal uses have continued until today.
Few of these medicinal benefits have seen scientific confirmation and they are not always exclusive to honey. The majority are due to the high sugar content and therefore can also be found in other sweet substances with high sugar contents. It was not by accident that sugar, when first introduced to Europe, was considered a medicine for many diseases and was used with caution.
The major properties and effects commonly attributed to honey (Donadieu, 1983) are briefly described below, but there are hundreds of different local uses in various countries, according to the specific cultures and traditions, and it is impossible to mention all of them. The Koran also mentions several uses for honey and other bee products (El Banby, 1987).
Nutritional benefits
Honey is said to facilitate better physical performance and resistance to fatigue, particularly for repeated effort; it also promotes higher mental efficiency. It is therefore used by both the healthy and the sick for any kind of weakness, particularly in the case of digestive or assimilative problems. Improved growth of non-breast fed newborn infants, improved calcium fixation in bones and curing anaemia and anorexia may all be attributed to some nutritional benefit or stimulation from eating honey.
Benefits to the digestive apparatus
Honey is said to improve food assimilation and to be useful for chronic and infective intestinal problems such as constipation, duodenal ulcers and liver disturbances. Salem (1981) and Haffejee and Moosa (1985) have reported successful treatment of various gastrointestinal disorders.
Benefits to the respiratory system
In temperate climates and places with considerable temperature fluctuations, honey is a well known remedy for colds and mouth, throat or bronchial irritations and infections. The benefits, apart from antibacterial effects, are assumed to relate to the soothing and relaxing effect of fructose.
Benefits to skin and wound healing
Honey is used in moisturizing and nourishing cosmetic creams, but also in pharmaceutical preparations applied directly on open wounds, sores, bed sores, ulcers, varicose ulcers and burns. It helps against infections, promotes tissue regeneration, and reduces scarring also in its pure, unprocessed form (Hutton, 1966; Manjo, 1975; Armon, 1980 and Dumronglert, 1983). If applied immediately, honey reduces blistering of burns and speeds regeneration of new tissue. Many case histories are reported in the literature for human as well as veterinary medicine (sores, open wounds and teat lesions in cows). A cream, applied three times per day and prepared from equal parts of honey, rye flour and olive oil, has been successfully used on many sores and open wounds -even gangrenous wounds in horses (Lu~hrs, 1935). Lu cke (1935) successfully tested a honey and cod liver oil mixture suspended in a simple non-reactive cream base on open wounds in humans, but he gave no details on
proportions.
Table 2.7:
List of coupoponds found in honey, but not necessarily present in all honeys
(from Gonnet and Vache, 1985 modified with data from Withe,
1975b Bogdanov and Crane, 1990)
List of coupoponds found in honey, but not necessarily present in all honeys (from Gonnet and Vache, 1985 modified with data from Withe, 1975b Bogdanov and Crane, 1990)
Benefit to eye disorders
Clinical cases or traditional claims that honey reduces and cures eye cataracts, cures conjunctivitis and various afflictions of the cornea if applied directly into the eye, are known from Europe (Mikhailov, 1950), Asia, and Central America. This is said to be more true for Meliponid and Trigonid honeys from South and Central America and India. There are also case histories of ceratitis rosacea and corneal ulcers, healed with pure honey or a 3 % sulphidine ointment in which Vaseline was replaced by honey.
Medicine-like benefit
Frequently, specific benefits of unifloral honeys are reported, based on the traditional assumption that honey made from the nectar of a medicinal plant has the same or similar beneficial activity as the one recognized for the whole plant or some parts of it. Even if no transfer of active ingredients is involved, mechanisms similar to homeopathic potentiation are possible. Empirically effective therapies such as Bach flower therapy and aroma-therapy suggest that there can be much more to the medicinal value of honey than chemical analysis and quantification reveals. These claims are not supported by orthodox scientific evidence.
Diabetes
Frequently, claims are voiced that honey is good for diabetics. This is unlikely to find confirmation because of its high sugar content. However, it is better than products made with cane sugar, as a study by Katsilambros et al., (1988) has shown. It revealed that insulin levels were lower when compared to the uptake of equal caloric values of other foods, but blood sugar level was equal or higher than in the other compared products shortly after eating. In healthy individuals, the consumption of honey produced lower blood sugar readings than the consumption of the same quantity of sucrose (Shambaugh et al., 1990).
Ayurvedic medicine
Traditional, but well-studied medicinal systems as the ayurvedic medicine of India, use honey predominantly as a vehicle for faster absorption of various drugs such as herbal extracts. Secondarily, it is also thought to support the trea