<title>Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa - A resource book for teachers of agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
OBJECTIVE AND RATIONALE FOR THIS RESOURCE BOOK
This is a resource book for use in sub-Saharan Africa^1 by teachers of agriculture who wish to introduce into their training programmes aspects of the food chain that are related to food consumption and to nutrition. It has been produced as a contribution to the FAO programme on introducing a food and nutrition component into agricultural training curricula in Africa, in response to numerous requests from participants in workshops and seminars.
^1 For ease of reference, sub-Saharan Africa (which excludes South Africa) is often simply referred to as Africa in the text. The grouping of countries in sub-Saharan Africa is given in Annex 2. Whenever possible, data are provided for individual countries or aggregated for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. In cases where data are available only in aggregated form for continental Africa as a whose (as is the case with statistics on the prevalence of malnutrition derived from the WHO Global Database on Child Growth), this is indicated in the text. The WHO grouping of countries in Africa is also included in Annex 2.
The resource book is designed for use by trainers in preparing their teaching material; it is not intended for direct use by students. It contains both resource material, in the form of tables, figures and boxes, and text linking the resource material under a number of topics. It is not expected that this text will be transcribed directly as teaching handouts; its purpose is to provide the trainer with information relevant to sub-Saharan Africa, based on which specific, locally based examples can be identified and developed to illustrate the concepts.
The resource material has been selected from the widest possible range of different African countries (mainly English-speaking) and ecological regions. However, it is inevitable that some countries are better represented than others because of the inequitable distribution of nutritional information and activities in the different regions. Thus it is essential that this material be supplemented, wherever possible, by local examples. The collection and collation of such examples can often serve as a useful training exercise for students. A list of addresses for international organizations and sources of material is provided in Annex 1.
The book is divided into nine chapters, whose topics are integrated through extensive cross-referencing. The sequence of presentation is such that a group of topics may be taught together as a complete course, or topics may be taught independently of the given sequence, in any logical order that suits the curriculum requirements of the educator. The book is intended to be used flexibly.
INTENDED USERS AND LEVELS OF PRESENTATION
To meet all of the resource needs for different academic levels and types of programmes in one volume, for the whole of Africa, is clearly impractical. Compromise was needed. Thus, topics related to policies and economic issues at the national and international levels are presented in a format appropriate to the responsibilities and level of understanding of policy-makers; accordingly, these chapters could form the basis for the development of an in-service seminar or workshop for participants from the highest levels of government. However, if the same concepts are deemed essential for rural development workers with lower educational qualifications, then some simplification and adaptation of the training material will be necessary.
Conversely, other topics of a more practical nature, such as the promotion of home gardens, are presented using a field-based approach, as this appears to be more relevant to the tasks and therefore to the training content of courses designed for agricultural extension agents. It is not intended that all chapters be taught in all programmes. This resource book is a menu, not a syllabus. However, it is advised that all teachers study Chapters 1 and 2, as these provide definitions of technical terms such as nutrition, introduce concepts such as household food security, and form the background to the chapters that follow.
The resource book may be used in the following range of programmes:
· pre-service education of agriculturists at diploma and bachelor's degree levels in fields such as general agriculture, agricultural extension and agricultural education;
· in-service training courses, workshops and seminars for agricultural extension agents, rural development workers, administrators of agriculture and rural development programmes and government policy-makers in food, nutrition and agriculture;
· in-service education of secondary-school teachers of agriculture;
· in-service education of members of the faculty of agriculture in colleges and universities.
SELECTING AND ADAPTING MATERIAL TO MEET SPECIFIC EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
The educational objectives of the trainer should be based on the needs of the course participants. The following are some examples of how the resource book can be used in developing various programmes.
A short in-service training programme for agricultural extension officers in general agriculture
Objective: To integrate some nutritional considerations into the normal tasks of the extension officer at community level.
Resource selection: Material from the following sections may be selected, depending on the identified tasks of the extension officers and the length of the training programme.
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
· Gardening for food
· Small livestock and poultry keeping
Chapter 6
· Post-harvest practices at household level
· Post-harvest handling and storage
· Home- and village-based food preservation
Chapter 7
· Planning a diet and feeding a family
Chapter 5
· Promoting diversification of diets
It will also be necessary to supplement such skill-oriented topics with some basic information on human nutrition and malnutrition from Chapters 7 and 8, depending on the background of the trainees. However, it will often be more effective to integrate this information into the skill-oriented topics where it will be seen as relevant, rather than to teach it as separate blocks. For example, information on requirements for vitamin A and symptoms of its deficiency could conveniently be discussed under the topic "Gardening for food".
An in-service education programme for secondary-school teachers of agriculture
Objective: To enable teachers of agriculture in schools to integrate nutrition in agricultural topics and encourage food- and agriculture-related community nutrition activities.
Resource selection: The following sections may be appropriate.
Chapter 7
· Vulnerable periods in the life cycle and special energy and nutrient needs
· African diets and diet composition
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
· Gardening for food
Chapter 6
· Post-harvest handling and storage
· Home- and village-based food preservation
Chapter 5
· Promoting diversification of diets
Chapter 9
· Nutrition education in schools
A seminar for policy-makers considering the merits of drawing up a national food and nutrition plan of action for inclusion in the next development plan
Objective: To enable policy-makers to assess the nutritional consequences of decisions taken in their spheres of influence.
Resource selection: Relevant material may be taken from the following sections. Care should be taken to ensure that up-to-date national statistics are used to illustrate the major concepts.
Chapter 2
· National policies affecting food security and nutrition
Chapter 3
· Concepts in household food security
Chapter 4
· Agriculture in transition: factors affecting food security
· Food industries and small-scale processing
· Urbanization and changing patterns of food demand
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
Chapter 8
· Micronutrient malnutrition: mineral and vitamin deficiency disorders
· Preventing and combating micronutrient malnutrition through a comprehensive approach
Some options for members of the faculty of agriculture in colleges and universities who wish to introduce some nutrition topics into their curricula
Specific topics may be introduced as part of existing undergraduate options.
In a curriculum on plant production, the inclusion of one or more of the following sections could be included.
Chapter 4
· Production potentials and crop selection
· Crop specialization and food security
· Commercialization of agriculture: potential effects on household food security
Teachers of horticulture might wish to include the following.
Chapter 5
· Improving mixed cropping technologies through farming systems studies and adaptive research
· Support services and advocacy for mixed cropping
· Promotion of underexploited traditional food crops
· Gardening for food
· Urban agriculture
A curriculum in agricultural economics might also encompass the following factors related to the nutrition security of families at household level.
Chapter 3
· The food system and household food security
· Concepts in household food security
· Health factors and their impact on nutrition
Chapter 2
· HIV/AIDS and its impact on household food security and nutrition
Chapter 3
· Women's work load and the consequences for nutrition
The possibilities for integrating nutritional considerations into the productive aspects of agriculture are extensive. Effectiveness depends on approach and attitude, rather than simply adding more academic subjects to the training. Regardless of the approach adopted, the work will be more challenging, but also exciting, for both the teaching staff and the students.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Chapter 1 - Introduction
This resource book on agriculture, food security and nutrition is intended for use by teachers of agriculture in Africa. The book adopts a "food systems" approach, following the path from producer to consumer to examine the role of agriculture in human development in Africa. The book emphasizes the importance of linkages between agriculture and nutrition in the development of the continent and stresses the need for sub-Saharan Africa to develop its greatest assets: the productive capacities of its land and its people.
In sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture constitutes the livelihood of 69 percent of the economically active population (FAO, 1995f). The productive capacities of natural resources on the continent depend on the productive capacities of its people. In rural communities producers and consumers live in the same household and are often the same people. The way rural households function and make decisions and their visions of the future have long been recognized as essential information for planners and policy-makers in the agricultural sector. What is less frequently recognized among agriculturists is the significance of the consequences of different levels and patterns of consumption and the effects of agricultural decisions on the household food security and nutritional status of both the producers and the consumers in rural and urban areas.
Such consequences may run right through the food chain or involve only part of it. Agricultural decisions may result in a direct change in diet or in the quantity, quality, variety and safety of food available in a particular community. Frequently, the effect is a change in access to food for a particular sector of society or community because of fluctuations in food prices or in household income. All of these changes affect consumption of food and the health and productivity of the consumer. Especially affected by these changes are the poor, who do not have the resources or adequate buffer stocks to withstand a crisis and to maintain household food security on a sustainable basis.
A sudden breakdown in household food security or a prolonged lack of availability of adequate food for consumption in the home will result in deterioration in nutritional status and malnutrition. Malnutrition in this resource book is understood to mean undernutrition, i.e. a lack of adequate energy, protein and micronutrients to meet basic requirements for body maintenance, growth and development. However, the fact that malnutrition is not only a food-related problem has been appreciated for some time. Other important factors include lack of access to health services, sanitation, knowledge, education and care.
The consequences of malnutrition for human well-being and for socio-economic development are far-reaching. In infants and young children, undernutrition and growth retardation are associated with reduced physical activity, impaired resistance to infection, impairment of mental development and reduced educational capacity, and increased morbidity and mortality. In adults, undernourishment can lead to poor health and diminished productivity through reduced physical performance and can hinder community and national development. Improvement of the nutritional conditions of the poor and undernourished is an investment which can help raise the productive capacity of both present and future generations (FAO/ WHO, 1992g).
The extent of the problem of malnutrition in Africa as compared with developing countries as a whole is shown in Tables 1 to 3. Although the proportion of the total developing-country population classified as undernourished dropped substantially (from 35 to 21 percent) between 1969-1971 and 1990-1992, progress has not been even on all continents. In sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, the proportion of the population without adequate access to food rose in this period from 38 to 43 percent. In addition, problems related to micronutrient deficiencies are extensive and are receiving significant attention.
Table 1 - Chronic undernutrition^a in sub-Saharan Africa and developing countries, all ages
Countries
Percent affected
Number
(millions)
Total, developing countries
Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: FAO, 1996b.
^a Population with energy intake (kcal/caput/day) on average below 1.54 times the basal metabolic rate (BMR) over one year. The estimates are averages for sub-Saharan Africa.
Table 2 - Underweight children^a in Africa and developing countries
Countries
Percent affected
Number
(millions)
Total, developing countries
Continental Africa
Sources: WHO, 1995b; WHO Global Database on Child Growth.
^a Children aged 0 through 60 months with weight for age below -2 SD of the median United States National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) reference (for continental Africa and sub-Saharan Africa).
Table 3 - Micronutrient malnutrition in Africa and developing countries, 1990s
Form of malnutrition
At risk
(millions)
Affected
(millions)
Iron deficiency or anaemia
Iodine deficiency disorders (IDD)
Vitamin A deficiency (children under five years)
Sources: WHO, 1994; WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993; WHO/UNICEF, 1995.
The joint FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) was held in Rome in December 1992 to raise global awareness of the causes of malnutrition and to encourage action to promote and protect the nutritional well-being of vulnerable populations. The conference's World Declaration on Nutrition and Plan of Action for Nutrition, unanimously adopted by delegates from 159 countries, emphasize that improvements in human welfare, including nutritional well-being, must be at the centre of social and economic development efforts. The documents call for concerted action to direct resources to those most in need in order to raise their productive capacities, improve their social opportunities and increase their access to food in a sustainable way. They also stress the need to protect the nutritional well-being of vulnerable groups through specific short-term nutrition programmes as needed, together with continuous work towards long-term solutions.
The World Food Summit, held in Rome in November 1996, reaffirmed the right of all people to be free from hunger through the recognition that the long-term answer to the problems of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition is sustainable economic growth coupled with equitable distribution of that growth throughout society. In sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture is the key to equitable economic growth, and the future health and nutrition of the African people clearly depend on its development.
This resource book was prepared not simply to introduce nutrition into agricultural training, but also to reinforce the aims of the ICN and the World Food Summit. It was also prepared in the recognition and acknowledgment that in Africa, the solution to current problems of poverty and malnutrition lies in the empowerment of rural communities, which can be brought about by assisting them in identifying and overcoming constraints to their fuller participation in the process of development.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 - Agriculture, food security and nutrition
Definitions
The food chain: Production-to-consumption linkages
Food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in Sub-Saharan Africa
National policies affecting food security and nutrition
Other factors affecting food security and nutrition
Policies and actions needed to improve household food security and nutrition
Chapter 2 - Agriculture, food security and nutrition
This chapter is concerned with the interactions among agriculture, food security and nutrition in sub-Saharan Africa. It starts with the definition of basic terms that will be used throughout the book and goes on to look at the various forms of malnutrition and their causes. An overview is then given of food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in sub-Saharan Africa over the past 25 to 30 years. To put these trends into context, different macro- and national-level factors, including policies, that have influenced and will continue to influence the achievement of national food security and individual nutritional well-being are examined. Among the most pressing problems facing sub-Saharan African countries are the effects of rapid population growth, environmental degradation, civil conflict and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Understanding these problems and how they affect a country's productive capacity and its ability to feed future generations
is the first step towards overcoming them.
Definitions
Food security
Food security may have different meanings for different people. The International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), held in Rome in 1992, defined food security as "access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy life" (FAO/WHO, 1992a). Essentially, in order to achieve food security a country must achieve three basic aims. It must:
· ensure adequacy of food supplies in terms of quantity, quality and variety of food;
· optimize stability in the flow of supplies;
· secure sustainable access to available supplies by all who need them.
Adequate food availability at the national, regional and household levels, obtained through markets and other channels, is the cornerstone of nutritional well-being. At the household level, food security implies physical and economic access to foods that are adequate in terms of quantity, nutritional quality, safety and cultural acceptability to meet each person's needs. Household food security depends on an adequate income and assets, including land and other productive resources owned. Food security is ultimately associated with access to nutritionally adequate food at household level, i.e. the ability of households or individuals to acquire a nutritionally adequate diet at all times. The normative dimensions of household food security, defining household food security in ideal terms, are graphically presented in Figure 1. The conditions necessary for achieving and maintaining household food security are discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
It is important to note at this stage that the achievement of household food security may not necessarily result in improvements in the nutritional status of all household members. Access to nutritionally adequate food guarantees neither adequate consumption by all individuals within the household nor the appropriate biological utilization of the food consumed. How does household food security then relate to human nutritional status, as expressed in biological or physiological terms?
The answer is that household food security can be translated into good nutritional status if household members have nutrition security, a condition that combines:
· access to nutritionally adequate and safe food;
· sufficient knowledge and skills to acquire, prepare and consume a nutritionally adequate diet, including those to meet the special needs of young children;
· access to health services and a healthy environment to ensure effective biological utilization of foods consumed.
Actual nutritional well-being is then determined by a number of interrelated factors, which besides food security include health and sanitation, adequate supplies of safe water, parents' education, time to prepare food and care of vulnerable individuals within the household. Household food security is thus one of the prerequisites for good nutritional status. For a model of the factors that determine nutritional outcome see Figure 2.
FIGURE 1 - The normative dimensions of household food security
Source: Adapted from Frankenberger et al, 1993.
Nutrition and nutritional status
Nutrition is the science that explains the role of food and nutrients in the human body during growth, development and maintenance of life. In its broader context, nutrition has also been defined as being concerned with "... how food is produced, processed, handled, sold, prepared, shared, and eaten and what happens to food in the body - how it is digested, absorbed, and used" (King and Burgess, 1993). Nutritional status refers to the nutritional state of the body, as expressed according to scientifically tested parameters such as weight, height, age or combinations of these. Using these parameters, an individual can be assessed as having good or poor nutritional status.
FIGURE 2 - Determinants of nutrition security: basic causes and links
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1996c.
Note: 1. Basic causes; 2. Structural/institutional conditions, areas of public action; 3. Market conditions;
4. Micro-level conditions (household, intrahousehold, gender).
Factors influencing nutritional status
Nutrition security is influenced by a wide range of factors that may lead to inadequate or excessive nutrient intakes or may impair nutrient utilization. The factors most directly influencing nutritional status are analysed under the categories of food security, health, and knowledge and care (see Figure 2). Each of these is essential to attain good nutritional status, and they often interact with each other. To ensure optimal nutritional outcome, simultaneous action in all three areas is needed, requiring not only well-coordinated efforts at household and community levels, but also appropriate national development policies and strategies to support local efforts. National development policies, including macroeconomic and agricultural policies, though usually not included in the domain of nutrition, can also affect nutritional well-being.
It is well recognized that poverty is the principal cause of malnutrition (FAO/WHO, 1992g). Acute and chronic undernutrition and most micronutrient deficiencies primarily affect the poor and deprived people who do not have access to adequate food, live in unsanitary environments without access to sufficient and clean water and basic services and lack access to appropriate education and information.
Household food security and nutrition. In sub-Saharan Africa, where approximately 70 percent of the population live in rural areas, crop and animal production, fisheries and forestry activities are direct sources of food and provide income with which to buy food. Increased and diversified production of food for family consumption or as a source of income is a basic prerequisite for improved household food security. Better home and community food processing, preservation and storage and access to marketing facilities can also contribute to household food security by alleviating seasonal shortages in food supply and stabilizing market prices. Agricultural practices and technology as well as the establishment of small-scale agro-processing industries can significantly increase employment and income-generating opportunities and thus positively affect household access to food. Food safety and quality, secured through effective food quality control at all stages of production,
processing and handling, also influence nutritional well-being. With regard to infant nutrition, the extent of breastfeeding is important, and hygienic preparation and handling of food are crucial for disease prevention and proper child growth.
Health and nutrition. Various infections, notably diarrhoeal and respiratory diseases, measles, malaria, intestinal parasites and infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/AIDS have a major impact on nutritional status. The interaction of infection and inadequate food consumption causing growth retardation in children leads to a vicious circle, the malnutrition-infection complex. To break the circle it is necessary to improve environmental health conditions by addressing problems of contaminated water, insanitary disposal of human excrete and household wastes, and poor food and personal hygiene in homes and places of food processing and marketing.
Access to health services is vital, especially in rural areas, where the prevention, timely treatment and proper management of infectious diseases can make an important contribution towards improving nutritional levels. Immunization programmes to prevent disease, curative and antenatal services, oral rehydration, the effective promotion of breastfeeding and proper weaning practices, the feeding of sick children and nutrition education are important in minimizing the risk of undernutrition.
Knowledge, care and nutrition. Malnutrition can occur even when a household has access to adequate amounts of nutritious foods as well as access to sanitation and health services. While adequate incomes, greater food availability and expanded health services are necessary for adequate nutrition, they will not bring about improvements unless households are able to take advantage of them. In this context, sufficient knowledge and the ability to care for vulnerable individuals are of critical importance. Care consists of the time, attention and support provided in the household (mainly by the mother and daughters and to a much lesser extent by the father) and in the community to meet the physical, mental and social needs of growing children and other family members.
In many instances it is especially important to ensure that women have access to the resources (e.g. income-generating opportunities), labour-saving technology (e.g. appropriate farming practices, extension and credit), infrastructure (e.g. water wells and flour mills) and knowledge and education they need in order to care better for themselves and their families. In addition, legislation to improve women's status in society and legal access to land and other productive resources is essential for the future nutritional well-being of family members. Men should also be encouraged to strengthen their role as providers of care. In addition, it is necessary to devote increasing attention to development of community care structures such as day-care centres for young children and for the sick and dying (e.g. people with HIV/AIDS), especially as urbanization and other social forces weaken traditional patterns of family care.
The food chain: Production-to-consumption linkages
To nourish is "to sustain with food"; food is a necessity of life, and all creatures must eat to live. Food acquisition is therefore a major preoccupation of all animals. Humans are virtually unique among animals in the practice of agriculture. Cultivation of the soil and domestication of plants and animals are widely recognized as major developments in the progress of human societies that have diversified their food acquisition strategies. Today, however, many individuals and many human societies suffer from lack of food. On any given day perhaps 1 000 million individuals eat less than they need. In any given year several million people die from hunger-related causes, and hundreds of millions experience retarded growth and reduction in their physical and mental abilities because of faulty or inadequate nutrition. Why should this be so? Is global food production inadequate to meet the needs of the world population?
Clearly this is not the case. If the world's grain production that is available for human consumption were converted into energy and protein, the total would be significantly greater than the amount of these nutrients needed for human survival. During the past three decades the growth of global food production has been faster than the increase in the world's population, yet hundreds of millions of poor people do not share in this abundance. Food production at the macro level is linked to food consumption and nutritional status at the micro level (i.e. the household and the individual) by a complex network of interactions. Understanding how these interactions work can be an important stage in addressing the problems of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition and identifying actions to attain nutritional wellbeing.
Food insecurity or lack of access to a nutritionally adequate diet in a household or community can take various forms. For example, chronic food insecurity exists when food supplies are persistently insufficient to supply adequate nutrition for all individuals. Low-income groups, such as the urban poor, rural landless and smallholder farmers and pastoralists, are the most vulnerable to food insecurity. Such groups often lack sufficient income and/or cannot produce enough food for adequate nutrition. Transitory food insecurity occurs when there is a temporary decline in access to adequate food because of instability in food production, food prices or incomes, as occurred, for example, during the serious droughts in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa from 1983 to 1985 and in southern Africa in the early 1990s. Transitory food insecurity is not necessarily a one-off event, as witnessed in the Horn of Africa, which has been threatened by recurrent droughts since the early 1980s.
Famine in this and other parts of Africa has largely been averted since the mid- 1980s through efforts such as the strengthening of early warning of impending food shortages and more rapid responses to such warnings through disaster prevention and preparedness measures (e.g. seed distribution), including food aid interventions.
The distinction between chronic and transitory food insecurity refers to the time dimension of the food problem, i.e. whether it is persistent or short-term. A further distinction between national and individual insecurity can be made, which refers to the macro and micro dimensions of the problem. National food insecurity exists when a country is unable to meet its domestic food requirements through production, imports or run-down of stocks and reserves. National food security is not the same as national self-sufficiency. Although supply security can be achieved through a policy of self-sufficiency, it can also be achieved through food imports or by a combination of imports and domestic production. Few countries are entirely self-sufficient with regard to food. The degree to which staple food supply needs should be met through imports rather than domestic production remains a key policy issue in African countries. Discussion of this issue is, however, beyond the scope of
this book.
Even though total food supply may be secure in a country or a region, households or individuals may not have access to adequate food. In other words, sufficient supply at the national level does not necessarily guarantee access at the household level. Household food security, however, is only possible in a situation that ensures adequate national or local food supplies. This relationship shows that it is very important for policy-makers to distinguish food security at the national, regional and household levels. The next section demonstrates the relationship between macro- and micro-level food security by looking at national food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in Africa over the pas