<title>FRESHWATER FISH PROCESSING AND EQUIPMENT IN SMALL PLANTS</title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
According to data published by FAO, 15% of the world supply of animal proteins is derived from fish. The demand for fish as food is systematically increasing but at the same time marine resources are close to the limits of exploitation. However, aquaculture which supplies the market with both marine and freshwater fish, is fast developing. Figure 1.1 shows the most important freshwater species in Europe.
Much of the freshwater fish found on Western European markets comes from aquaculture and only very limited quantities of fish are derived from the freshwater fishery; this is due to the poor economics associated with this sector. But it should be stressed that in the Central European countries e.g., in Poland, approximately only 50% of freshwater fish come from aquaculture.
The European market is dominated by the following fish species (Table 1.1):
- rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss),
- European eel (Anguilla anguilla),
- carp (Cyprinus carpio).
Table 1.1
Freshwater fish production in Europe (excluding former USSR) in 1990, and a forecast for the year 2000 (Hough, 1993)
SPECIES
1990 [t]
2000 [t]
Trout 
Carp 
Eel 
Others 
Although trout production has doubled in countries of the European Union, to reach 190 000 t in the period 1980-90, the anticipated increase in production by 50 000 t by the year 2000 may testify to a restrained demand market. On the other hand, the increase in eel production is expected to exceed 200%.
Carp is greatly appreciated in Central European countries but only in limited regions of Western Europe.
Italy is the major European producer of eel, but Germany and the Netherlands are the biggest markets. Prices of eel depend on the size of fish (best prices are obtained for fish weighing more than 350 g). As much as 65% of the entire eel production comes from aquaculture, and fish derived from this source is considered more suitable for smoking than the wild fish due to its thinner skin and higher fat content.
w0495e01.gif (109969 byte)
Figure 1.1
The most important species of freshwater fish:
1. Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
2. European eel (Anguilla anguilla)
3. Pike-perch (Stizostedion lucioperca)
4. European perch (Perca fluviatilis)
5. Northern pike (Esox lucius)
6. Wels catfish (Silurus glanis)
7. Mirror carp (Cyprinus carpio var. specularis)
8. Scale carp (Cyprinus carpio var. communis)
9. Freshwater bream (Abramis brama)
10. Roach (Rutilus rutilus)
Until recently, freshwater fish processing was carried out mainly in kitchens at home, in restaurants and in catering centres. Occasionally, fishmonger shops and small fish processing plants produced semi-products in rudimentary conditions and placed them on the market. However, changing requirements and habits of customers in Europe created the need for an increased market supply of ready-to-cook (e.g., fillets, chunks) or ready-to-serve dishes. This trend will intensify and, if they are not to lose the market, the existing processing plants will have to be modernized. The modernization should improve economies, simplify work and, most important, improve sanitary conditions of production. The introduction of modern machines results in the growth of productivity and reduction of employment; it shortens the duration of technological processes, and makes it easier to prepare more laborious but, at the same time, more attractive products for the consumer.
However, mechanization of the processing lines is very costly, especially for small plants processing freshwater fish. In these cases, mechanization of freshwater fish processing would be limited to that equipment needed to maintain the market and meet the basic sanitary requirements imposed by the competent authorities. In addition to infrastructure and the necessary machines - for example, ice generators, washers, smoking equipment, freezers, cold stores - small processing plants could, within reason, also acquire simple, inexpensive machines which often only perform one operation.
During the Eighteenth Session of the Advisory Board of the FAO European Inland Fisheries Commission, held in Rome in 1994, it was noted with satisfaction that needs for high quality freshwater fish products are growing, especially in the more affluent countries. The Commission made important recommendations for inland fisheries, among which:
- elaboration and distribution of publications on existing technologies of fish processing and marketing, with special regard to species of the Cyprinidae family
- arrangement of aid concerning the elaboration of new technologies for producing high quality fish products.
The problems related to freshwater fish processing are not sufficiently reflected in the scientific literature. Here, an effort was made to collect the information, often based on the authors' experience or technological processes used, and on the possibilities and trends in the mechanization of freshwater fish processing, with special regard to the Cyprinidae family.
<section>2</section>
2. FRESHWATER FISH AS RAW MATERIAL FOR PROCESSING
2.1 Nutritive and Technological Values of Freshwater Fish
The manufacturing potential of the raw material as food depends on two features - the nutritive and the technological value.
2.1.1 Nutritive value
The nutritive value of dishes prepared from fish and from animal meat is comparable, but in some cases fish-based meals are advisable. In such an evaluation, many parameters, such as energetic value, quality and content of protein components, vitamins and mineral compound content should be examined. The energetic value of eel meat is lower than that of fat beef (1 050 kJ/100 g and 1 250 kJ/100 g respectively); while in the case of trout it amounts to 600 kJ/100 g and it is lower than for lean beef, 735 kJ/100 g. Thus the meat of freshwater fish can be a valuable constituent in low-calorie diets and at the same time has a high energy content.
The composition of amino-acid proteins in fish meat is similar to that of a hen's egg. Consumption of fish together with products of plant origin which are poor in some amino-acids (lysin, threonine), enables not only a complete utilization of plant protein, but also improves the content of a diet.
The biological value of freshwater fish fats is lower than that of marine fish because the former contain fewer unsaturated aliphatic acids. Fish meat is valuable as a source of vitamins and mineral substances. It contains especially the trace metals such as: selenium, molybdenum, cobalt, whose value is emphasized by physiologists.
The definition of food stresses that the basic food ingredients as well as the raw materials used for its production must be wholesome. However, contamination of the environment is fast increasing, especially through the use of chemicals in agriculture or in industry. For that reason, certain countries or groups of countries establish limits and recommendations for permissible levels of chemical contaminants the excess of which leads to exclusion of such raw material from the production of food for human consumption. This problem, for many reasons (diets, habits, analytical methods), is far from being solved as countries have different attitudes in this respect. It may well constitute a non-tariff barrier on a free market in the future.
2.1.2 Technological value
The technological value generally depends on two parameters: the yield of preliminary processing and the quality features of fish meat and by-products. The yield of edible parts of the fish depends, first, on the species and constitution, and also on age and consequently size and maturity.
Yield is affected by the ratio between edible and inedible parts of the fish and this is a decisive factor with regard to the technological value of the fish. This ratio depends on the species. It is most favourable in the Salmonidae family, amounting to approximately 75% of the weight. For most fish species this parameter ranges from 50 to 60%. In the case of perch and most of the Cyprinidae family the yield is less than 50%. More information on the yield of preliminary processing of freshwater fish is given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Average yield of preliminary processing (manual processing) of several species of freshwater fish
SPECIES SIZE OF FISH
FORM OF
PREPROCESSED FISH
YIELD
Trout > 0.35 gutted
Trout > 0.35 h/g (deheaded/gutted)
Trout > 0.35 fillet with skin
Carp > 3.0 gutted
Carp > 1 - 3.0 gutted
Carp > 3.0 deheaded and gutted
Carp > 3.0 chunks
Carp > 3.0 fillet with skin
Pike-perch > 1.0 gutted
Pike-perch > 1.0 deheaded and gutted
Pike-perch 0.35 - 0.5 deheaded and gutted
Pike-perch > 1.0 chunks
Pike-perch > 1.0 fillet with skin
Pike 1 - 3.0 gutted
Bream > 1.0 gutted
Bream 0.5 - 1.0 deheaded and gutted
Bream 0.5 - 1.0 chunks
Evaluation of the technological value of freshwater fish should take account of its possible utilization for different products, considering the sensory properties such as: flavour, texture, appearance, size and bone content. These parameters are decisive as to consumer's interest and thus the market demand.
Fish with high bone content are not so popular as a product for consumption. Therefore, the technological value of roach (Rutilus rutilus) is lower than that of pike-perch (Stizostedion lucioperca). The taste of freshwater fish depends mainly on the quality of their water habitat and on their food. It is known that fish (for example, carp) living in dirty and muddy ponds, have an unpleasant flavour. The flavour of wild trout from streams is better than that of fish from aquaculture. The opposite is true for eel resulting from the fact that the aquaculture eel has a more tender tissue and thinner skin.
Freshwater fish are classified according to size, larger individuals usually being preferred to small fish. This is also connected with bone content: e.g., trouts weighing about 300 g are very popular as single portions, prices increasing with popularity. The most expensive are fish weighing over 500 g which are destined for smoking. The best market value are carp of 1-2 kg, but those exceeding 3 kg have less customer appeal.
The sanitary and hygienic condition of fish and fish meat also influences the technological value. This relates to the presence of parasites and pathogenic micro-organisms.
However, the main role in evaluating technological value and usefulness is played by a set of features termed freshness. These features change during storage after the death of the fish and the intensity of the changes depends on the species, fishing conditions and storage conditions immediately after capture.
2.2 Post mortem Changes and Fish Quality Assurance Methods
On the death of the fish, processes of physical and chemical change caused by enzymes and micro-organisms begin to occur. The complete decay of the fish is the final result of those changes.
Post-mortem
changes which take place in fish tissue occur in the following phases:
- slime secretion on the surface of fish
- rigor mortis
- autolysis as enzymatic decomposition of tissues
- microbiological spoilage
The duration of each phase can change or phases can overlap. This depends on storage conditions, especially the temperature which greatly influences these processes.
2.2.1 Slime secretion
Slime is formed in certain cells of fish skin and the process becomes very active just after fish death. Some of the fish, for example eel, secrete more slime than, for comparison, Salmonidae and perch. Fish which secrete great quantities of slime have poorly developed scales; very often the quantity of slime reaches 2-3% of the fish mass and that in turn creates problems during processing. The secretion process stops with the onset of rigor mortis.
Slime contains large amounts of nitrogenous compounds and these provide good nourishment for micro-organisms originating from the environment. Therefore, the slime spoils quickly: first giving an unpleasant smell to the fish, and second opening the way for further and deeper bacterial penetration into the fish.
2.2.2 Rigor mortis
Rigor mortis
is a result of complicated biochemical reactions which cause muscle fibres to shorten and tighten, and finally the fish becomes stiff. Rigor mortis has many technological consequences. If, for example, the bones were removed prior to rigor mortis the length of the fillet shortens by 30%. At the same time, the fillet becomes wider and thicker because its volume does not change.
This tightness very often causes the connective tissue of individual myomeres to break; this process is termed "gaping" and results in muscle separation which is considered a quality defect. "Gaping" depends on temperature; the higher the temperature of fish at the beginning of the rigor mortis process the greater the gaping of the muscle. Therefore, during rigor mortis fish temperature should be as low as possible. For example, for roach and perch kept at 0° C rigor mortis begins 24 hours after death and lasts for 72-80 hours. When the same species is kept at 35° C it begins 20-30 minutes after death and stops after about 3 hours. The time rigor mortis begins and its duration depend on the fish species (e.g., for carp at 0° C it starts after 48 hours, for roach and perch at 0° C after 24 hours), on the fish catching technique, and on fish temperature. It was also found that fast swimmers, for example trout, undergo rigor mortis faster but for a shorter duration than slow
swimmers like carp.
In those fish which are in good condition (well-nourished) rigor mortis is more intensive. Fish put to death just after removal from the water reach a state of rigor mortis later than those fish which died after a long agony. In the case of carp put to death just after capture rigor mortis begins after 48 hours, but if the carp died after a long agony it sets in after 24 hours (at 0° C).
Unnecessary and rough handling of the fish can shorten the time of occurrence and duration of rigor mortis. Such treatment causes stress in live fish.
Fish body temperature is a decisive factor in the onset and duration of the rigor mortis process. The higher the temperature the sooner it begins and the faster it ceases. This is evidenced by enzymatic reactions whose speed increases with increased temperature. At high temperatures it results in greater changes in proteins, the latter causing higher loss of tissue juices, e.g., during processing. Usually, the later rigor mortis begins and the longer it lasts, the longer are the storage life of the fish and its use for consumption.
2.2.3 Autolysis
On the death of the fish, a complicated biochemical process starts, leading to a decomposition of basic compounds of tissues which takes place under the influence of enzymes. This decomposition involves proteins, lipids and carbohydrates. Its intensity is not the same for all compounds and the decomposition of one can influence the decomposition of the others.
The quality of fish as a raw material for consumption or for processing depends largely on proteolysis, that is, the decomposition of proteins. This process follows rigor mortis. The final products of protein hydrolysis, under the influence of enzymes, are: amino-acids and other low-molecular substances which have an impact on the sensory features of fish. A similar situation concerns the products of lipid autolysis: thus autolysis cannot be qualified as a phase in the spoilage process.
During autolysis, great changes occur in the structure of muscle tissue which becomes softer, and very often falls into layers along the myosepts. In small fish, perforation of the belly occurs. From the technological view, it is negative because the proteolysis process leads to a decrease in the capacity of tissue to retain tissue juice, resulting in toughness of texture of the final product. The degradation of proteins creates ideal conditions for the growth of spoilage bacteria.
2.2.4 Microbiological decomposition
The muscle tissue of live fish is generally sterile but bacteria thrive in the alimentary tract and on the skin, and from there they penetrate into the muscles; for example, through the blood vessels. This process is further favoured by structural changes in the tissue as a result of rigor mortis and autolysis. Bacteria are able to decompose proteins, but products of proteolysis such as amino-acids and other low-molecular nitrogenous compounds provide better nourishment. Thus it was found that, due to lower content of these substances, freshwater fish tissue undergoes microbiological decomposition more slowly than marine fish tissue. Micro-organisms cause decomposition of not only proteins but other compounds containing nitrogen, lipids to peroxides, aldehydes, ketones and lower aliphatic acids. However, the decomposition of nitrogenous compounds occurs much faster than in the case of lipids.
Compounds such ammonia, hydrogen sulphide and mercaptans, indole, skatole, etc., are the final products of microbiological spoilage of fish, which produces an unpleasant and then disgusting flavour.
Penetration of bacteria into fish tissue and microbiological decomposition begins with autolysis and these processes are practically parallel. However, their rate and intensity strictly depend on the storage temperature. Low temperature strongly inhibits the activity of micro-organisms in which case the autolysis process dominates.
2.3 Indicators of Fish Freshness
Freshwater fish, as other fish species, are raw material which fast deteriorates. This implies that both the producer and the consumer are very often exposed to the risk of buying fish which is not fresh or has even deteriorated. Knowledge of the average shelf life for individual fish species - depending on storage conditions - is a basic principle applied in the food - and the fish - industry. Effective, objective and repeatable methods for evaluation of raw material freshness should be specified, but attempts so far are only now showing positive results. Thus, sensory analysis is the main method of evaluating fish freshness. It enables differences in texture, flavour, and taste to be determined, and subsequently the usefulness of the raw material. Sensory properties change during storage from the desired very high standard, through neutral or average, and finally to undesirable or disgusting. It is generally assumed that prior to disappearance of desirable features the
fish is considered to be fresh, while the appearance of undesirable or disgusting features disqualifies the raw material. The most difficult step is to determine an intermediate state in which the fish is not entirely fresh. Sensory analysis is thus carried out on raw fish and cooked fish. Flavour, appearance and state of abdominal cavity (for not eviscerated fish) are the main indicators of quality in the case of raw fish. For cooked fish, smell is the most important indicator. These problems are covered in section 6.5.2 Quality control.
<section>3</section>
3. PRELIMINARY PROCESSING OF FRESHWATER FISH
3.1 Requirements Related to Freshwater Fish Processing
Freshwater fish processing, like the processing of other food raw materials, should:
- assure best possible market quality
- provide a proper form of semi-processed of final product
- assure health safety of products
- apply the most rational raw processing method
- reduce waste to the extent possible
Due to its chemical composition, fish is a perishable raw material. Fish flavour and texture change rapidly during storage after death. It is thus advisable in freshwater fish processing to keep the fish alive as long as possible. Actions focusing on quality assurance also involve transport and storage/depuration of the fish awaiting processing (described in section 3.2).
In order to reduce the bacterial processes, immediately on death fish should be deheaded, gutted, washed and chilled in order to inhibit unfavourable enzymatic and microbiological processes. If fish is not sold fresh, preservations methods should be applied in order to extend shelf life. These could include freezing, smoking, heat treatment (sterilization, pasteurization, etc.).
Another aspect of fish processing is to give the product a form which is attractive to the consumer, e.g., skinless fillet or deheaded fish with fins removed.
The third main goal of fish processing is high product quality and extended shelf life.
Fresh fish can be stored only for the short time that processing technologies allow for the storage life of fish to be extended without significant loss of quality.
Fish processing must ensure full health safety of fish products and proper sanitary conditions as well as selection of a process (e.g., sterilization, pasteurization) which render impossible the development of harmful micro-organisms and toxins. High quality products which are safe and satisfy the consumer can be reached by compliance with processing parameters, from the start of the operation to the distribution of the final product.
Appropriate processing should enable maximal use of raw material and thus contribute to increased economic profitability. This is a basic approach in modern industry. A filleting operation offers a classic example of such an approach in which, apart from the fillets, minced meat can be produced from the waste material and the remainder sold as animal feed. Thus the process results in practically no unused waste material. However, achievement of this goal essentially requires that mechanization be introduced into processing, albeit on a small scale. At the same time, it is noted that production of value added products is obviously the basis of processing profitability and can be a decisive factor for the survival of many fish processing plants, especially the small ones.
Fishing, processing, transportation and sale of fish products are links in a complete processing chain. Each has its own importance but only together can they form an inseparable process to provide the customer with a top quality product.
3.2 Handling of Freshwater Fish before Processing
The quality of the raw material and its usefulness for further utilization in processing is affected by the fish capture method. Unsuitable fishing methods e.g., catching too many fish in one haul, cause not only mechanical damage to the fish, but also create stress and the conditions which accelerate processes which begin after fish death.
In many countries consumers are used to buying live fish: this assures the highest quality. This habit takes different forms, e.g., the consumer buys live fish, for instance carp or trout and processes it at home. Very often the fish bought live can be partly processed by the shop assistant; for example, it can be filleted. In some restaurants the customer can choose the fish from an aquarium and have it prepared for consumption. Thus the tradition, the quality, and the resultant price, constitute the reason why the preparation of fish for transportation, and the transportation itself, are the preliminary operations of processing of freshwater fish like trout, carp, eel, etc. However, producers should remember that not all fish are suitable for transportation alive. Therefore, just after fishing, fish should be sorted and only those in good condition, healthy and not damaged be destined for sale as live fish. Fish so classified is first conditioned in water of appropriate
quality. The conditioning process reduces stress, inhibits metabolism and at the same time food remains are removed from the alimentary ducts and the oxygen demand reduced. During the conditioning process fish is not fed which further inhibits metabolism and also limits the excretion of ammonia and carbon dioxide. In the short conditioning process 1 m³ of water is sufficient for 50-60 kg of carp, 30-40 kg of pike, 20-25 kg of trout or pike-perch.
Water provided for conditioning must be properly oxidized.
For example, in the case of 1 kg of fish at a temperature of 10° C the oxygen demand is: eel 25 mg, carp 45 mg, pike 50 mg. Young fish need more oxygen than older fish. Oxygen consumption depends also on the liveliness of fish. The amount of oxygen dissolved in water depends on water temperature which should be rather low. But for stenothermal species such as carp water temperature should be not less than 10-12° C in summer and 5-6° C in spring and autumn. Optimal temperature for conditioning and transportation of trout is 5-6° C in summer and 3-5° C in spring. During winter fish tolerates temperatures of 1-2° C.
Nowadays, special tanks with aeration system and often with cooling and filtering (activated coal, biological filters) systems are used for transportation of live fish. In simple solutions water is cooled by ice. Cooling is especially important during summer and in transportation over long distances. If all parameters, i.e., temperature, oxygenation, are properly maintained, and when the temperature does not exceed 10° C, the weight loss varies from 1 to 6%, and about 10% of carp and 20% of trout die during a six-day transportation in winter. At present, large valuable fish species are transported via air in which case they are placed in big plastic bags with aeration system.
3.3 Equipment for Preliminary Processing of Freshwater Fish
Preliminary processing of freshwater fish usually consists of the following steps or unit processes: evisceration, deheading, scaling, cutting of fins and belly flaps, slicing of whole fish into steaks, filleting, skinning, grinding of skinned fillets and different combinations of the above (Figure 3.1).
w0495e01.jpg (33911 byte)
The products of preliminary processing can be sold or further processed to obtain value added products. In freshwater fish processing, particularly species such as perch, pike-perch and the cyprinids, the processing steps described above are executed manually with a wide variety of knives. Efficient preparation of fish is important when top quality, maximum yield and highest possible profits are to be achieved. This is important when fish is to be exported. Efficient fish preparation is a skill only be acquired with practice. Several perfectly acceptable methods for cutting any fish exist; they may often give the same yield and similar end-products. In the future, the level of mechanization of fish processing in small processing plants will increase due to the constant pressure to reduce production costs and improve economic performance.
The present level of mechanization is low which results from the overall limited production, seasonal availability of the raw product and lack of inexpensive, efficient mechanical equipment adaptable for processing of various fish species.
In practice, most freshwater fish processing is done in small processing plants (with the exception of salmon and trout processing), usually supplying products for local or nearby markets. Manpower capacity in such plants varies, usually not exceeding 10-20 employees. In addition to freshwater fish, frozen marine fish may be processed in the same plant.
3.3.1 Stunning of fish
In many freshwater species the method of stunning is critical for final product quality because prolonged agony of fish causes production of undesired substances in the tissue. Oxygen deficiency in blood and muscle tissue results in accumulation of lactic acid and other reduced products of catabolic processes and consequently in a paralysis of the neural system. Red spots appear on the surface of the skin and in the muscle tissue near the backbone; these reduce quality.
Stunning of freshly caught fish or fish delivered live to a processing plant is best done with an electric current. First, the fish are placed in a tank of water and an electric current is then passed through the water to stun or kill the fish. Live fish are also slaughtered by cutting the aorta and bleeding to death when technological or ritual reasons require the removal of blood from the tissue before further processing.
In some plants, water in the fish tanks is saturated with carbon dioxide which renders the animals unconscious or dead.
3.3.2 Grading
The processing sequence starts from grading the fish by species and size. Sorting by species or on the basis of freshness and physical damage are still manual processes, but grading of fish by size is easily done with mechanical equipment. Mechanical graders yield better sorting precision for fish before or after rigor mortis than for fish in a state of rigor mortis.
Size grading is very important for fish processing (i.e., smoking, freezing, heat treatment, salting, etc.) as well as for marketing. Automated sorters are rarely used in small plants processing freshwater fish because the raw product is usually already sorted on delivery and because of their high costs.
Automated grading is 6-10 times more efficient than manual grading. The sorting speed of different graders varies and depends on the type of device and size of fish sorted. Sorting capacity is 1-15 t/hour, and usually into three size groups.
A combination of conveyor belt and automated sorter shown in Figure 3.2 is used by fish processing plants in the USA. This machine has an interesting design: two smooth rotating rollers are installed above the surface of the conveyor belt and the distance between the rollers and belt can be adjusted according to the maximum thickness of the sorted fish. Thinner animals fall off the belt while the thick ones are retained on it until the end of line. Therefore, one device serves simultaneously as a grading machine and a conveyor.
Figure 3.2 Combination grading machine-conveyor belt:
a - general view, b - cross-section
Most commonly used grading machines consist of a series of compartments connected by slits of varying size (Figure 3.3) with rotating rollers or conveyor belts arranged in a V-shape (Figure 3.4). In such devices fish are sorted according to the maximum thickness which is highly correlated to fish length. The size range to be sorted is easily adjusted.
Figure 3.3 Grading machine with a fan shaped arrangement of rollers:
a - scheme, b - general view.
Figure 3.4 Slit grader consisting of two conveyor belts arranged in a V-shape;
1 - rubber belt, 2 - rotating wheel
3.3.3 Removal of slime
Slime accumulating on the skin surface of dying fish is a protection mechanism against harmful conditions. In some freshwater species slime constitutes 2-3% of body weight. Slime excretion stops before rigor mortis. Slime creates a perfect environment for micro-organism growth and should be removed by thorough washing. Eel, trout and carp require special care with regard to slime removal. Even small amounts of slime, which frequently remain after manual cleaning, result in visible yellowish-brown spots (particularly in smoked eel).
Drum-washing with a horizontal rotation axis does not remove slime from some fish, e.g., eel. Eel are best washed in machines which originally serve as scalers (Figure 3.5a, b). The device is loaded with 30 kg of eel and several kilograms of salt, and after about 2-3 minutes the slime is completely removed from the fish skin. This procedure is more efficient than manual washing.
Slime can be removed from eel, trout and other freshwater species by soaking fish in a 2% solution of baking soda and then washing in a cylindrical rotating washer.
3.3.4 Scaling
Many freshwater species are routinely scaled; this is extremely labour-intensive when done manually. Some sources estimate that manual scaling of larger animals requires almost 50% of the total time necessary to produce headed and gutted fish without fins. Fish destined for skinning and filleting or to be smoked or minced in mincing/deboning separator is not scaled. Tools used for manual scaling are shown in Figure 3.6. Tools are moved over the body of fish from tail fin towards the head, pulling out the scales.
Figure 3.6 Tools used for manual scaling
Fish such as perch, bream, pike-perch and carp, are particularly difficult to scale manually. One method includes blanching of fish for 3-6 seconds in boiling water and then scaling by hand with motions perpendicular to the long body axis. Mechanized and power-assisted hand-held scalers are commonly used in small processing plants (Figure 3.7).
Electrical hand-held scalers simplify and speed up the scaling procedure. They are most commonly used for secondary scaling of fish which has left the automated scaling device 80-90% free of scales. Use of electrical hand-held scalers reduces labour intensity and assures complete elimination of scales. The power-assisted tool shown in Figure 3.7 consists of a cylindrical rotating scraper of 30-40 mm diameter powered by an electric motor and connected to it with