<title>Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Dry-Zone Africa. UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting. Nairobi, Kenya, 21-24 November 1995. UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest </title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms
ATO
African Timber Organization
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research
CILSS
Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
COFO
Committee on Forestry (FAO)
CSD
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (also UNCSD)
CSCE
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
ECE
Economic Commission for Europe
FSC
Forest Stewardship Council
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
IIED
International Institute for Environment and Development
IGADD
Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development
IPF
Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN
World Conservation Union
IUFRO
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
SADC
Southern African Development Community
UNEP
United Nations Environmental Programme
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNSO
Office to Combat Desertification and Drought (UNDP)
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>2</section>
Recommendations
The meeting recommended that FAO and UNEP bring to the attention, as soon as possible, the recommendations and conclusions of the meeting to their regional intergovernmental bodies for their review and possible endorsement, and particularly at the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and at the Sixth Session of the African Ministerial Conference on Environment ( §21).
The meeting also recommended that FAO and UNEP inform the CILSS and IGADD Secretariats and the Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit of SADC of its conclusions and recommendations in order for them to take appropriate action to pursue the process at sub-regional level for the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management ( §22).
The meeting recommended that each country be involved in the internalization of the process and that this process be promoted simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels ( §23).
The meeting underlined the importance of an effective coordination in this field among the three sub-regional organizations ( §24).
The meeting recommended that the process be actively pursued at regional, sub-regional and national levels in order to be taken into account in the programme of work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development ( §25).
The meeting recommended that the criteria agreed on at regional, sub-regional and national levels be the same and that for each criterion, indicators be added at the sub-regional and national levels to those adopted at the regional level to reflect the specific conditions of the sub-regions and countries concerned ( §26).
The meeting further recommended that the process identifies first a minimum set of simple indicators which can be later on complemented and refined gradually on the basis of the experience obtained through testing and application ( §27).
The meeting finally recommended that every effort be made by all concerned to promote the exchange of information and experience with the relevant on-going processes in this field, through, in particular, the participation of their experts in meetings organised within the framework of this process; and that the various stakeholders, including NGOs and the private sector, be involved at the various levels and in the various phases of this process, in a participatory and transparent manner ( §28).
<section>3</section>
I. Introduction
1. The Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Dry-Zone Africa, was jointly organized by FAO and UNEP, and held at UNEP Headquarters in Nairobi from 21 to 24 November 1995. The Agenda of the meeting is given in Annex 1.
2. The attendance at the Expert Meeting is shown in Annex 2. The 14 experts invited by the organizers were selected on the basis of their specialized knowledge and their role in the management of forest resources in their country. They were from dry-zone African countries presently not involved in any international initiative on formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. Observers included representatives from ongoing initiatives on the development of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management at national level (Helsinki Process) and at the forest management, unit level (CIFOR, ATO), intergovernmental organizations (IGADD, UNDP/UNSO) and from NGO's (IUCN, Ecoterra, etc.).
3. The focus of the meeting was on the sustainable management of the mixed forest/grassland formations and other woody vegetation types in dry zone Africa, south of the Sahara. FAO plans to organize in 1996 a similar expert meeting in collaboration with other, concerned international organizations to address the same issues in the Near East and North Africa region.
4. The objectives of the expert meeting were to review, discuss and report to the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, and/or any other fora as appropriate, on the following issues:
(i) Relevance for the dry-zone African countries of the general aims and objectives of the on-going international initiatives for the formulation of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management at the national level, and their applicability to the ecological, economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations of the countries in the region.
(ii) Specific aspects of, and conditions for, sustainable forest management in dry-zone African countries not presently covered in such initiatives.
(iii) Validity for dry-zone African countries of existing, defined criteria and national level indicators of sustainable forest management, identified in ongoing international and regional initiatives.
(iv) In light of prevailing needs and management objectives in the ecological region under review, identification of additional or complementary criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in dry-zone African countries applicable at national level.
(v) Strategy, modalities and a proposed time-frame for the promotion of action at regional and national level of a process aimed at facilitating possible efforts in the start-up of initiatives for the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in dry-zone african countries.
<section>4</section>
II. Opening of the Meeting
(Agenda Item 1)
5. The meeting was opened by Mr. Jaime Hurtubia, Biodiversity Programme Manager at UNEP. In his Opening Statement, Mr. Hurtubia welcomed the participants on behalf of Ms. E. Dowdeswell, Executive Director of UNEP.
6. Mr. Hurtubia stressed that the meeting was timely planned, as it underscored the importance the international community attached to sustainable forest management in the region. He also emphasized that the meeting was designed to facilitate an open dialogue among experts, and that it would make a direct contribution to the technical discussions in moving towards the development and utilization of shared criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa.
7. Mr. Hurtubia reiterated the call made in both the Forest Principles and in Chapter 11 of Agenda 21, to identify measurable criteria and indicators for the evaluation of how countries are progressing in their efforts to follow the principles of sustainable forest management. The meeting was informed that the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development placed this activity as a top priority during its first session (11-15 September 1995). The speaker also briefly recalled the many activities and initiatives on this subject before and after the Earth Summit in Rio, such as the Montreal and Helsinki processes and the ITTO Guidelines.
8. Mr. Hurtubia underlined the importance of the FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting on the Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, which was held in Rome in February 1995, and of the Rome Ministerial Meeting on Forestry (16-17 March 1995) to involve those countries which had not to date been part of any of the ongoing international initiatives on this subject, in a process for developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. In particular, the speaker emphasized on dry-zone sub-Saharan Africa.
9. Mr. Lanly, Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division, welcomed in his opening statement the participants in the name of Mr. D. Harcharik, Assistant Director-General of the Forestry Department of FAO, and informed them of Mr. Harcharik's participation at the closing session, underlining hereby the importance given by FAO to this meeting. Mr. Lanly further expressed his appreciation for UNEP's continuing and constructive collaboration with FAO in the furtherance of sustainable forest management, in the spirit of agreements reached at the Earth Summit, and the follow-up recommendations from the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF).
10. Mr. Lanly noted that, since the Earth Summit, the issue of sustainable forest management was a much debated topic within the international community. The forestry concept of sustained yield, considered in a broad sense, covering wood and other goods and services, was germane to that of sustainable forest management. He noted that society had the right to challenge foresters on their performance in managing forest resources. Such performance had to be assessed on the basis of well-identified criteria and indicators, which were acceptable to all parties involved with the conservation and utilization of forest resources. Hence the importance of defining and developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at both the national and the forest management unit level.
11. Mr. Lanly mentioned further that dry-zone Africa was the most important eco-region presently not yet involved in current ongoing international initiatives in this field. He emphasized the ecological and socio-economic specificity of this region and underlined the importance of the meeting as the initial step of a process of development and utilization of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management by the countries of the region. He informed the participants that the deliberations of the meeting would be made available to forthcoming high level inter-governmental meetings, including the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission (27 November - 1 December 1995).
<section>5</section>
III. Election of Chairman and Rapporteurs
(Agenda Item 3)
12. The meeting elected Mr. Papa N. Sall as Chairman and Messrs. Cyrille Kabore and R.E.L. Ole-Meiludie as Rapporteurs. Mr. J.P. Lanly of FAO and Mr. B. Taal of UNEP served as Secretaries for the meeting.
<section>6</section>
IV. Adoption of Agenda
(Agenda Item 2) 13. The Provisional Agenda as proposed by the Secretariat was adopted (see Annex 1).
<section>7</section>
V. Overview of Existing International Schemes of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management
(Agenda Item 4)
14. FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note, Part I: "General Review of the International Initiatives on the Formulation of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management at National Level"^/1 was presented by Mr. B. Taal from UNEP. The meeting was thoroughly briefed on subsequent developments so far in the four international initiatives covered by the paper, which are: the Helsinki Process, the Montreal Process, the "Tarapoto Proposal on Criteria and Indicators of Sustainability for the Amazon Forest", and the initiatives taken by the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) regarding sustainable forest management.
1/The full version of this FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note (Part I and II) is available from the Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO and from UNEP (in English and French). A shortened version of this Note is given in Annex 3.
15. The meeting was further informed about activities carried out by a number of both governmental agencies and national and international non-governmental organizations, including those of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) in developing principles and standards for sustainable forest management at the forest management unit level.
16. In addition, the meeting was briefed on the support provided by FAO and UNEP to the process of developing criteria and indicators and on the role these two organizations played in facilitating a dialogue among on-going initiatives. The participants were fully informed on: (i) the outcome of the FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting on the Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management; (ii) the recommendations of the 12th Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO) on the report of the above expert meeting; (iii) the "Rome Statement on Forestry" by the Ministerial Meeting on Forestry regarding the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and the need to involve countries and eco-regions presently not participating in any of those initiatives; (iv) the work programme of the recently established Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) by the CSD regarding its role in the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable
forest management and its support to help promote a dialogue and compatibility among the existing international initiatives. Information on an expert meeting on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in the Near East Region (Cairo, October 1996) and on a similar meeting planned for the Central American countries (venue and timing of meeting still to be decided) was also provided to the participants.
17. The participants were briefed by a representative from the Helsinki Process on the experience gained so far by the European countries in the development and use of national level criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. The meeting was also informed by a representative from CIFOR on the objectives and preliminary findings of the research work promoted and coordinated by the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) in the field testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level.
<section>8</section>
VI. Discussion on the Relevance, Development and Utilization of Criteria and Indicators for Dry-zone African countries
(Agenda items 5, 6 and 7)
18. To facilitate the discussions, three case studies had been commissioned by FAO to cover the situation, trends and needs in this respect in Western, Eastern and Southern dry-zone Africa (respectively covering countries from the CILSS, IGADD and SADC sub-regions) and were presented by their authors at the meeting. These case studies^1/, elaborated by African experts, review on-going work in the light of possible adaptation of already identified criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management to the environmental conditions, socio-economic needs and institutional possibilities of countries in the region. Based on consultation with colleagues in the countries covered of their respective sub-region, the authors of the case studies also proposed a strategy and timetable for the promotion of action at regional, eco-regional and national levels aiming at identifying and testing common criteria and sets of regionally applicable indicators, with due consideration to the
assessment of the relevance of these to environmental, social and economic conditions in the countries in the region and to the contribution of their application to the overall management of dry-zone forests and woodlands. Mr. Vantomme of FAO presented Part II of the FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note, which included a synthesis of the above case studies (see Annex 3). Finally Mr. Bellefontaine, FAO resource person, presented the preliminary findings of a joint FAO-SAREC global study on the status of tropical dry-zone forest management.
1/ - "Survey of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Tropical Dry Africa, Sub-Saharan West Africa Zone - CILSS Region" by Mounkaila Goumandakoye.
- "Criteria and Indicators of Sustainable Forest Management, Southern Africa Zone (SADC)" by Samuel Chipompha.
- "A Review of Criteria and Indicators of Sustainable Forest Management, Sub-Saharan East African Zone IGADD Countries", by Jeff Odera.
Available from the Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO (English and French).
19. All papers generated interesting discussions on forest management in dry-zone Africa and on the process of developing appropriate criteria and indicators for the region. The participants agreed that this meeting was the first step of a process in the formulation and application of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level in countries of sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa.
20. The participants also agreed that the following principles and guidelines should be taken into account in this process:
- For the concerned countries, the formulation and application of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level was a useful tool to assess, monitor and improve the management of their forest resources.
- At the international level it was particularly important that this part of Africa developed its own criteria and indicators reflecting its specific needs and capacities.
- The prioritization and assigning of hierarchy among the agreed criteria and among indicators in each criterion should be considered at a later stage as, at present, equal importance had been given to all criteria and to all indicators.
- The indicators agreed on by the meeting and presented below in section VII were to be considered of a generic character, without precise definition at this stage of the corresponding quantitative and/or descriptive parameters. The parameters would however have to be defined in the successive stages of the formulation and application process at the regional, sub-regional and national levels. Naturally this process would be a dynamic one which would adjust progressively to conditions prevailing in each country and subregion.
- The finally agreed parameters would have to be defined without ambiguity. The cost of the assessment and monitoring of the parameters should be acceptable to the national institutions involved; and in relation to the expected benefits from the management of the national forest estate.
- The estimates subsequently provided by the countries for the agreed parameters would have to be complemented by information on the methodology and the means used in obtaining them.
21. The meeting recommended that FAO and UNEP bring to the attention, as soon as possible, the recommendations and conclusions of the meeting to their regional intergovernmental bodies for their review and possible endorsement, and particularly at the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and at the Sixth Session of the African Ministerial Conference on Environment.
22. The meeting also recommended that FAO and UNEP inform the CILSS and IGADD Secretariats and the Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit of SADC of its conclusions and recommendations in order for them to take appropriate action to pursue the process at sub-regional level for the formulation of criteria and indicators for Sustainable Forest Management.
23. The meeting recommended that each country be involved in the internalization of the process and that this process be promoted simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels.
24. The meeting underlined the importance of an effective coordination in this field among the three sub-regional organizations.
25. The meeting recommended that the process be actively pursued at regional, sub-regional and national levels in order to be taken into account in the programme of work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
26. The meeting recommended that the criteria agreed on at regional, sub-regional and national levels be the same and that for each criterion, indicators be added at the sub-regional and national levels to those adopted at the regional level to reflect the specific conditions of the sub-regions and countries concerned.
27. The meeting further recommended that the process identifies first a minimum set of simple indicators which can be later on complemented and refined gradually on the basis of the experience obtained through testing and application.
28. The meeting finally recommended that every effort be made by all concerned to promote the exchange of information and experience with the relevant on-going processes in this field, through, in particular, the participation of their experts in meetings organized within the framework of this process; and that the various stakeholders, including NGOs and the private sector, be involved at the various levels and in the various phases of this process, in a participatory and transparent manner.
<section>9</section>
VII. Proposed Criteria and Indicators at regional scale
(i.e. for the group of countries of Sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa)
Criterion 1: Maintenance and improvement of FOREST RESOURCES, including their contribution to global carbon cycles.
1. Total areas of forests, plantations and other wooded lands (and their changes over time)^1/
2. Biomass (and its changes over time).
^1/ At forest management unit level an indicator on the area of grazing lands would be useful
Criterion 2: Conservation and enhancement of BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY in forest ecosystems.
Ecosystem Indicators:
1. Areas by types of vegetation (natural and man-made)
2. Extent of protected areas
3. Fragmentation of forests
4. Area cleared annually of forest ecosystems containing endemic species.
Species Indicators:
5. Number of forest dependent species (and its changes over time)
6. Number of forest dependent species at risk
7. Resources exploitation systems^2/used.
^2/ Indicators such as licensing cycle, allowable cut and pattern of coupes can provide useful information on the impact on key species.
Genetic Indicators (fauna, flora):
8. Average number of provenances (and its change over time)
9. Number of forest dependent species with reduced range
10. Population levels of key species across their range
11. Management of genetic resources.
Criterion 3: Maintenance of forest ecosystem HEALTH. VITALITY AND INTEGRITY.
1. Areas and percentages of forest (natural and man-made) modified, with the indication of the severity of damage, by such processes and agents as:
- fires (incl. frequency)
- storms (incl. windthrow, flooded areas)
- insects and diseases
- damage by wild animals
- damage by domesticated animals
- competition from introduced plants
- drought
- damage by wind erosion
2. Percentages of forest ecosystems with or without regeneration
3. Changes in nutrient balance and soil acidity
4. Bush encroachment
5. Trends in crop yields
6. Percentage of the population employed in crop and livestock farming.
Criterion 4: Maintenance and enhancement of PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS of forests and other wooded lands.
1. Percentage of forests and other wooded lands managed according to a management plan
2. Growing stock
3. Annual balance between growth and removals of wood products (and its change over time)
4. Average annual consumption of wood for energy per capita
5. Managed and sustainable extraction of non-wood forest products (and its changes over time^1/) of:
^1/ As in Indicator (3) above, measured as annual balance between production and removals of products.
- fodder (grass layer and fodder from trees/shrubs)
- consumptive wildlife utilization
- honey
- gum
- miscellaneous fruits, roots and edible leaves
- medicinal substances
- fibres for handy crafts and other uses.
Criterion 5: Maintenance and improvement of PROTECTION FUNCTIONS in forest management.
1. Areas and percentages of forests and other wooded lands managed mainly for the protection and/or rehabilitation of agricultural or range lands, and/or rehabilitation of degraded lands and relevant important infrastructure works
2. Areas and percentages of forests and other wooded areas managed mainly for the production of water, protection of watersheds, riverine zones and for flood control.
3. Areas of forests and other wooded lands managed for scenic and amenity purposes.
Criterion 6: Maintenance and enhancement of SOCIO-ECONOMIC BENEFITS.
Indicators of economic benefits:
1. value of wood products
2. value of non-wood forest products
3. ecotourism (including hunting and recreation)
4. share of forest sector in GNP
5. value from primary and secondary industries
6. value from biomass energy
7. forest sector trade balance
8. investment in forests and forest industries.
Indicators of the distribution of benefits:
9. employment generation, notably in rural areas
10. degree to which social, cultural and spiritual needs are met
11. benefits accruing to local communities (with particular emphasis on women and youth)
12. contributions to food security.
Criterion 7: Adequacy of LEGAL. INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICIES FRAMEWORKS for sustainable forest management.
1. Existence of a national forest policy including the integration of forest management in rural land-use planning and development
2. Existence of a comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework providing for equitable access to resources, alternative forms of conflict resolution and consideration of land occupancy and cultural rights of local populations
3. Institutional, human and financial capacity to implement the national forestry policy, and relevant national and international laws, instruments and regulations
4. Research and development capacity
5. Existence of incentives for investments in the forestry sector
6. Valorization of local expertise, knowledge and technologies
7. Existence of measures to facilitate the transfer and adaptation of appropriate technologies
8. Existence of an administrative, policy and legal framework for the effective participation of local communities, NGOs and the private sector in forest policy formulation, implementation and monitoring.
<section>a</section>
ANNEX 1. Agenda
1. Opening of the Meeting
2. Adoption of the Agenda
3. Election of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Rapporteurs (2)
4. Overview of Existing International Schemes of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management (FAO/UNEP)
5. Presentation and discussion of the Background Papers on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management for Dry-Zone Africa by sub-region:
5.1 - Countries in the West African Sahelian region (CILSS)
5.2 - Countries in Eastern Africa (IGADD)
5.3 - Countries in Southern Africa (SADC)
6. Overview, relevance and applicability of existing Criteria and Indicators to Dry-Zone African countries (FAO/UNEP)
7. Discussion on the development and utilization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management for Dry-Zone African countries
8. Conclusions and Recommendations
9. Adoption of the Report
10. Closing of the Meeting
<section>b</section>
ANNEX 2. List of Participants
1. NATIONAL EXPERTS
Mr. Mounkaila Goumandakoye
Directeur
Direction de l'Environnement
Ministère de l'Hydraulique et de l'Environnement B.P. 12091 Niamey, Niger
Fax: 227 732784/227 734962
Tel: 227 723362
Mr. Jeff Odera
Chief Research Scientist
Kenya Forestry Research Institute
P.O. Box 20412
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 14 32844/254 2 727584
Tel: 254 1432541
Mr. Salomon Chipompha
Deputy Director of Forestry
SADC
Forestry Department
P.O. Box 30048
Lilongwe 3, Malawi
Fax: 265 784 268
Tel: 265 781 000
Mr. Cyrille Kabore
Ingénieur Forestier
Ministère de l'Environnement et de l'Eau
B.P. 7044
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
Fax: 226 310084
Tel: 226 307207/226 334098
Mr. David Everard
Project Leader
Natural Resources and Development
Programme Division of Forest Science and Technology, CSIR
P.O. Box 395
Pretoria 0001, South Africa
Fax: 27 12 841 2689
Tel: 27 12 841 3444
Mr. Gaafar El Faki Ali Elamin
Director
National Energy Research Institute
P.O. Box 4025
Khartoum, Sudan
Fax: 249 11 44075
Tel: 249 11 44075
Mr. Christopher Shikaputo
Chief Forester
Directorate of Forestry
P.O. Box 333
Grootfontein, Namibia
Fax: 264 6731 3389
Tel: 264 6731 2128
Mr. Diarré Soulyemane
National Expert
Projet Forêt et Securité Alimentaire
B.P 208 Sikasso, Mali
Fax: 223 620681
Tel: 223 620409
Mr. Amadou Maiga
Chef de Division des Ressources Forestières
Direction Nationale des Ressources Forestières
Bamako, Mali
Fax: 223 224199
Tel: 223 225850
Mr. Papa N. Sall
Directeur, Recherche Forestière
Institut Senegalais de Recherche Agricole
Direction des Recherches sur les Productions Forestières (CILSS-IUFRO)
B.P. 2312
Dakar, Senegal
Fax: 221 329617
Tel: 221 321638
Prof. R.E.L. Ole-Meiludie
Coordinator SADC
Centre for Practical Forestry Training
P.O. Box 12173
Arusha, Tanzania
Fax: 255 51 44211
Tel: 255 51 32979
Ms. Sarah K. Mbithi
Forest Department
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
P.O. Box 30241
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 767944
Tel: 254 2 767028
Prof. J. Mwangi Mokili
Forest Department
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
P.O. Box 56533
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 767944
Tel: 254 2 767028
Mr. P.K.A. Konuche
KEFRI
P.O. Box 20412
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 154 32844
Tel: 254 154 32841
2. OBSERVERS FROM ORGANIZATIONS
Mr. Mohammed Lawal Garba
Secretary General
African Timber Organization
B.P. 1077
Libreville, Gabon
Fax: 241 734030
Tel: 241 732928
Dr. Ravindra Prabhu
CIFOR
Jalan Gunung Batu 5
Bogor 16001, Indonesia
Fax: 62 251 326433
Tel: 62 251 343652
E-Mail: r.prabhu@cgnet.com
Mr. Heikki Granholm
Forestry Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Department of Forest Policy
P.O. Box 232
Helsinki, Finland
Fax: 358 0 1602400
Tel: 358 0 1602431
Mr. Bernard K'Omudho
IGADD
P.O. Box 30126
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 216951
Tel: 254 2 216951
Mr. Ndegwa Ndiang'ui
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO)
P.O. Box 30552
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 520874
Tel: 254 2 622010
Mr. Guido Broekhoven
Coordinator
Forest Conservation Programme
IUCN Eastern Africa Regional Office
P.O. Box 68200
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 2542 890615
Tel: 254 2 890605-12
E-Mail: AGB@EARO.IUCN.CM
Prof. Julian Bauer
ECOTERRA International
P.O. Box 100
Espenau-2, Germany
Fax: 49 711 445500
Tel: 49 551 8205010
Mr. Patrick Mallet
ELCI
P.O. Box 72461
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 562175
Tel: 254 2 562015
E-Mail: pmallet@elci.sasa.unep.no
3. SECRETARIAT
FAO
Mr. D.A. Harcharik
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
FAO, Rome
Mr. Jean-Paul Lanly
Director, Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department, FAO Rome
Mr. Paul Vantomme
Forest Management Officer
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department, FAO Rome
Fax: 39 6 57975137
Tel: 39 6 52254064
Telex: 610181
Email: Paul.Vantomme@FAO.org
Mr. Ronald Bellefontaine
FAO Resource Person
CIRAD-Forêt
45^bis av. Belle Gabrielle
94130 Nogent sur Marne
France
Fax: 33 1 4394 4381
Tel: 33 1 4394 4354
UNEP
Mr. Jaime Hurtubia
Biodiversity Programme Manager
Biodiversity Unit
UNEP
P.O. Box 30552
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623248
E-Mail: Jaime.Hurtubia@unep.no
Mr. Bat-Mass Taal
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623238
E-Mail: Bai-Mass.Taal@unep.no
Mr. Aiko Bode
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623894
E-Mail: Aiko.Bode@unep.no
Ms. Rahab Gikunju
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 624321
E-Mail: Rahab.Gikunju@unep.no
Ms. Miriam Schomaker
Programme Officer
Environment Assessment Division
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 623944
Tel: 254 2 623499
E-Mail: miriam.schomaker@unep.no
<section>c</section>
ANNEX 3. FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in dry-zone Africa^1/
^1/ Organized in collaboration with IUFRO
UNEP Headquarters
Nairobi, Kenya 21-24 November 1995
PART I
GENERAL REVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES ON THE FORMULATION OF CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT AT NATIONAL LEVEL
BACKGROUND
1. The development of criteria and indicators is by far the most significant outcome in the field of forest management from the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED, Rio de Janeiro - 1992). The important contribution of forestry and specifically of forest management for sustainable development was formalized at this Conference through the "Non-Legally Binding Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Develop