<title>PROCESS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INDIAN OCEAN TUNA COMMISSION</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
1. The long-term institutional arrangements for the management of tuna in the Indian Ocean has been discussed by the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC) since its First Session in 1968 and in the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna since 1970. The substantial increase in the catch of tuna and tuna-like species in the 1980s prompted serious discussions at the Ninth Session of the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna in 1986. This marked the beginning of a serious attempt towards establishing a commission with appropriate structure and power to manage the tunas of the Indian Ocean. The Committee set up a small ad hoc group of nations to review in detail the options available for the long-term institutional arrangements for the management of tuna in the Indian Ocean.
2. The First Government Consultation, held in Rome in May 1987, had an exploratory mission. It discussed in rather general terms the issues related to the institutional arrangements for the management of tuna in the Indian Ocean. A Second Government Consultation held in Bangkok, Thailand, in March 1988 made substantial progress in identifying the issues which were contentious and needed elaboration. Following formal and informal discussions and negotiations, the First Conference for the Adoption of a Draft Agreement for the Establishment of the India Ocean Tuna Commission under Article XIV of FAO Constitution was held in Rome in 1989. The Conference considered that further amendments to the text were needed in order to improve the Draft Agreement. The outstanding issues at this stage were the membership (in view of the interest of the European Community), funding and the powers of the Commission.
3. In 1991, the Basic Texts of FAO were amended, paving the way for the European Community (EC) to become a member of the Organization, as well as granting more power to bodies established under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The Second Conference whi94ch was held in Rome in June 1992 reached broad agreement on the Text of the Draft Agreement. The Draft Agreement for the Establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission was finally adopted by the FAO Council in 1993 and circulated in 1994. It entered into force in 1996. The present document describes the origin and the long process by which the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) was established.
<section>2</section>
I. CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF TUNA IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
I.1 The Establishment of the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC), 1967
4. The Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC) was established by Resolution 2/48 of the FAO Council at its Forty-eighth Session in September 1967. The Council in setting up the Commission noted that "the Indian Ocean is an area as yet inadequately served by international fishery bodies" and that "the need for collective action for the development and rational utilization of the fishery resources of the area had been established". The mandate of the Commission is:
(a) To promote, assist and coordinate national programmes over the entire field of fishery development and conservation;
(b) to promote research and development activities in the area through international sources, in particular through international aid programmes;
(c) to examine management problems, with special emphasis on the management of offshore resources.
5. Its area of competence is the Indian Ocean and adjacent seas excluding the Antarctic area. The species covered by the Commission are all living marine resources. Its membership is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. At its First Session held in Rome in September 1968, the Commission reviewed the state of knowledge of the inshore, offshore and oceanic fisheries of the Indian Ocean as well as the status of fishery statistics in the region. The Commission decided that the improvement of fishery statistics for the region was a matter of fundamental priority. It also agreed that high priority should be given to the management of heavily exploited stocks.
I.2 IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna, 1968
6. At its First Session, the Commission established the Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna the membership of which consisted of Australia, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea (Republic of), Sri Lanka, Tanzania and USA. The Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna was given the following mandate:
"To assist IOFC in its consideration of the steps required to introduce management measures for heavily exploited stocks of tuna when these measures are found necessary".
The Committee held its First Session in Rome, in October 1970.
7. In November of that year, the Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission (IPFC) (Fourteenth Session, 18-27 November 1970, Bangkok, Thailand), now Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC) , also decided to establish the IPFC Special Committee on Management of Indo-Pacific Tuna. From 1971 to 1980 the two Committees held six Joint Sessions as follows:
1st joint meeting of the Committees: 22-23 April 1971, Rome, Italy
2nd joint meeting of the Committees: 5-6 October 1972, Colombo, Sri Lanka
3rd joint meeting of the Committees: 18-19 July 1975, Mombasa, Kenya
4th joint meeting of the Committees: 29-30 October 1976, Colombo, Sri Lanka
5th joint meeting of the Committees: 3-4 March 1978, Manila, Philippines
6th joint meeting of the Committees: 21-22 February 1980, Perth, Australia
At its Twenty-first Session in 1984, the IPFC decided that in view of the scientific information concerning the low degree of interaction between the Indian Ocean and Pacific Tuna stocks, it was unnecessary to continue the practice of convening joint meetings.
8. During this period, the review and assessment of the state of tuna in the areas covered by the two Committees were based mainly on the reports of the IOFC/IPFC Ad hoc Working Party of Scientists on Stock Assessment of Tuna, reports of several expert consultations and workshops on various aspects relating to tuna and the ad hoc meetings and reports by some members on their tuna activities. By 1980, the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna had acquired substantial information on the state of tuna and the trends of tuna fisheries in the region. Apart from monitoring tuna fishing activities and reviewing the state of tuna, the Committees did not recommend any specific management measures although they repeatedly emphasized that the longline fishery should be reduced in the Indian Ocean. The question of management of tuna and some form of proper arrangements was never off the agenda of the Committees.
9. At its Sixth Session (Perth, Australia, 1980), IOFC made the membership of the Committee open-ended so that any member of the Commission could become a member of the Committee. The terms of reference of the Committee were also revised at this Session:
(i) to review the state of the stocks of tuna, particularly in relation to the level of exploitation and likely development;
(ii) to consider the boundaries of the area that have to be taken into account in any management of tuna, bearing in mind particularly the movement of fish and fishing vessels;
(iii) to review measures that might be considered for the planning, management and development of the tuna fisheries and to suggest the administrative and other actions that would be required to put such measures into effect; and
(iv) to consider arrangements for ensuring the continuation and coordination of the necessary research and the continuing re-assessment of the state of the stocks.
The Committee did not resume its regular sessions until 1985. By then the Indo-Pacific Tuna Development and Management Programme which had become operational early in 1982 was in a position to provide information to and receive guidance from the Committee on most technical and scientific aspects related to Indian Ocean tuna.
I.3 Recent Trends in Tuna Fisheries in the Indian Ocean
10. Until the beginning of the 1980s, there was a gradual but steady increase in the catches of tuna and tuna-like species in the Indian Ocean. The fisheries consisted of small-scale or artisanal fisheries by coastal countries in the region as well as industrial fisheries from Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan (Province of China). Following the establishment of the 200 nautical miles Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) most of the fisheries resources fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of coastal States. In order to have access to these resources many industrial fishing nations concluded fisheries agreements with coastal States, allowing them to fish in their EEZs. This was particularly significant in the case of tuna fisheries in the Indian Ocean. In the early eighties, following the conclusion of a number of bilateral fisheries agreements between the EC and the coastal countries in the region, the EC tuna fleet moved to the western part of the Indian Ocean in
substantial
numbers. Port Victoria in Seychelles became, and still remains, the most important port for transhipment in the Western Indian Ocean.
11. The total catch of tuna and tuna-like species in the Indian Ocean rose steadily from around 150 000 t in the early 1960s to 238 616 t in 1975. They continued to rise from 306 905 t in 1980 to 566 231 in 1985 and again to 981 319 t in 1993 (see figure 1). The landings from the Western Indian Ocean (FAO Statistical Area 51) increased from 261 168 t in 1983 to 429 434 t in 1985 and again to 782 104 t in 1993.
12. Yellowfin and skipjack are the main two species targeted by distant-water fishing nations (DWFNs). In 1975 the total catch of yellowfin in the Indian Ocean was 28 390 t rising steadily to 34 064 t in 1980 and to 103 924 t in 1985, and increasing substantially to 349 935 t in 1993. During the same period, the total catch of skipjack rose from 35 165 t in 1975 to 45 835 t in 1980, to 141 475 t in 1985 and to 250 460 t in 1993 (see figure 2).
I.4 Indo-Pacific Tuna Development and Management Programme (IPTP)
13. In the latter part of the seventies the need for coordination and implementation of tuna fishery development as well as management and investigation activities in the Indian and Pacific Oceans had been discussed by both IPFC and IOFC. At the Sixth Joint Meeting of the IOFC and IPFC Tuna Management Committees in 1980, it was recommended that funding should be sought to initiate such a broad coordination and implementation programme.
14. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) tuna project, based in Manila, Philippines, which ended in 1981 provided a professional officer and a consultant to begin investigation of data availability and quality in the coastal and island nations of the area and to review the need for a broad-based development and management programme. The preparatory assistance phase of project INT/81/034 recruited a Programme Director and Statistician and provided the necessary equipment to establish a permanent headquarters for the project in Colombo, Sri Lanka in early 1982. These activities led to the UNDP funding of an Indo-Pacific Tuna Development and Management Programme which ended in June 1984 and then periodically extended. Since 1990 funding has come entirely from a cost sharing arrangement between participating countries and the EC under the UNDP Programme. The main objective of IPTP has been to establish a tuna data centre as a basis for the management and development
of tuna fisheries in the region.
15. To complement the IPTP, FAO established a Trust Fund in 1980. A Five-Year Project, "Investigation on Indian Ocean and Western Pacific Small Tuna Resources (GCP/RAS/099/JPN)", was developed and Japanese funding was secured. Since then the project has been funded by Japan and other donors as well as participating countries.
w1750e01.jpg (50553 byte)
Source: IPTP, Reports of Expert Consultations on Stock Assessment of Tuna in the Indian Ocean
16. Since it became operational, IPTP has contributed substantially to the work of the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna which resumed its regular sessions in 1985. Until the last session of the Committee, which was held in 1990, IPTP acted as its scientific body undertaking various activities during intersessional periods and organizing expert consultations on Indian Ocean tunas prior to the Committee's meetings. The Expert Consultations have been held regularly, the latest of which was held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, in September 1995.
<section>3</section>
II. DISCUSSIONS AND PROGRESS ON POSSIBLE OPTIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDIAN OCEAN TUNA MANAGEMENT BODY BY IOFC AND THE IOFC COMMITTEE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF INDIAN OCEAN TUNA
II.1 Background
17. Detailed discussions on the institutional arrangements that would be most suitable for the formulation, adoption and implementation of management measures took place at the First Session of the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna in 1970, at the Second Session of IOFC in October 1970, at the First and Second Joint meetings of the IOFC and IPFC Tuna Committees in 1971 and 1972 respectively, and at the Third Session of IOFC in 1973. The views expressed on the occasion of these meetings may be summarized as follows:
(i) Two delegations were of the opinion that it was necessary to create a new body similar to the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC) and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). It was essential that all countries concerned with tuna fisheries should become full members of the management body. This would be possible in the case of an independent body, while certain of the countries concerned were not Member Nations of FAO and therefore could not become members of IOFC. They also stated that it was not the role of FAO and of its subsidiary bodies to concern themselves directly with the adoption and implementation of management measures.
(ii) One delegation felt that interim and temporary measures could be discussed and recommended by existing bodies and that FAO should be requested to take steps to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries that might adopt a convention providing for the establishment of an independent tuna management body.
(iii) The other delegations were of the opinion that the unnecessary proliferation of management bodies should be avoided. As IOFC and IPFC had been entrusted with the task of examining management problems, they constituted the most appropriate forum to discuss and recommend management measures. As bodies established within the framework of FAO, IOFC and IPFC were well equipped to fulfil the Organization's role to ensure that fishery resources were utilized for the maximum benefit of the international community and that development and management would be considered as complementary aspects of the single aim of rational utilization of the tuna resources in the areas under review. In the final analysis, it would be necessary to rely on the good will and sense of cooperation of all countries concerned.
18. In the following years, delegations maintained the same positions and apart from discussions on financing secretariat activities, institutional aspects were not given special attention again until 1978. At their Fifth Joint Meeting in 1978, the IOFC and IPFC Tuna Committees discussed the issue and felt that the three following options could be considered:
(a) to provide for a better system of collection, analysis and dissemination of data and statistics at both the national and international levels with no additional institutional arrangements at this time;
(b) to strengthen the present IPFC secretariat or establish a separate tuna management secretariat within IPFC,
(c) to establish a separate body by treaty concluded outside the framework of FAO.
19. The Committees agreed that the state of development of tuna management activities was well beyond the stage referred to in option (a), while option (c), although possibly a long-term solution, involved complex political considerations that could not be addressed at that meeting. Option (b) had substantial support and it was proposed that action be taken in this regard in stages. Within the purview of option (b), the Committees recommended that FAO should prepare short- and long-term tuna management schemes, in consultation with all member countries of IOFC and IPFC and with the assistance of a tuna management specialist. The relevant proposals should be submitted to the next meeting of the Tuna Committees of IOFC and IPFC in 1980.
20. The question of financing the data collection and other activities required to allow for the management of tunas was also discussed by the joint meeting of the IOFC and IPFC Tuna Management Committees. At their Second Joint Meeting in 1972, the issue was discussed briefly without reaching any conclusion. At their Third Joint Meeting in 1975 the Committees emphasized that the development and introduction of management measures would require substantial funding but that the amount involved would be far exceeded by the cost of failing to manage. The Committees agreed that whichever structure for management decision would be finally adopted, it was necessary to prepare detailed proposals for financing that structure in the short and long-term. The Committees established a small ad hoc Committee of Nations to prepare statements on the functions, methods of operation and financing of a joint IOFC/IPFC secretariat. It must be noted that at this time the financing was only
discussed in the context of management functions being conducted by the two Committees.
21. The ad hoc Committee of Nations met twice in 1975 and agreed that the figure of US$ 300,000 annually presented by the Secretariat for an "austerity" budget for central technical support, was reasonable and could be used as general guidelines. Although there were several views as to how the cost should be shared, it was generally accepted that the principle of "user pays" should be adopted. This proposal was considered by the IPFC and IOFC Committees on tuna management at their Fourth Joint Meeting in 1976 and although some countries were of the opinion that funding should be provided by FAO and UNDP, there was general agreement that in the long term funding should be on the principle of "user pays". This was also the opinion of IPFC and IOFC. When the two tuna Committees met for their Fifth Joint Meeting in 1978, they decided that the tuna management activities should be carried out within the framework of IPFC and IOFC and furthermore, they considered that the original
proposal for a budget in the order of US$ 300 000 was far too ambitious.
22. The question of institutional arrangements for the management of the Indian Ocean tunas was not discussed by either IOFC or its Committee on Tuna Management until 1986. Two developments necessitated the serious consideration of this issue. First, as described in paragraphs 5 and 6 there was a substantial increase in the landings of tunas from the Indian Ocean. The increase which was due mainly to increased tuna fishing activities by DWFNs in the region prompted some coastal States to reiterate their concern over the lack of a proper management body to regulate tuna fishing in the region. The second development was that, by 1986, the IPTP data centre in Colombo had gathered substantial information on various aspects of tuna in the Indian Ocean and was becoming increasingly competent to provide scientific information for management consideration. In addition UNDP had repeatedly indicated that the funding for IPTP should come from the members and that the UNDP funding would
terminate in 1989.
23. At its Ninth Session (Colombo, Sri Lanka, December 1986) the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna noted that the present institutional arrangements (i.e., a subsidiary body of a commission created under Article VI of the FAO Constitution complemented by a field project funded partly by UNDP and partly by member countries and EC) were satisfactory to meet the present needs. Several delegations expressed their concern, however, about the adequacy of these arrangements after the termination of the project. Bearing in mind the time required for changing the present structure, if needed, the Committee felt that it was not too early to start thinking about the various options available. It agreed to set up a small ad hoc group, made up of France, Japan, Seychelles, Sri Lanka and Thailand, to review in detail these options and make recommendations to the next session. The Committee also decided that in view of the growing involvement of the EC in the tuna
fishery in the Indian Ocean, the EC should be invited to participate in the work of the ad hoc group in an observer capacity. The Committee further requested the ad hoc group to inter alia consider and recommend options which would allow the EC to participate fully in any decision-making process involving questions for which the EC member States had transferred their competence to the Community.
II.2 First Government Consultation on Long-term Institutional Arrangements for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna, 1987
24. The First Government Consultation was held at FAO Headquarters in Rome on 15 and 21 May 1987. It was attended by delegates from the five Member Nations selected by the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna at its Ninth Session. Representatives of the UNDP and the EC also attended as observers. Although the issue of institutional arrangement for the management of tuna in the Indian Ocean had been discussed by IOFC and by the IOFC and IPFC Tuna Committees in the past, those discussions had been fragmented and touched only upon certain aspects of the issue. The Government Consultation, on the other hand, had been entrusted to discuss all aspects of the long-term institutional arrangements for the management of Indian Ocean tuna; a task which was taken very seriously with total commitment on the part of the participants.
25. The Consultation had before it a comprehensive document (IOFC/TML/87/2, April 1987) which had been prepared by the Secretariat of the Consultation on Long-term Institutional Arrangements for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna. The Consultation noted that this document had identified three broad options for institutional mechanism to deal with the management of the Indian Ocean tunas.
(i) continuation and strengthening of the present arrangements, i.e., a subsidiary body of an FAO Commission receiving support from field projects financed by extra-budgetary funds;
(ii) creation of a new structure within the framework of FAO either under Article VI.I or under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution; and
(iii) establishment of a new body by a treaty concluded outside the framework of FAO.
26. After an exchange of views, the Consultation decided that before making any recommendation in favour of any of the options mentioned above, it was necessary to analyse some concrete issues (membership, powers, funding, etc.) which would have a direct bearing on the choice of the legal framework. The Consultation, therefore, discussed all the issues in the following order:
(a) Areas and species to be covered
27. The Consultation noted that at present the area of competence of the Committee was the same as its parent body, i.e. the Indian Ocean and adjacent seas, excluding Antarctica. It agreed that the future institutional arrangements should cover the same area, corresponding to FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57. One delegation stressed that all species of tuna occurring in the area should be covered. Other delegations advised that the matter should be carefully discussed and that it would be necessary to list the species to be dealt with by the new management body, bearing in mind the present arrangements and the relevant provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
(b) Membership
28. It was recalled that Article 64 of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which deals with highly migratory species, calls upon coastal States and other States whose nationals fish in a region for such species to cooperate directly or through appropriate international organizations with a view to ensuring conservation and promoting the objective of optimum utilization of such species throughout the region. The Consultation noted that some of the States whose nationals fish in the Indian Ocean for highly migratory species were not members of FAO, but that such States which were members of the United Nations or any of its Specialized Agencies could become full members of an FAO body established under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution.
29. Some delegations expressed their preference for opening membership only to the two categories referred to above while others considered that the participation of countries which could contribute substantially to the scientific knowledge of Indian Ocean tuna stocks would also be desirable. The Consultation hoped that the legal difficulties which at present prevented the EC from becoming a member of FAO fishery bodies could be overcome. The Consultation was informed that this question was under consideration by the competent organs of the EC. The EC Representative explained that full membership of EC would be important for the following reasons (i) its exclusive competence to implement conservation measures, (ii) its bilateral fishery agreements with some States in the region, and (iii) its financial rules for making long-term contributions.
(c) Functions
30. Most participants in the Consultation agreed that the future institutional arrangements should provide for full management functions. They felt that the new body should be able to recommend appropriate management measures on the basis of the best scientific information available. Some delegations strongly emphasized the need for the new body to deal with development aspects and to help coastal countries to participate more actively and more directly in the tuna fishery in the region. One delegation, while recognizing the importance of development aspects, felt that the Consultation had to concentrate on management aspects.
(d) Powers
31. The Consultation acknowledged that, under the existing arrangements, the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna was empowered to make recommendations which, once formally endorsed by the Commission, were transmitted for appropriate action to its Member Nations by the Director-General of FAO. It felt that, if a new body was entrusted with more explicit management functions, it should also be given stronger powers, including the possibility to formulate recommendations which might become binding upon member countries unless an objection was lodged within a given period. It was noted that the adoption of such a procedure was possible for bodies established under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution.
(e) Funding
32. The Consultation devoted particular attention to this problem. It noted that the choice of a legal framework would have very important consequences on the funding of the new body. The Consultation was informed that, if it were decided to choose option (a) or (b) indicated in paragraph 25 above, the FAO Regular Programme could continue to provide some basic support, at least at the same level as in the previous years. On the other hand, should option (c) be favoured, FAO financial support could not be continued and FAO could only provide some very limited technical assistance to the new body (e.g. sending officers to attend, in an observer capacity, meetings of the new body). Option (c) would, however, allow the EC to contribute on a continuing basis to the budget of the new body for those activities for which it had been given competence by its member countries, whereas, if option (a) or (b) were adopted, the EC could only consider contributing to specific activities on
a case-by-case basis but could not participate in the funding of a permanent administrative structure.
33. It was recognized that, in all cases, financial contributions should be required from participating countries. The Consultation took note, with interest, of the information provided on the funding systems adopted by other international organizations dealing with tuna management in other regions of the world. It discussed various formulae but could not elaborate on a detailed recommendation concerning this matter. It was agreed that the volume of the catches should be one of the factors to be taken into account for assessing countries' contributions.
34. It was however unanimously recognized that this factor should be complemented by other factors such as the level of development (e.g., GNP), the commercial value of the catches, the importance of the industry processing tuna from the region, and the incomes derived from bilateral access agreements. A distinction could also be made depending on the nature of the fisheries operations which would alleviate the financial burden of countries with artisanal fisheries. The Consultation requested the Secretariat to work out possible formulae for submission to the next Consultation.
(f) Legal Framework
35. Bearing in mind all the above considerations, the Consultation was unable to reach consensus on any of the three options referred to in paragraph 25 above. The delegations of two developing coastal States felt that the continuation of a substantial FAO involvement was essential. This could, in their view, be achieved through the establishment of a new body under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The delegate from another developing coastal State found that the third option was the most interesting because it was the only one allowing for full EC membership. The EC representative stressed that the Community had been given exclusive competence on fishery management by its member countries and should be able to participate fully in the future international mechanism for the management of tuna in the Indian Ocean. The representative noted that this would not be possible within the existing FAO legal framework and expressed preference for the establishment of a new body by
a Treaty concluded outside the framework of FAO.
CONCLUSIONS OF THE FIRST CONSULTATION
36. The Consultation made a significant contribution to the setting up of new institutional arrangement for the management and development of Indian Ocean tuna. A number of problems remained to be solved, in particular the issue of membership which was directly linked to the legal framework of the new body, the species to be covered, the extent of power of the new body and finally the financial implications.
37. The Secretariat was instructed to circulate the report of the Consultation and document IOFC/TML/87/2 to all members of the Committee for comment and to prepare additional proposals concerning in particular the institutional framework, the funding options and the species to be covered. Once the comments from other members had been received and the required additional documentation prepared, the five countries participating in the Consultation would meet again in Bangkok, Thailand, in early 1988, to formulate final proposals for the Committee's consideration.
II.3 Second Government Consultation on Long-term Institutional Arrangements for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna, 1988
38. As requested by the First Consultation, the Secretariat sent the Report of the Consultation, document IOFC/TML/87/2 and a letter to all members of the IOFC Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna requesting them to send their comments to the Secretariat before the end of December 1987. The Secretariat received comments from the Governments of Bangladesh, Cuba, Spain, Norway, Thailand, Tanzania, Indonesia and Japan. The views expressed by these Governments can be summarized as follows:
39. On the issue of membership, Bangladesh and Spain were in favour of full membership of the EC in any new arrangement while Japan considered it to be proper to limit membership to the coastal States and the fishing countries directly involved. On the species to be covered, Bangladesh and Indonesia wanted all species of tuna to be covered by the new body. Spain favoured those species listed in the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea while Japan considered it more appropriate to limit the species to skipjack tuna and yellowfin tuna only. On the question of power, those who commented were generally in favour of giving the new body adequate power to deal with conservation and management 