<title>Control of water pollution from agriculture - FAO irrigation and drainage paper 55</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Environmental pollution is a major global concern. When sources of water pollution are enumerated, agriculture is, with increasing frequency, listed as a major contributor. As nations make efforts to correct abuses to their water resources, there is a need to determine the causes of water quality degradation and to quantify pollution contributions from many sources. Until such time as adequate facts are made available through research to delineate causes and sources, conflicting opinions continue to flourish and programmes to control and abate pollution will be less effective and efficient in the use of limited resources.
Existing knowledge indicates that agricultural operations can contribute to water quality deterioration through the release of several materials into water: sediments, pesticides, animal manures, fertilizers and other sources of inorganic and organic matter. Many of these pollutants reach surface and groundwater resources through widespread runoff and percolation and, hence, are called "non-point" sources of pollution. Identification, quantification and control of non-point pollution remain relatively difficult tasks as compared to those of "point" sources of pollution.
FAO's mandate is to raise levels of nutrition and standards of living of people and, in implementing this mandate, it promotes agricultural development and national food security. FAO is equally committed to sustainable development and, hence, has given top priority to sustainable agricultural development. In this context, the Organization recognizes the key role of water in agricultural development and implements a comprehensive Regular Programme on Water Resources Development and Management. One of the thematic areas of this programme is water quality management which includes, among others, the control of water pollution from agricultural activities, with particular reference to non-point sources.
It is under the framework of these Regular Programme activities of the Organization that the preparation of a "guidelines" document on control and management of agricultural water pollution is initiated. The objective is to delineate the nature and consequences of agricultural impacts on water quality, and to provide a framework for practical measures to be undertaken by relevant professionals and decision-makers to control water pollution.
The Organization recognizes that the preparation of the guidelines is only the beginning in the long process of assisting Member Nations to build national capacity and implement programmes on the control of agricultural water pollution. The publication will be disseminated widely among Member Nations and relevant regional and international organizations. It is intended that this will be followed by regional and national workshops, with the mobilization of extra-budgetary sources of funds for this purpose.
The Organization recognizes the contribution of the Canada Centre for Inland Waters, Environment Canada, and the expertise of Dr E. Ongley in the preparation of this document.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This publication was prepared as a follow up to FAO's commitment to integrated water management within the framework of sustainable development and food security. This framework was strengthened following the United Conference on Environment and Development, 1992, and links with other water programmes of United Nations specialized agencies such as UNEP, WHO and the GEMS/Water Programme.
The author wishes to acknowledge the assistance of many professionals of FAO for their inspiration and cooperation in developing the framework and locating references. In particular, the wise counsel of Drs Arumugam Kandiah, Hans Wolter and Robert Brinkman of the Land and Water Development Division, is much appreciated. Dr Desmond Walling of the University Exeter, graciously reviewed the draft manuscript and provided useful comment and suggestions for improvement. Much appreciation is extended to the many others within FAO and from other agencies who also reviewed the manuscript. Thanks are also due to Mr J.G. Kamphuis for reviewing and editing the document and Ms C. Redfern for formatting and preparing the text for final printing.
The sections on data issues and integrated basin management are largely drawn from experiences gained through the author's participation in the UNEP/WHO GEMS/Water Programme in many developing countries. Material on environmental information systems reflects the author's long association with Dr David Lam and his staff at the Canada Centre for Inland Waters and Dr David Swain of the University of Guelph.
<section>3</section>
Acronyms of institutes and programmes
CCREM
Canadian Council of Resource and Environment Ministers
ECE
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
EEA
European Environment Agency
EEC
European Economic Community
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GEMS
Global Environmental Monitoring System
GESAMP
Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution
IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency
ICWE
International Conference on Water and the Environment
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OMAF
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture and Food
PLUARG
Pollution from Land Use Activities Reference Groups
RIVM
The Netherlands National Institute of Public Health
RIZA
Institute for Inland Water Management and Waste Water Treatment, The Netherlands
UFRGS
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
US-EPA
United States Environmental Protection Agency
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
WB
World Bank
WHO
World Health Organization
WWF
World Wildlife Fund
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction to agricultural water pollution
Water quality as a global issue
Non-point source pollution defined
Scope of the problem
Agricultural impacts on water quality
Types of decisions in agriculture for non-point source pollution control
The data problem
Second only to availability of drinking water, access to food supply is the greatest priority. Hence, agriculture is a dominant component of the global economy. While mechanization of farming in many countries has resulted in a dramatic fall in the proportion of population working in agriculture, the pressure to produce enough food has had a worldwide impact on agricultural practices. In many countries, this pressure has resulted in expansion into marginal lands and is usually associated with subsistence farming. In other countries, food requirements have required expansion of irrigation and steadily increasing use of fertilizers and pesticides to achieve and sustain higher yields. FAO (1990a), in its Strategy on Water for Sustainable Agricultural Development, and the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Agenda 21, Chapters 10, 14 and 18 (UNCED, 1992) have highlighted the challenge of securing food supply into the 21st century.
Sustainable agriculture is one of the greatest challenges. Sustainability implies that agriculture not only secure a sustained food supply, but that its environmental, socio-economic and human health impacts are recognized and accounted for within national development plans. FAO's definition of Sustainable agricultural development appears in Box 1.
BOX 1: FAO's DEFINITION OF SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Sustainable development is the management and conservation of the natural resource base and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for the present and future generations. Such Sustainable development (in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and socially acceptable.
It is well known that agriculture is the single largest user of freshwater resources, using a global average of 70% of all surface water supplies. Except for water lost through evapotranspiration, agricultural water is recycled back to surface water and/or groundwater. However, agriculture is both cause and victim of water pollution. It is a cause through its discharge of pollutants and sediment to surface and/or groundwater, through net loss of soil by poor agricultural practices, and through salinization and waterlogging of irrigated land. It is a victim through use of wastewater and polluted surface and groundwater which contaminate crops and transmit disease to consumers and farm workers. Agriculture exists within a symbiosis of land and water and, as FAO (1990a) makes quite clear, "... appropriate steps must be taken to ensure that agricultural activities do not adversely affect water quality so that subsequent uses of water for different purposes are not impaired."
Sagardoy (FAO, 1993a) summarized the action items for agriculture in the field of water quality as:
· establishment and operation of cost-effective water quality monitoring systems for agricultural water uses.
· prevention of adverse effects of agricultural activities on water quality for other social and economic activities and on wetlands, inter alia through optimal use of on-farm inputs and the minimization of the use of external inputs in agricultural activities.
· establishment of biological, physical and chemical water quality criteria for agricultural water users and for marine and riverine ecosystems.
· prevention of soil runoff and sedimentation.
· proper disposal of sewage from human settlements and of manure produced by intensive livestock breeding.
· minimization of adverse effects from agricultural chemicals by use of integrated pest management.
· education of communities about the pollution impacts of the use of fertilizers and chemicals on water quality and food safety.
This publication deals specifically with the role of agriculture in the field of freshwater quality. Categories of non-point source impacts - specifically sediment, pesticides, nutrients, and pathogens - are identified together with their ecological, public health and, as appropriate, legal consequences. Recommendations are made on evaluation techniques and control measures. Much of the scientific literature on agricultural impacts on surface and groundwater quality is from developed countries, reflecting broad scientific concern and, in some cases, regulatory attention since the 1970s. The scientific findings and management principles are, however, generally applicable worldwide. This publication does not deal with water quality impacts caused by food processing industries insofar as these are considered to be point sources and are usually subject to control through effluent regulation and enforcement.
Water quality as a global issue
Agriculture, as the single largest user of freshwater on a global basis and as a major cause of degradation of surface and groundwater resources through erosion and chemical runoff, has cause to be concerned about the global implications of water quality. The associated agrofood-processing industry is also a significant source of organic pollution in most countries. Aquaculture is now recognised as a major problem in freshwater, estuarine and coastal environments, leading to eutrophication and ecosystem damage. The principal environmental and public health dimensions of the global freshwater quality problem are highlighted below:
· Five million people die annually from water-borne diseases.
· Ecosystem dysfunction and loss of biodiversity.
· Contamination of marine ecosystems from land-based activities.
· Contamination of groundwater resources.
· Global contamination by persistent organic pollutants.
Experts predict that, because pollution can no longer be remedied by dilution (i.e. the flow regime is fully utilized) in many countries, freshwater quality will become the principal limitation for sustainable development in these countries early in the next century. This "crisis" is predicted to have the following global dimensions:
· Decline in sustainable food resources (e.g. freshwater and coastal fisheries) due to pollution.
· Cumulative effect of poor water resource management decisions because of inadequate water quality data in many countries.
· Many countries can no longer manage pollution by dilution, leading to higher levels of aquatic pollution.
· Escalating cost of remediation and potential loss of "creditworthiness".
The real and potential loss of development opportunity because of diversion of funds for remediation of water pollution has been noted by many countries. At the 1994 Expert Meeting on Water Quantity and Quality Management convened by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), Asian representatives approved a declaration which called for national and international action to assess loss of economic opportunity due to water pollution and to determine the potential economic impacts of the "looming water crisis". Interestingly, the concern of the delegates to the ESCAP meeting was to demonstrate the economic rather than simply the environmental impacts of water pollution on sustainable development. Creditworthiness (Matthews, 1993) is of concern insofar as lending institutions now look at the cost of remediation relative to the economic gains. There is concern that if the cost of remediation exceeds economic benefits, development projects may no longer
be creditworthy. Sustainable agriculture will, inevitably, be required to factor into its water resource planning the larger issues of sustainable economic development across economic sectors. This comprehensive approach to management of water resources has been highlighted in the World Bank's (1993) policy on water resource development.
Older chlorinated agricultural pesticides have been implicated in a variety of human health issues and as causing significant and widespread ecosystem dysfunction through their toxic effects on organisms. Generally banned in the developed countries, there is now a concerted international effort to ban these worldwide as part of a protocol for Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). One example of such an effort was the Intergovernmental Conference on the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, convened in Washington DC in 1995 jointly with UNEP (more information is included in Chapter 5).
TABLE 1: Classes of non-point source pollution (highlighted categories refer to agricultural activities) (Source: International Joint Commission, 1974, and other sources)
Agriculture
Animal feedlots Irrigation Cultivation Pastures
Dairy farming Orchards Aquaculture
Runoff from all categories of agriculture leading to surface and groundwater pollution. In northern climates, runoff from frozen ground is a major problem, especially where manure is spread during the winter. Vegetable handling, especially washing in polluted surface waters in many developing countries, leads to contamination of food supplies. Growth of aquaculture is becoming a major polluting activity in many countries. Irrigation return flows carry salts, nutrients and pesticides. Tile drainage rapidly carries leachates such as nitrogen to surface waters.
Phosphorus, nitrogen, metals, pathogens, sediment, pesticides, salt, BOD^1, trace elements (e.g. selenium).
Forestry
Increased runoff from disturbed land. Most damaging is forest clearing for urbanization.
Sediment, pesticides.
Liquid waste disposal
Disposal of liquid wastes from municipal wastewater effluents, sewage sludge, industrial effluents and sludges, wastewater from home septic systems; especially disposal on agricultural land, and legal or illegal dumping in watercourses.
Pathogens, metals, organic compounds.
Urban areas
Residential Commercial Industrial
Urban runoff from roofs, streets, parking lots, etc. leading to overloading of sewage plants from combined sewers, or polluted runoff routed directly to receiving waters; local industries and businesses may discharge wastes to street gutters and storm drains; street cleaning; road salting contributes to surface and groundwater pollution.
Fertilizers, greases and oils, faecal matter and pathogens, organic contaminants (e.g. PAHs^2 and PCBs^3), heavy metals, pesticides, nutrients, sediment, salts, BOD, COD^4, etc.
Rural sewage systems
Overloading and malfunction of septic systems leading to surface runoff and/or direct infiltration to groundwater.
Phosphorus, nitrogen, pathogens (faecal matter).
Transportation
Roads, railways, pipelines, hydro-electric corridors, etc.
Nutrients, sediment, metals, organic contaminants, pesticides (especially herbicides).
Mineral extraction
Runoff from mines and mine wastes, quarries, well sites.
Sediment, acids, metals, oils, organic contaminants, salts (brine).
Recreational land use
Large variety of recreational land uses, including ski resorts, boating and marinas, campgrounds, parks; waste and "grey" water from recreational boats is a major pollutant, especially in small lakes and rivers. Hunting (lead pollution in waterfowl).
Nutrients, pesticides, sediment, pathogens, heavy metals.
Solid waste disposal
Contamination of surface and groundwater by leachates and gases. Hazardous wastes may be disposed of through underground disposal.
Nutrients, metals, pathogens, organic contaminants.
Dredging
Dispersion of contaminated sediments, leakage from containment areas.
Metals, organic contaminants.
Deep well disposal
Contamination of groundwater by deep well injection of liquid wastes, especially oilfield brines and liquid industrial wastes.
Salts, heavy metals, organic contaminants.
Atmospheric deposition
Long-range transport of atmospheric pollutants (LRTAP) and deposition of land and water surfaces. Regarded as a significant source of pesticides (from agriculture, etc.), nutrients, metals, etc., especially in pristine environments.
Nutrients, metals, organic contaminants.
^1 BOD =Biological Oxygen Demand
^2 PAH = Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
^3 PCB = Polycyclic Chlorinated Bi-Phenyls
^4 COD = Chemical Oxygen Demand
Non-point source pollution defined
Classes of non-point sources
Non-point source water pollution, once known as "diffuse" source pollution, arises from a broad group of human activities for which the pollutants have no obvious point of entry into receiving watercourses. In contrast, point source pollution represents those activities where wastewater is routed directly into receiving water bodies by, for example, discharge pipes, where they can be easily measured and controlled. Obviously, non-point source pollution is much more difficult to identify, measure and control than point sources. The term "diffuse" source should be avoided as it has legal connotation in the United States that can now include certain types of point sources.
In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) has an extensive permitting system for point discharge of pollutants in water courses. Therefore, in that country, non-point sources are defined as any source which is not covered by the legal definition of "point source" as defined in the section 502 (14) of the United States Clean Water Act (Water Quality Act) of 1987:
"The term "point source" means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, form which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include agricultural storm water discharges and return flows from irrigated agriculture."
The reference to "agricultural storm water discharges" is taken to mean that pollutant runoff from agriculture occurs primarily during storm flow conditions. However, even in the United States, the distinction between point and non-point sources can be unclear and, as Novotny and Olem (1994) point out, these terms tend to have assumed legal rather than technical meanings.
Conventionally, in most countries, all types of agricultural practices and land use, including animal feeding operations (feed lots), are treated as a non-point sources. The main characteristics of non-point sources are that they respond to hydrological conditions, are not easily measured or controlled directly (and therefore are difficult to regulate), and focus on land and related management practices. Control of point sources in those countries having effective control programmes is carried out by effluent treatment according to regulations, usually under a system of discharge permits. In comparison, control of non-point sources, especially in agriculture, has been by education, promotion of appropriate management practices and modification of land use.
Classes of non-point sources
Prevention and modification of land-use practices
Table 1 outlines the classes of non-point sources and their relative contributions to pollution loadings. Agriculture is only one of a variety of causes of non-point sources of pollution, however it is generally regarded as the largest contributor of pollutants of all the categories.
FIGURE 1 Hierarchical complexity of agriculturally-related water quality problems (Rickert, 1993)
Scope of the problem
Non-point source pollutants, irrespective of source, are transported overland and through the soil by rainwater and melting snow. These pollutants ultimately find their way into groundwater, wetlands, rivers and lakes and, finally, to oceans in the form of sediment and chemical loads carried by rivers. As discussed below, the ecological impact of these pollutants range from simple nuisance substances to severe ecological impacts involving fish, birds and mammals, and on human health. The range and relative complexity of agricultural non-point source pollution are illustrated in Figure 1.
In what is undoubtedly the earliest and still most extensive study of non-point source pollution, Canada and the United States undertook a major programme of point and non-point source identification and control in the 1970s for the entire Great Lakes basin. This was precipitated by public concern (e.g. press reports that "Lake Erie was dead!") over the deterioration in water quality, including the visible evidence of algal blooms and increase in aquatic weeds. Scientifically, the situation was one of hypertrophic^1 conditions in Lake Erie and eutrophic^1 conditions in Lake Ontario caused by excessive phosphorus entering the Lower Great Lakes from point and non-point sources. The two countries, under the bilateral International Joint Commission, established the "Pollution from Land Use Activities Reference Groups" (known as "PLUARG") which served as the scientific vehicle for a ten year study of pollution sources from the entire Great Lakes basin, and which culminated in
major changes both to point and non-point source control. The study also resulted in an unprecedented increase in scientific understanding of the impacts of land use activities on water quality. This work, mainly done in the 1970s and early 1980s, still has great relevance to non-point source issues now of concern elsewhere in the world.
^1 These terms refer to the levels of nutrient enrichment in water; these are described in Chapter 3.
The PLUARG study, through analysis of monitoring data of rivers within the Great Lakes, from detailed studies of experimental and representative tributary catchments, and from research of agricultural practices at the field and plot level, found that non-point sources in general, and agriculture in particular, were a major source of pollution to the Great Lakes. By evaluation of the relative contributions of point and non-point sources to pollution loads to the Great Lakes, the PLUARG study proposed a combined programme of point source control and land use modification. The two federal governments and riparian state and provincial governments implemented these recommendations with the result that the two lower and most impacted Great Lakes (Erie and Ontario) have undergone major improvements in water quality and in associated ecosystems in the past decade. A significant factor in the agricultural sector was the high degree of public participation and education. Change in
agricultural practices was, in many cases, achieved by demonstrating to farmers that there were economic gains to be realized by changing land management practices.
In most industrialized countries, the focus on water pollution control has traditionally been on point source management. In the United States, which is probably reasonably typical of other industrialized nations, the economics of further increases in point source regulation are being challenged, especially in view of the known impacts of non-point sources of which agriculture has the largest overall and pervasive impact. There is a growing opinion that, despite the billions of dollars spent on point source control measures, further point source control cannot achieve major additional benefits in water quality without significant control over non-point sources. In this context, it is relevant to note that agriculture is regarded as the main non-point source issue. Table 2 presents the outcome of a study by US-EPA (1994) on the ranking of sources of water quality deterioration in rivers, lakes and estuaries.
The United States is one of the few countries that systematically produces national statistics on water quality impairment by point and non-point sources. In its 1986 Report to Congress, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) reported that 65% of assessed river miles in the United States were impacted by non-point sources. Again, in its most recent study, the US-EPA (1994) identified agriculture as the leading cause of water quality impairment of rivers and lakes in the United States (Table 3) and third in importance for pollution of estuaries. Agriculture also figures prominently in the types of pollutants as noted in Table 3. Sediment, nutrients and pesticides occupy the first four categories and are significantly associated with agriculture. While these findings indicate the major importance of agriculture in water pollution in the United States, the ranking would change in countries with less control over point sources. However, a change in ranking
only indicates that point source controls are less effective, not that agricultural sources of pollution are any less polluting.
TABLE 2: Leading sources of water quality impairment in the United States (US-EPA, 1994)
Rank
Rivers
Lakes
Estuaries
Agriculture
Agriculture
Municipal point sources
Municipal point sources
Urban runoff/storm sewers
Urban runoff/storm sewers
Urban runoff/storm
Hydrologic/habitat modification
Agriculture
Resource extraction
Municipal point sources
Industrial point sources
Industrial point sources
On-site wastewater
Resource extraction
TABLE 3: Percent of assessed river length and lake area impacted (US-EPA, 1994)
Source of pollution
Rivers (%)
Lakes (%)
Nature of pollutant
Rivers (%)
Lakes(%)
Agriculture
Siltation (sediment)
Municipal point sources
Nutrients
Urban runoff/storm sewers
Pathogens
Resource extraction
Pesticides
Industrial point sources
Organic enrichment DO
Silviculture
Metals
Hydrologic/habitat modification
Priority organic
On-site wastewater disposal
chemicals
Flow modification
TABLE 4: Number of States reporting groundwater contamination (maximum possible is 50) (US-EPA, 1994)
Pollutants
No. of States
Pollutants
No. of States
Nitrates
Volatile organic substances
Petroleum products
Metals
Pesticides
Brine/salinity
Synthetic organic substances
Arsenic
Other substances
Other agricultural chemicals
Radioactive material
Fluoride
Other inorganic substances
The ranking of agriculture as a major polluter is highlighted by the statistics of Table 3. Fully 72% of assessed river length and 56% of assessed lakes are impacted by agriculture.
These finding caused the US-EPA to declare that: "AGRICULTURE is the leading source of impairment in the Nation's rivers and lakes ...".
Since the 1970s there has also been growing concern in Europe over the increases in nitrogen, phosphorus and pesticide residues in surface and groundwater. Intense cultivation and "factory" livestock operations led to the conclusion, already drawn by the French in 1980, that agriculture is a significant non-point source contributor to surface and groundwater pollution (Ignazi, 1993). In a recent comparison of domestic, industrial and agricultural sources of pollution from the coastal zone of Mediterranean countries, UNEP (1996) found that agriculture was the leading source of phosphorus compounds and sediment.
The European Community has responded with Directive (91/676/EEC) on "Protection of waters against pollution by nitrates from agricultural sources". The situation in France has resulted in the formation of an "Advisory Committee for the Reduction of Water Pollution by Nitrates and Phosphates of Agricultural Origin" under the authorities of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of the Environment (Ignazi, 1993).
Agriculture is also cited as a leading cause of groundwater pollution in the United States. In 1992, fully forty-nine of fifty states identified that nitrate was the principal groundwater contaminant, followed closely by the pesticide category (Table 4). The US-EPA (1994) concluded that: "more than 75% of the states reported that AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES posed a significant threat to GROUNDWATER quality."
In an analysis of wetlands, the US-EPA (1994) reported that: "AGRICULTURE is the most important land use causing WETLAND degradation".
Similar data are difficult to obtain or are not systematically collected and reported in other countries, however, numerous reports and studies indicate that similar concerns are expressed in many other developed and developing countries.
Agricultural impacts on water quality
Types of impacts
Irrigation impacts on surface water quality
Public health impacts
Data on agricultural water pollution in developing countries
Types of impacts
As indicated in Table 5 the impacts of agriculture on water quality are diverse. The major impacts will be discussed in greater detail in subsequent chapters.
Irrigation impacts on surface water quality
United Nations' predictions of global population increase to the year 2025 require an expansion of food production of about 40-45%. Irrigation agriculture, which currently comprises 17% of all agricultural land yet produces 36% of the world's food, will be an essential component of any strategy to increase the global food supply. Currently 75% of irrigated land is located in developing countries; by the year 2000 it is estimated that 90% will be in developing countries.
In addition to problems of waterlogging, desertification, salinization, erosion, etc., that affect irrigated areas, the problem of downstream degradation of water quality by salts, agrochemicals and toxic leachates is a serious environmental problem. "It is of relatively recent recognition that salinization of water resources is a major and widespread phenomenon of possibly even greater concern to the sustainability of irrigation than is that of the salinization of soils, per se. Indeed, only in the past few years has it become apparent that trace toxic constituents, such as Se, Mo and As in agricultural drainage waters may cause pollution problems that threaten the continuation of irrigation in some projects" (Letey et al., cited in Rhoades, 1993).
TABLE 5: Agricultural impacts on water quality
Agricultural activity
Impacts
Surface water
Groundwater
Tillage/ploughing
Sediment/turbidity: sediments carry phosphorus and pesticides adsorbed to sediment particles; siltation of river beds and loss of habitat, spawning ground, etc.
Fertilizing
Runoff of nutrients, especially phosphorus, leading to eutrophication causing taste and odour in public water supply, excess algae growth leading to deoxygenation of water and fish kills.
Leaching of nitrate to groundwater; excessive levels are a threat to public health.
Manure spreading
Carried out as a fertilizer activity; spreading on frozen ground results in high levels of contamination of receiving waters by pathogens, metals, phosphorus and nitrogen leading to eutrophication and potential contamination.
Contamination of ground-water, especially by nitrogen
Pesticides
Runoff of pesticides leads