<title>Small-scale irrigation for arid zones: Principles and options</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This publication is an attempt to distil current information on irrigation methods that might be appropriate, and to offer some ideas on the possible adoption and adaptation of such methods by small-scale farmers in the semi-arid areas of sub-Saharan Africa. At issue is a vast region greatly in need of enhanced and more stable agricultural production. Yet the irrigated sector here has, to date, suffered from underdevelopment. Numerous efforts to develop the sector have foundered in the past, possibly because the approach has been inappropriate to the physical and socio-economic conditions prevailing in the region.
There can be no single panacea to the problem of ensuring food security in Africa, nor to the task of developing irrigation there. The continent is too varied for any single approach to apply in all cases. A multiplicity of possibilities exists, and the most appropriate ones depend in each case on local agronomic, economic and social conditions. In some cases, large-scale systems, centrally controlled (by commercial or government enterprises) may be the quickest way to increase production. Concurrently, however, the development of irrigation should take place on small-scale farms operated by individual farmers or by associations of farmers. It is to promote the latter form of development that this publication is primarily directed.
A positive and realistic approach, in awareness of the real problems but undeterred by them, is called for. The aim of this publication is to present practical options that are consistent with such a new approach. An effort is made to do so in simplified but not simplistic terms, in a manner that may be useful to a wide spectrum of potential readers, from policy-makers to extension workers in the field, and that is consistent with FAO's Special Programme for Food Security in Africa.
As the reader will quickly notice, this presentation is not a purely technical how to handbook. It is, rather, a what and why elucidation of the conceptual foundations of modern irrigation that should underlie decision-making in the area of irrigation development. Whereas ready-made prescriptions tend to be specific and inflexible, and hence rarely apply as new problems arise in changing circumstances, a basic understanding of principles should enable practitioners to adjust their thinking and actions to unforeseen situations. The ultimate purpose is therefore to foster an informed awareness of both the potentialities and the limitations of modern irrigation methods, and thus to guide the selection and adaptation of appropriate technologies for greater sustainable production and better resource utilization.
In taking this approach I have avoided dealing with traditional surface irrigation methods (including border, basin and furrow methods) that have been described repeatedly in the past and are generally well known in the region. Such methods have long served for the irrigation of crops such as rice, sugar cane and cotton. Rather, attention is concentrated on the development of irrigation for such food crops as fruit, grain, legume and vegetable crops (including root crops) that can be grown in water-scarce semi-arid or arid areas. It is in such areas of sub-Saharan Africa that small-scale, low-volume, low-cost, partial-area, high-frequency irrigation methods appear to offer considerable possibilities that are yet to be realized.
Daniel Hillel
Acknowledgements
As author of this report, I wish to express my gratitude, first of all, to Dr Jacques Diouf, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, whose personal interest and determination to make the work of FAO more relevant to the field have inspired this project.
I also acknowledge the valuable advice and encouragement of Messrs Wim Sombroek, formerly Director of the Land and Water Development Division, Robert Brinkman, present Director, and Hans Wolter, Chief of the Water Resources Development and Management Service within that Division. Other members of the Division - especially Messrs Lucien Vermeiren, Arum Kandiah and Bo Appelgren - offered information and advice as well. The drawings were made with the able and willing assistance of Mr Han Kamphuis, who deserves special thanks. So does Dr Cynthia Rosenzweig, who gave much of her time to help in shaping this publication.
Finally, I acknowledge with deep appre-ciation the support granted me by the Rockefeller Foundation of New York.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1
Food security and irrigation
The outlook for the food security of many developing nations is a cause for serious concern. Widespread denudation and accelerated erosion diminish the productivity of both cultivated and grazed rain-fed lands. Especially vulnerable are semi-arid regions to climatic instability and frequent droughts. At the same time, depletion and pollution of limited freshwater resources and competing demands for water - among neighbouring states as well as between different sectors within each state - constrain the further expansion of irrigation.
The problem of food security is exacerbated by the rapid growth of population and hence of the demand for food. In fact, the prices of foodstuffs in the world market have recently begun to rise. Beyond that looms the spectre of a fundamental change in climate (a consequence of the enhanced greenhouse effect), that may increase the severity and variability of weather and thus disrupt established systems of production. Such a change could require expensive invest-ments in modifying existing systems and establishing new ones.
All these problems are particularly acute in the continent of Africa, parts of which are already in the throes of a severe population-environment crisis. The population of sub-Saharan Africa, now nearing 600 million, is projected to double by the year 2020. Therefore, a much greater effort must be made by the international community to assist the African nations in the difficult task of improving their prospects for food security (Figure 1).
w3094e02.GIF (18545 bytes)
FIGURE 1
Water availability in Africa
Source: Irrigation and water resources potential for Africa, FAO (1987).
Clearly, irrigation can and should play an important role in raising and stabilizing food production, especially in the less-developed parts of Africa south of the Sahara. There are, however, many obstacles to the rapid development of irrigation there. Large parts of the region have only limited freshwater resources. In other areas, potential resources are insufficiently known to permit reliable planning. Even where water resources are definitely known to be substantial, other conditions may not be conducive to irrigation development. Such conditions may include unfavourable topography and soils, distant markets and inadequate infrastructure, as well as lack of credit, labour, information and other services to farmers.
These problems, while real, do not entirely explain the historical failure to develop the full irrigation potential of sub-Saharan Africa. The data available (Table 1) on that potential suggest that it is considerable. By some estimates it may be as great as 30 million hectares, whereas other estimates project less than 10 million hectares. A reasonable figure may be in the order of 15 to 20 million hectares which, if fully developed and properly managed, could contribute significantly to the food security of the African continent. The fact that some earlier efforts at irrigation development produced disappointing results may be more the consequence of flaws in approach and implementation than of truly insurmountable obstacles. The time is ripe for a new approach.
Irrigation is the supply of water to agricultural crops by artificial means, designed to permit farming in arid regions and to offset drought in semi-arid regions. Even in areas where total seasonal rainfall is adequate on average, it may be poorly distributed during the year and variable from year to year. Where traditional rain-fed farming is a high-risk enterprise, irrigation can help to ensure stable production.
TABLE 1
Sub-Saharan Africa: estimates of irrigated areas in relation to potential, 1991
Country
Irrigation potential
(ha)
Area under irrigation
(ha)
Total in % of potential
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania, United Rep.
Togo
Uganda
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: Irrigation in Africa - a basin approach, FAO (in press).
Irrigation has long played a key role in feeding expanding populations and is undoubtedly destined to play a still greater role in the future. It not only raises the yields of specific crops, but also prolongs the effective crop-growing period in areas with dry seasons, thus permitting multiple cropping (two or three, and sometimes four, crops per year) where only a single crop could be grown otherwise. With the security provided by irrigation, additional inputs needed to intensify production further (pest control, fertilizers, improved varieties and better tillage) become economically feasible. Irrigation reduces the risk of these expensive inputs being wasted by crop failure resulting from lack of water.
The practice of irrigation consists of applying water to the part of the soil profile that serves as the root zone, for the immediate and subsequent use of the crop. Well-managed irrigation systems are those which control the spatial and temporal supply of water so as to promote growth and yield, and to enhance the economic efficiency of crop production. Such systems apply water in amounts and at frequencies calibrated to answer the time-variable crop needs. The aim is not merely to optimize growing conditions in a specific plot or season, but also to protect the field environment as a whole against degradation in the long term. Only thus can water and land resources be utilized efficiently and sustainably. On the other hand, poorly managed irrigation systems are those which waste water and energy, deplete or pollute water resources, fail to produce good crops and/or pose the danger of soil degradation.
The vital task of increasing and stabilizing food production in drought-prone regions must therefore include a concerted effort to improve on-farm water management. Some traditional irrigation schemes need to be modernized so as to achieve higher yields as well as better resource utilization. New schemes being planned should likewise be based on sound principles and techniques for efficient water use and for optimizing irrigation in relation to all other essential agricultural inputs and operations.
In recent decades, revolutionary developments have taken place in the science and art of irrigation. A more comprehensive understanding has evolved regarding the soil-crop-water regime as affected by climatic, physiological and soil factors. These conceptual developments have led to technical innovations in water control that have made possible the maintenance of near-optimal moisture and nutrient conditions throughout the growing season.
Foremost among these innovations are techniques for high-frequency, low-volume, partial-area applications of water and of nutrients at rates calibrated to satisfy crop needs. Such methods are now applied on a large scale in industrialized countries, where they tend to be highly mechanized and to rely on energy-intensive labour-saving technologies. However, they need not necessarily depend on expensive manufactured equipment and intensive energy inputs. Instead, they can be simplified to fit the special low-capital circumstances of the less-developed countries. Moreover, they are flexible enough to permit downscaling in order to fit the requirements of small-scale farmers.
Properly applied, the new irrigation methods can raise yields while minimizing waste (by runoff, evaporation and excessive seepage), reducing drainage requirements and promoting the integration of irrigation with essential concurrent operations (fertilization, tillage and pest control). The use of brackish water has become more feasible, as has application to sandy, stony or steep lands previously considered unirrigable. Other potential benefits include increased crop diversification and cropping intensity.
Despite all the new advances and promising possibilities, wasteful practices still persist in many irrigated areas. In some places, inefficiency is perpetuated by fixed, institutionally imposed standards that foster unmeasured and typically excessive applications of water. Such inflexible regimes offer farmers no incentive to improve water management and even discourage them from taking independent initiatives to do so. However, institutional inertia and rigid patterns are only part of the problem. Some of the new irrigation systems developed in the industrialized countries are in fact too complex, energy-intensive, dependent on expensive imported equipment and large in scale to be directly applicable to the low-capital, low-technology circumstances of the less-industrialized countries, where farming is often practised on a small scale and the relative costs of labour and capital are very different.
Hence, ready-made modern technology often fails when introduced arbitrarily into developing countries. Elaborate and expensive systems (such as large centre-pivot booms and even drip-irrigation assemblies complete with automated pumps, filters, pressure regulators, metering valves and fertilizer injectors), imported and installed in the grand hope of achieving instant modernization, typically fail for lack of expert maintenance and spare parts. Such installations can quickly become white elephants - idle monuments to hasty "progress" relying on ill-adapted technology.
Instead of introducing prepackaged hardware systems, developers should apply the best principles of efficient irrigation, in so far as possible using indigenous skills and materials. Rather than simply transfer Western technology as such, the aim should be to adapt or redesign technology flexibly so as to suit the prevailing conditions and requirements.
w3094e03.GIF (19123 bytes)
FIGURE 2
Distribution of basement aquifers in Africa
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2
Principles of appropriate irrigation development
Why is it that irrigated farming in some areas fails to achieve its potential benefits? The problem is not inherent in the principle of irrigation as such, but in the frequently inappropriate practice of it. More often than not the fault lies in the unmeasured and generally excessive application of water to land, with little regard either for the real cost of extracting the water from its source and delivering it to the farm, or for the cost of restoring the water resource after it has been depleted or polluted. By deliberately maintaining a low price for water, governments perpetuate the false notion that fresh water is a free good, rather than the scarce and expensive resource that it really is. It is the universal fallacy of humans to assume that if a little of something is good, then more must be better. In irrigation (as indeed in many other activities), just enough is best, and by that is meant a controlled quantity of water that is sufficient to meet the requirements
of the crop and to prevent accumulation of salts in the soil, no less and certainly no more. The application of too little water is an obvious waste, as it fails to produce the desired benefit. Excessive flooding of the land is, however, likely to be still more harmful, as it tends to saturate the soil for too long, inhibit aeration, leach nutrients, induce greater evaporation and salin-ization, and ultimately raise the water-table to a level that suppresses normal root and microbial activity and that can only be drained and leached at great expense.
Apart from wasting water, therefore, excessive irrigation contributes to its own demise by the twin scourges of water-logging and soil salinization. Instead of achieving its full potential to increase and stabilize food production, irrigation in such cases is in danger of becoming unsus-tainable. The ultimate economic and environmental consequence of poorly managed irrigation is the destruction of an area's productive base. The cost of rehabilitating the land after it has been degraded may be entirely prohibitive.
From the point of view of water use, some large-scale irrigation projects operate in an inherently inefficient way. Where water is delivered to farmers on a fixed schedule and charges are set per delivery regardless of the actual amount used, irrigators tend to take as much water as they can while they can. This typically results in overirrigation, which not only wastes water but also contributes to project-wide problems associated with the disposal of return flow and elevation of the water-table. Especially difficult to change are management practices that lead to waste, not necessarily because of insurmountable technical problems or lack of knowledge, but simply because it appears more convenient or economical in the short term to waste water rather than to conserve it. Such situations occur when the price of irrigation water is lower than the cost of the labour or of the equipment needed to avoid overirrigation.
The classical method of irrigation, which evolved in the major river valleys of the Near East, South Asia and East Asia, consists of flooding the land to some depth with a large volume of water so as to saturate the soil completely, then waiting some days or weeks until the moisture thus stored in the soil is nearly depleted before flooding the land once again. In this low-frequency, high-volume, total-area pattern of irrigation, the typical cycles consist of repeated periods of excess soil moisture alternating with periods of likely insufficiency. Optimal conditions occur only briefly in transition from one extreme condition to the other (Figure 3).
w3094e04.GIF (5552 bytes)
FIGURE 3
Flood irrigation wets the entire root zone to saturation
In contrast, the newer irrigation methods are designed to apply a small, measured volume of water at frequent intervals to where the roots are concentrated. The aim is to reduce fluctuations in the moisture content of the root zone by maintaining moist but unsaturated conditions continuously, without subjecting the crop either to oxygen stress (from excess moisture) or water stress (from lack of moisture). Moreover, applying the water at spatially discrete locations rather than over the entire area has the effect of keeping much of the soil surface dry, thus helping not only to reduce evaporation but also to suppress proliferation of weeds (Figures 4, 5, 6 and 7).
w3094e05.GIF (5111 bytes)
FIGURE 4
The pattern of wetting under furrow irrigation: if furrows are closely spaced the entire root zone is wetted to near-saturation
w3094e06.GIF (4517 bytes)
FIGURE 5
The pattern of wetting under sprinkler irrigation: to compensate for the uneven distribution of water around each sprinkler, adjacent sprinklers are spaced closely enough to overlap (thus tending to equalize the spatial distribution of water)
w3094e07.GIF (15872 bytes)
FIGURE 6
A portable hand-move sprinkler irrigation system
w3094e08.GIF (11139 bytes)
FIGURE 7
Partial-area wetting around orchard trees under drip irrigation
This optimization of soil moisture is difficult to achieve with the traditional flood irrigation methods still dominant in many river valleys. As a result, the new approach to irrigation management has not yet been adopted very widely in developing countries. Although it is gaining ground gradually, its progress should be encouraged and accelerated wherever appropriate.
Ideally, the new irrigation systems should convey water to the field in concrete-lined channels so as to avoid seepage losses, or preferably in closed conduits that avoid pollution and allow pressurizing of the water thus delivered. In the field, the water can be distributed via low-cost, weathering-resistant plastic tubes, and be applied to the root zone by means of drip emitters, microsprayers or porous bodies placed at or below the soil surface. Human labour and local materials may substitute for industrially produced devices where such are unavailable or too expensive, while retaining the principles of efficient irrigation.
As the frequency of irrigation increases, the infiltration period becomes a more important part of the irrigation cycle. With small daily (rather than massive weekly or monthly) applications of water, the pulses of added water are damped down within a few centimetres or decimetres of the surface, so the flow below that depth is essentially steady. A skilled irrigator can control the moisture content of the root zone as well as the rate of internal drainage by adjusting the rate and quantity of application according to the soil's infiltrability, the soil solution's concentration, and the climate-imposed evaporative demand. Thus the irrigator can manage the system optimally so as to both increase yields and conserve water (Figures 6 and 7).
The long-accepted notion that the entire volume of the root zone must be wetted to capacity at each irrigation has been contradicted by recent experience proving that a crop can fare well when the wetted zone is restricted to a fraction of the soil volume - 50 percent, or even less. This is on condition, of course, that the supply of moisture and nutrients in that partial volume is sufficient to satisfy full crop needs.
Since a high-frequency irrigation system can be adjusted to supply water at very nearly the exact rate required by the crop, the irrigator no longer needs to depend on the soil's ability to store water during long intervals between irrigations. Hence water storage properties, once considered essential, are no longer decisive in determining whether a soil is irrigable. New lands, until recently believed to be unsuited for irrigation, can now be brought into production. Examples are coarse sands and gravels, where moisture storage capacity is very low and where the conveyance and spreading of water by surface flooding would cause too much seepage. Such soils can now be irrigated even on sloping ground by means of drip, trickle, microsprayer or soil-embedded porous emitters that apply the water frequently or continuously to the root zone at a controlled rate.
Though they offer many advantages, high-frequency partial-volume systems have shortcomings too. With only a fraction of the potential root zone wetted, there is less moisture storage in the soil, so the crop depends vitally on the continuous operation of the system. Any short-term interruption of the irrigation (whether caused by neglect, mechanical failure or water shortage) can quickly result in severe distress to the crop. The imperative to maintain continuous operation is difficult to meet if the system depends on costly and vulnerable equipment imported from abroad. The system must therefore be simplified so as to make the local farmers self-reliant.
In general, it is difficult to change a pre-existing pattern of human behaviour and institutional norms. An infrastructure designed for one mode of operation cannot readily be converted to another. Habits and traditions, once established, acquire an inertia, with vested interests in maintaining the status quo and a resistance to reforming it. That is why it is considered so important to start new irrigation projects appropriately by instituting efficient practices from the outset.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3
Improving water-use efficiency
In general, the term efficiency is used to quantify the relative output obtainable from a given input. Referring to the use of water in irrigation, efficiency may be defined in various ways, depending on the nature of the inputs and outputs to be considered. An economic criterion of efficiency, for example, might be the financial return obtained from irrigation in relation to the investment made in the water supply. The problem here is that costs and prices fluctuate from year to year and vary widely from place to place. Another problem is that some of the costs of irrigation and some of the benefits cannot easily be quantified in tangible economic or financial terms, especially where a market economy is not yet fully developed. Often, only the short-term costs and immediate benefits are seen, whereas the long-term advantages or disadvantages are not fully realized at the outset. How is it possible to assess the economic value, for instance, of saving the population of a
region from the potential effects of a drought, if the probability or severity of future drought events is not known? To some degree, therefore, it is necessary to operate in a state of uncertainty.
In more restricted technical terms, what irrigation engineers often call conveyance efficiency is defined as the net amount of water delivered to a farm, as a fraction of the amount taken from some source. The difference between the two amounts represents the seepage and evaporative losses incurred en route from source to field. Not generally considered in the term conveyance efficiency is the possible loss of water quality through pollution - such as that caused by wading animals or by human use of the canal water for washing and waste disposal.
The term on-farm application efficiency or field application efficiency generally refers to the fraction of the water volume applied to a farm or a field that is "consumed" by a crop, relative to the amount applied. Crop consumption consists of the amount of water actually absorbed by the crop, most of which is generally transpired to the atmosphere (only a small fraction, often less than 1 percent, being retained in the vegetative biomass). There is much evidence that, in a given climate, the growth of many crops is directly related to the amount of water they transpire. The explanation is that both carbon dioxide (CO[2]) for photosynthesis and transpiration occur concurrently through the same stomatal openings in the leaves, so the two processes should be roughly proportional.
In actual practice, however, the volume of water reported to be consumed in the field consists of evapotranspiration rather than of transpiration alone. Evapotranspiration includes, in addition to the amount of water transpired by the plants, the amount evaporated directly from the soil surface without being taken up by the plants. In addition, evapotranspiration
often includes the amount of water intercepted by the foliage (e.g. under overhead sprinkler irrigation) and evaporated without ever entering either the soil or the plant. The reason why the term evapotranspiration is taken to be consumptive use is that, in practice, direct evaporation is difficult to measure separately from transpiration, so the two terms are lumped together merely for the sake of convenience.
Clearly, however, much of the water evaporated without entering the plant is consumed non-productively. Therefore, any method of irrigation that minimizes evaporation (but not transpiration) is likely to increase the efficiency of water utilization by the crop. Some of the irrigation methods described in this publication are capable of doing just that: they introduce water directly into the root zone without sprin-kling the foliage or wetting the entire soil surface. Such partial-area irrigation methods offer the additional benefit of keeping the greater part of the soil surface (between the rows of crop plants) dry. This discourages the growth of weeds, that would otherwise not only compete with crop plants for nutrients and moisture in the root zone and for light above ground, but also hinder field operations and the control of pests.
Even with total evapotranspiration considered as consumptive use, field application efficiency in most traditional irrigation schemes is still very low: typically less than 50 percent and often as low as 30 percent. Excessive application of water generally entails losses due to surface runoff from the field as well as to deep percolation below the root zone within the field. Both runoff and deep percolation losses are difficult to control under flood or furrow irrigation, where a large volume of water is applied all at once. They can, however, be minimized where a controlled volume of water is applied at a slow rate over an extended period of time directly to the root zone.
Even with the best irrigation practices, however, field application efficiency values cannot attain 100 percent. Nor should that be the aim, since a certain fraction of the water applied must be allowed to seep downwards and leach the salts that would otherwise accumulate in the root zone.^1 However, with careful management, field water application efficiency values approaching 90 percent are possible, and values of 80 percent are practicable, by some of the methods described in this publication.
A word of warning is in order at this point. No irrigation method or technology in itself guarantees the attainment of high efficiency. How the system is operated is all important. With poor management, even the most sophisticated system can result in water loss and inefficiency. Only knowledgeable, experienced and caring management can ensure that appropriate irrigation systems achieve their full potential benefits (Figure 8).
w3094e09.GIF (32738 bytes)
FIGURE 8
Typical crop root distributions
Quite different from strictly technical criteria of efficiency is the physiological index, known as crop water-use efficiency. The relevant measure here is the response of the crop to irrigation, not in percentage terms but as total biomass produced (above-ground dry matter) per unit mass of water taken up by the crop. Since, as mentioned above, well over 90 percent of the water taken up by plants in the field is normally transpired, crop water-use efficiency is in effect the reciprocal of what has long been known as the transpiration ratio. The latter is defined as the ratio of the amount of water transpired to the amount of dry matter produced (tonnes per tonne). That ratio can be of the order of 1 000 or more in a dry climate of high evaporative demand.
An alternative way to characterize crop water-use efficiency is in terms of the marketable crop produced per unit volume of water. This expression is identical to the above-ground biomass in the case of crops grown and harvested for forage, but it is quite different where the marketable product is only the fruit, seed or fibre. Generally, but not always, the yield of such products is proportional to total growth, hence also to transpiration.
To maximize crop water-use efficiency, by either of the above criteria, it is necessary both to conserve water and to promote maximal growth. The former requires minimizing losses through runoff, seepage, evaporation and transpiration by weeds. The latter task includes planting high-yielding crops well adapted to the local soil and climate. It also includes optimizing growing conditions by proper timing and performance of planting and harvesting, tillage, fertilization and pest control. In short, raising water-use efficiency requires good farming practices from start to finish.
Box 1
Summary of ways to improve water-use efficiency
Conservation of water
* Reduce conveyance losses by lining channels or, preferably, by using closed conduits.
* Reduce direct evaporation during irrigation by avoiding midday sprinkling. Minimize foliar interception by under-canopy, rather than by overhead sprinkling.
* Reduce runoff and percolation losses due to overirrigation.
* Reduce evaporation from bare soil by mulch-ing and by keeping the inter-row strips dry.
* Reduce transpiration by weeds, keeping the inter-row strips dry and applying weed control measures where needed.
Enhancement of crop growth
* Select most suitable and marketable crops for the region.
* Use optimal timing for planting and harvesting.
* Use optimal tillage (avoid excessive cultivation).
* Use appropriate insect, parasite and disease control.
* Apply manures and green manures where possible and fertilize effectively (preferably by injecting the necessary nutrients into the irrigation water).
* Practise soil conservation for long-term sustainability.
* Avoid progressive salinization by mon-itoring water-table el