<title>Development of rural radio in Africa: Declaration and plan of action, Ouagadougou, June 1996</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
INTRODUCTION
African rural societies increasingly find that they must adapt to a rapidly changing world. They have to integrate into complex worldwide economic mechanisms and yet not lose sight of the need to ensure their own food security. They must manage and protect their resources, improve their standards of living, health and education, and value and conserve their cultural heritage.
Communication is essential to overcome the constraints to development and face the challenges. Rural communities should have at their disposal the tools to access and convey useful information and knowledge. They should be able to exchange experiences, knowledge and techniques, and be actors in the debate on development matters.
In Africa, radio is the most widespread and popular tool of communication. Its versatility allows it to be at the same time:
* a mechanism for rapid diffusion of economic, social and cultural information in a diversity of languages and throughout widespread geographical areas;
* a channel for interactive communication, for dialogue and debate on the principal issues of rural development;
* a platform for democratic and pluralistic expression of the opinions, needs and aspirations of rural communities;
* a tool for culture and entertainment, and a means of collecting, preserving, and enhancing the oral and musical heritage of rural communities;
* a media to collect local information on social issues. This is essential for defining, planning and implementing development programmes and projects;
* a means of raising public awareness and of motivation;
* a tool which, combined with other media channels, can be used for education and the transfer or exchange of knowledge and technologies.
Nevertheless, today most African rural radio stations are not in a position to fulfil this mission. There are many political, technical, legal, institutional and financial constraints which make it difficult for rural radio to adapt to change. These constraints are partly the result of the history of rural radio which for many years played a top down role, disseminating messages to rural communities.
However, some changes have taken place over the last ten years.
* rural radio goes beyond agricultural issues and is now embracing the social, educational and cultural needs of the rural population;
* radio, which was once a top down delivery of messages and advice, is now becoming more interactive, with opportunities for dialogue, exchange of views and debate;
* centralized radio, based in the capital or in the major urban centres, is now becoming decentralized with many regional and local stations;
* government controlled state radio, with its central administration, is beginning to be joined by independent radio stations with different legal status.
In most countries the general framework of the media is being redefined. Deregulation, the ending of state monopoly, the emergence of new actors and the appearance of important new technologies are all creating a context for new approaches to the development of rural radio:
* an approach that relies on public broadcasting services that use radio for informing and motivating rural communities;
* an approach that promotes local radio, principally at community level, based on the development of local solidarity;
* an approach based on the emergence of new forces within society, such as farmer associations that want to create their own radio stations at the local, regional and national levels.
* an approach based on very small-scale radio stations devoted to specific issues such health hazards (AIDS, onchocerciasis), agricultural topics (rice, cotton, irrigation, livestock), women's issues, etc.
* an approach based on the network of private stations, set up by commercial operators, principally in the urban areas but increasingly also in rural areas, with programmes in part financed by advertising, which often transmit programmes originated by the big international radio networks.
This diversity of actors and initiatives presents a good asset for the development of rural radio because it is based on many different approaches, radio coverage over a wider geographical area, and better use of linguistic and socio-economic diversity. It also encourages closer and more interactive communication with village communities and empowers rural populations with a better use of this means of communication.
However, it can also present a danger: the initiatives to set up local radio stations are not properly coordinated and in consequence may be developed primarily in urban and peri-urban communities where there is a potential advertising market. Thus they are likely to be established principally for commercial, political or sectarian reasons to the detriment of public service broadcasting, which is the only way to guarantee to the rural populations an equitable access to information and to the media.
It is also important to emphasize that radio remains, and will no doubt continue to remain for some time, the communication media that is most readily available to serve the economic, social and cultural needs of rural Africans. It provides the one source of information, expression and communication at a time when new technology and global information and communication networks monopolize international attention, and siphon off a significant proportion of available resources.
It is therefore essential to ensure the survival and credibility of African rural radio. Assistance will be needed to lift some of the constraints to the infrastructure, equipment, the legal and institutional framework under which it is governed and to help rural radio to adapt to change. Radio stations will need to enhance their capacity to identify listeners' demands and respond to them. Training must be improved as well as the capacity to organize networks.
However, the necessary political, technical, legal, institutional and financial decisions upon which the successful transformation of rural radio will depend have not yet been taken. Rural radio is still too often dependent upon project funding and cannot sustain its activities when project funding ceases.
It is within this context, and at the request of several African states, that FAD, in collaboration with the Government of Burkina Faso and URTNA (Union des radios et televisions rationales d'Afrique) organized a workshop in Ouagadougou, 10-14 June 1996, which assessed the current status of rural radio in Africa, identified the principal constraints with which it is faced and established the broad principles of a plan of action for its development. Cooperation with international agencies in order to raise the funding necessary to implement the resulting plan of action was also discussed.
The workshop, which was one of a series of international meetings organized during preceding years by a number of international organizations, notably UNICEF, the Cultural and Technical Cooperation Agency (ACCT), the World Association for Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC), the Agricultural and Rural Cooperation Centre (CTA) and the Panos Institute, was a significant opportunity for a meeting and exchange of views between all those engaged in the development of rural radio in Africa. The workshop brought together 73 participants including delegates from 21 francophone, anglophone and lusophone African countries, representatives of bi-lateral and multi-lateral organizations, working in partnership with African rural radio as well as representatives of many other public, private and other organizations, working in this sector. The workshop provided an opportunity for wide ranging, pertinent discussions and debate. It underlined the necessity in Africa for dynamic, lively,
democratic and interactive rural radio.
It is now essential that, in order to move forward and open a route to the sustainable development of African rural radio, individual nations and their partners should define new directions for the legal and institutional frameworks and for technical infrastructure, equipment, research and training. They must also make a firm commitment to the realization of these objectives.
The workshop in Ouagadougou was an important step in this process because it led to the adoption of a declaration and a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa. The text of the declaration and plan of action follows.
DECLARATION
African countries are finding themselves confronted by many significant changes, politically, economically and socially. These changes have been brought about by a process of democratization and pluralism, a desire for peace, decentralization of economic and political decision-making and the encouragement of the private sector to take over many functions previously undertaken by the state.
In this context, the major challenges to be met are: to improve agricultural production while preserving the natural resource base in order to meet the need for food security for a rapidly growing population; to improve standards of living, health, education and nutrition, particularly for women and children; to create income and employment opportunities; and to preserve cultural heritage.
These challenges will not be met without active popular participation of the population, for which communication is a strategic factor.
The Windhoek (1991) and Bamako (1993) declarations emphasized the necessity for developing independent and pluralistic radio and press.
Radio remains the most popular, viable, accessible and cost-effective means of communication for rural people. Radio can overcome the barriers of distance, illiteracy and language diversity better than any other media.
There have been a number of developments that have led to significant changes in the use of radio for reaching rural audiences. The introduction of new technology, the reduction in cost of FM transmitters and the replacement of state broadcasting monopolies by private sector and association-based radio has, in recent years, led to the development of new forms of radio both in urban centres and in rural communities.
This evolution has provided opportunities for a diversity of approaches to the use of radio, and much more effective coverage of audiences in terms of territory and meeting differing socio-economic and linguistic needs. From now on, all those who are involved in development, particularly those operating at the grassroots level, can make use of this form of communication, either by playing an active role in the conception and production of rural programmes for broadcast by existing radio stations or by establishing their own radio stations. Despite these promising trends, rural radio nevertheless suffers from initiatives that are too widely dispersed and from lack of resources.
Today rural radio is at a crossroads. Decisions must be made and a number of problems addressed in order to allow rural radio to develop in a coordinated manner so that it may fulfil its mission to provide information and opportunity for dialogue and contribute to rural development:
* First, the development of rural radio must be confirmed as a priority objective of governments and their partners within the national strategy for the communication of development objectives.
* Appropriate legal and institutional measures must be established for the different forms of rural radio that already exist in order to encourage their development and complementarity.
* Rural radio stations should be provided with the infrastructure, equipment and consumables that are best suited to their tasks and their environment.
* Research and training programmes should be expanded and strengthened in order that rural radio can carry out its tasks effectively and develop so that it can respond to future development needs.
* Inter-African cooperation should be pursued and reinforced.
Finally, it is essential that all those involved in rural development (governments, international partners, NGOs, local groups and associations, the private sector, etc.) should support and encourage the development of rural radio in Africa. To achieve this it is necessary to identify all available means for establishing mechanisms for cooperation and follow-up which will allow the planning and mobilization, in a coordinated and complementary way, of all appropriate human, technical and financial resources. One such mechanism could be to find a linkage with the UN's Special Initiative for Africa.
We invite all partners in development to consider this Ouagadougou plan of action as a framework within which to define and implement actions for the development of rural radio in Africa.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents
PLAN OF ACTION
MISSION AND LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
Basis for action
The development of rural radio at national, regional and local level to meet the need of rural people implies a respect for pluralism by the State and others. It also requires a concerted effort to develop a more coordinated development of rural radio stations which at the present time operate within many different legal and regulatory frameworks.
It is therefore essential, at a time when new radio stations are rapidly multiplying in both urban and rural areas, that appropriate political, legal and regulatory measures be adopted at national, regional and local levels in order to harmonize the legal status and define the mission and terms of reference for the operation of rural radio. Licensing and allocation of transmission frequencies must be awarded on a statutory basis and the formation of networks should be encouraged.
Furthermore, the adoption of appropriate legal statutes will enable rural radio stations to acquire administrative, financial and editorial autonomy while maintaining a general public service mission.
These legal and regulatory changes should be accompanied by institutional measures that can make it possible for rural radio stations to fully assume their role in promoting and sustaining rural development. To this end, all development actions should be associated with determining the direction and definition of radio programmes to ensure that the themes of the programmes and the manner in which they are treated reflect the diversity of needs and the multiplicity of opinions and approaches of rural radio stations.
Objective: To establish for each country an appropriate legal, regulatory and institutional framework in order to favour the development of rural radio in its many forms.
Activities
a) To define and put into place national communication for development policies. To define the role and function of rural radio stations within the framework of these policies in order to legitimize the mission of rural radio in the overall rural development process and to commit all national and international partners to a joint action covering the information and communication needs of all sectors of rural development.
b) To identify, study and adapt the legal statutes that are most appropriate to the roles of rural radio in its various forms.
c) To adopt regulatory measures aimed at granting and increasing administrative, editorial and financial autonomy of rural radio.
d) To establish terms of reference, supervise the implementation of public service missions, deal with matters relating to legislation and the granting of permits, licenses and allocation of transmission frequencies and to regulate advertising revenue in order that radio stations derive some benefit.
e) To propose legal, institutional and technical provisions which will promote the creation of a network of rural radio stations at the local, regional and national levels. These provisions should make optimal use of all existing resources in order to meet the needs of listeners, ensure the best possible territorial and linguistic coverage and reinforce democracy and participation.
f) To set up a joint authority for intersectorial consultation and coordination between all those concerned in order to develop programming which recognizes listener interests and which assists rural radio stations to cover themes relating to economic, social and cultural development. Such an authority would also help rural radio stations to gain access to the technical, financial and human resources required. The composition of this authority should be adapted to the context of rural radio at different levels: local, regional and national.
INFRASTRUCTURE, EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHOICES
Basis for action
The survival of rural radio stations is threatened by the lack of resources available for equipment and technical infrastructure. As a result of this there are serious operational and maintenance problems. In general, rural radio stations do not have their own equipment and they experience great difficulty in obtaining spare parts. To ensure sustainable development of rural radio it is essential to establish, at national level, a development plan for technical equipment and infrastructure. At both national and regional levels, appropriate technical solutions should be sought in order to make rational use of existing equipment.
Objective 1: To establish in each country a broad" casting development plan reflecting the advantages of shared use of technical infrastructure and equipment with PTT, broadcasting organizations etc.
Objective 2: To develop wherever possible a national manufacturing capability for the production, assembly and marketing of radio equipment.
Activities
a) To establish a system for circulating information about existing technical facilities. The ITU, in cooperation with other agencies, should be invited to produce a manual giving technical parameters for transmitters in order to improve management of frequencies at national level. The manual could also provide guidelines for the design, construction, acoustics and air-conditioning of technical sites.
b) To develop a plan which favours FM transmission for broadcasting.
c) Each country to seek means by which import duties on all broadcasting equipment destined for rural radio are reduced or even eliminated.
d) To implement, with the support of UNIDO, a series of needs assessments and feasibility studies with a view to establishing local industrial units for the manufacture of radio equipment, receivers and consumables (batteries, tapes and cassettes). These studies should lead to the formulation of projects in a form which can be presented to funding partners.
e) To undertake a feasibility study into the possibility of establishing central purchasing in order to reduce the cost of acquiring radio equipment.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR TRAINING AND RESEARCH
Basis for action
Training and research are crucial to the development of rural radio in Africa. At the national level they must be considered a priority.
A research and training sector must be established in each country to cover the needs of all those involved in rural radio. It must carry out a research programme on all aspects of the development of rural radio and set up a programme that takes into account the training needs of all categories of specialists: producers, technicians, documentalists, managers, trainers and audience research specialists as well as for specialists in new information technology. This training programme should also address all the new techniques and methods of participatory research with rural communities. It should also take into account the need for other means of communication in order to extend the impact of rural radio in the field.
At inter-African level, a mechanism for coordination and support to national research and training programmes should be established with the support of international agencies. A network of researchers and African rural radio trainers should be set up, as well as an international resource centre. CIERRO could carry out this duty for francophone countries and similar bodies could be created for anglophones and lusophones.
At international level collaboration between the principal agencies concerned with rural radio in Africa should be reinforced in order to coordinate research and training support to the different countries and to inter-African organizations,
Objective 1: To develop in each country and at inter-African level, training programmes and tools which relate to the needs of rural radio and grass-roots community workers with in a wider framework of communication for development.
Objective 2: At inter-African level, to establish or reinforce a programme of research into the development of rural radio in all its aspects - legal, institutional, social, cultural, economic and technical - as well as its impact.
Activities
a) To evaluate the training needs of each station, taking into account the specific nature of the station, the personnel involved and the need to develop the production and broadcasting capability of the station. Develop a training strategy.
b) To develop a national training programme for each country taking into account the needs identified at station level.
c) Set up, or improve, training structures for rural radio at national level.
Improve access to training for women working in rural radio as well as for personnel from community, commercial or AGO radio stations.
e) Establish tertiary level training at CIERRO.
f) Develop a training programme in marketing at CEIRRO for studying rural audiences, how to develop projects and how to conduct participatory research.
g) Develop and strengthen programmes for training of trainers.
h) Set up structures for the coordination and follow up of training at national and inter-African level.
i) Develop at inter-African level a data file of resource personnel and institutions.
j) Support the URTNA proposal for the establishment of a training institution similar to CIERRO for anglophone countries.
k) Develop a research. programme covering the following points:
* the changing role of rural radio;
* the corresponding technical, social, economic, cultural, legal and institutional implications;
* the kind of programmes which should be produced by rural radio, taking into account approaches involving audience participation, use of national languages and the opportunities for social dialogue offered by rural radio;
* the development of ways to analyse rural audiences and to measure the impact of programmes on rural development;
* equipment and technical infrastructure best adapted to the needs of rural radio in economic, technical and cultural contexts.
l) Seek finance and funding partners in order to establish a programme of research.
m) Establish a mechanism by which the research results can be shared.
INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN OF ACTION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL RADIO IN AFRICA
Basis for action
International coordination and partnerships to implement this plan of action are essential in order to mobilize technical and financial resources. This cooperation will promote rational and cost-effective initiatives, avoid duplication and maximize the use of existing resources. This international collaboration will cooperate with existing institutions currently working to support rural radio and rural communication. Institutions such as CIERRO will continue to play an important role in this process. Particular attention will be given to the UN System-wide Special Initiative on Africa which promotes the development of human resources, especially women, health, sustainable development, peace and democracy. Rural radio plays a central role in this endeavour and should continue to do so.
Objective: To develop international cooperation in order to implement and follow up the plan of action.
Activities
a) To develop, in accordance with the recommendations of the workshop, a package of project proposals for which funding should be sought.
b) To explore and establish appropriate mechanisms for consultation among all partners, including governments, aid agencies, professional groups, NGOs and the private sector.
c) To organize a meeting of donors in order to submit project proposals relating to rural radio. International funding agencies such as the World Bank, UNDP, and the EU should be invited to take an active role.
d) To complement the meeting of donors, the plan of action should be submitted to the UN System-wide Special Initiative on Africa in view of the important role that radio will play in achieving its objectives.
The conclusions of the Ouagadougou workshop will also be presented at the round table discussions on communication for development organized by UNESCO for September 1996 in Harare, to be attended by UN Agencies, NGOs and universities.
As organizers of the workshop, URTNA, FAO and the Government of Burkina Faso are required to implement follow up to the workshop and to identify the necessary funding required.
back contents
