1 FO: CIP/96/Rep.
INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION.
Report of the 20th Session of the Commission and of the 38th Session of its Executive Committee Budapest, Hungary, 1 - 4 October 1996.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
2 Rome, 1996 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page PART I I II III REPORT OF THE 38TH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION Organization The Session Post-session Informal Meeting of the Executive Committee 1 1 2.
PART II REPORT OF THE 20TH SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION I II III IV V VI VII VIII Organization Opening of the Session The Session's Admission of New Member Nations Environmental and Social Issues in Poplar and Willow Cultivation and Utilization Synthesis of National Reports on Activities Related to Poplar and Willow Areas, Production, Consumption and the Functioning of National Poplar Commissions Poplar and Willow Identification and Varietal Control Joint Session of the Working Parties Poplar and Willow Protection (a) Report of the Working Party on Poplar Diseases (b) Report of the Working Party on Poplar Insect Pests IX X XI XII XIII XIV Logging and Utilization Breeding and Selection of Poplars and Willows Biomass Production Systems for the Salicaceae Recommendations of the Commission Election of the Executive Committee, 1997-2000 Date and Place of the Next Session 3 3 4 4 5 6 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 11 11.
3 XV Closing of the Session (ii) ANNEXES I Agenda (a) Agenda of the 38th Session of the Executive Committee (b) Agenda of the 20th Session of the IPC II III.A III.B IV List of Participants List of Papers Presented at Meetings of Subsidiary Bodies List of Posters National Reports and Answers to Questionnaire on Theme 13 14 15 31 38 42 11.
PART I REPORT OF THE 38TH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION.
I ORGANIZATION.
The 38th Session of the Executive Committee of the International Poplar Commission (IPC) was held in Budapest, Hungary, on 1st October 1996 at the kind invitation of the Government of Hungary. Mr V. Steenackers, Chairman of the Executive Committee, chaired the meeting. It consisted of a closed session of 12 members, 7 heads or secretaries of Working Parties and the Secretary of the Commission assisted by a former Secretary of the IPC.
THE SESSION.
The Session was opened by the Chairman of the Committee. The provisional agenda was adopted.
The Chairmen of the Working Parties presented their reports. Informal meetings of some of the.
Working Parties had been held at the time of meetings of other bodies such as IUFRO, the EU Poplar project and the IEA. Contacts had been continued with the EUFORGEN group. The importance of these links and of the co-ordination of activities was stressed.
The Secretariat informed the Committee of the names of the candidates proposed by member.
countries from which its members would be elected for the period 1997-2000.
The Secretariat informed the Committee that offers to host the 39th Session of the Executive.
Committee had been received from India and from New Zealand.
The responsibilities of the Working Groups were discussed, with reference to subjects that were.
presently not clearly reflected in the titles of the Groups. This item was further discussed in subsequent Working Group meetings (see also para. 13 below).
The Secretariat informed the Committee that provision had been included in the programme of the XI.
World Forestry Congress (Antalya, Turkey, October 1997) for a satellite meeting to mark the 50th anniversary of the IPC.
Other matters that were discussed included future directions for the IPC and the subject matter and distribution of the proposed leaflets on the cultivation and utilisation of the Salicaceae. It was agreed that a small group should be set up to develop ideas for future directions of the IPC and that this matter should be drawn to the attention of the incoming Committee. The members of the Committee recorded their thanks to the Director of the Istituto de Sperimentazione per la Pioppicoltura (Casale Monferrato, Italy) for the support of his Institute towards the compilation of the Directory of Poplar and Willow Scientists, and reviewed the possibility of putting it on the Internet.
POST-SESSION INFORMAL MEETING OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
The newly elected members of the Executive Committee for 1997-2000 met on 4th October 1996 to.
elect the Chairman and Vice-chairman of the Committee and to discuss general business.
10. Mr V. Steenackers (Belgium) was elected Chairman and Mr A. Padro (Spain) Vice-chairman of the.
Executive Committee, both unanimously. It was agreed that Messrs. Scarascia-Mugnozza (Italy), K. Siddiqui (Pakistan) and P. Tabbush (UK) should be co-opted to the Executive Committee. Mr A. Wilkinson (New Zealand) was appointed Chairman of the Sub-committee on Nomenclature.
11. The Secretary was requested to circulate member countries to request suggestions for a theme for the.
satellite meeting to be held at the time of the XI World Forestry Congress and to request comments on the subject matter of the proposed leaflets (see paras 7 and 8 above). The Secretary was requested to look for the Rules of Procedure which were drafted some years ago for the conduct of the Sessions of the IPC.
12. It was agreed that a small organising committee, drawn from member, countries should be set up to.
help prepare for future Sessions and in particular to relate the papers of the Working Parties to the general theme of the Session.
13. It was agreed that the title of the Working Group on Biomass Production Systems for the Salicaceae.
should be renamed Production Systems for Poplars and Willows.
PART II REPORT OF THE 20TH SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION.
The 20th Session of the International Poplar Commission (IPC) was held in Budapest, Hungary at the kind invitation of the Government of Hungary under the Chairmanship of Professor Csaba Mátyás (Hungary).
The Session was attended by delegates, and advisers from 27 member countries of the Commission: Argentina, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Egypt, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Korea (Republic of), New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal, Romania, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Turkey, UK and USA Observers attended from Brazil, Greece, Kenya, Poland, Slovak Republic and Uruguay. A total of 207 delegates, advisers and observers participated.
OPENING OF THE SESSION.
The Session was opened by the Chairman of the retiring Executive Committee, Mr V. Steenackers.
Mr Lajos Buzássy, Deputy State Secretary, Department of Agriculture, welcomed participants to Hungary. He reviewed the important role of the Hungarian forestry sector in wood production and in the provision of other goods and services, and emphasised the support of his Ministry to the sector. He stressed the need for international co-operation in forestry and mentioned Hungary's long experience in forest management. In declaring the Session open he thanked FAO for its support to the Hungarian agroeconomy and its contribution to the co-ordination of international activities in forestry.
The Director of the Forestry Office, Ministry of Agriculture, Mr Márton Dauner, reviewed current priorities for forestry in Hungary, which included output of forest products, nature and game protection and the provision of social benefits. Under the new economic and political order, ownership patterns of land and of forest industry were changing with the break up of co-operatives but there would be no reduction of forest area and forest laws would be strengthened. The Forestry Office had clear goals: to prepare regulations for implementing the new Forests Act, to reorganise the administration of the national forestry sector and of the state forests, to speed up the process of land and forest consolidation, and to promote afforestation.
The Chairman of the National Poplar Commission of Hungary, Dr Laszlo Erdosz, stated that Hungary has now 153 000 ha of poplar plantations, which were the basis of the composite board and the packaging and paper industries. Much of the output from poplar-based industry was exported. Research, especially into tree breeding and wood properties, had made an important contribution to this process. Important challenges lay ahead, including the consolidation of private forest holdings and adapting to the effects of further changes in the structure of the Hungarian agricultural sector.
Mr J.B. Ball, Secretary of the IPC, in welcoming participants on behalf of the Director-General of FAO, drew attention to the 50th anniversary of the establishment of the IPC in 1997. He described the IPC, a Statutory Body of FAO, as providing: a neutral forum for the discussion of technical and policy issues related to poplars and willows; advice and technical support from a wide range of disciplines; and.
2 access to the network of 174 member countries of the Organization.
Professor Csaba Mátyás (Hungary) was elected Chairman and Messrs M. Villar and J. Isebrands and Ms R. Arreghini were elected Vice-chairmen.
The Provisional Agenda was adopted without amendment.
THE SESSION'S ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBER NATIONS.
10. Delegates were advised that South Africa, as a member of FAO, had applied to join the IPC under Article II (1) of the Convention governing the IPC. South Africa had lodged its formal acceptance of the Convention with the Director-General of FAO and was accordingly now a member of the IPC.
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN POPLAR AND WILLOW CULTIVATION AND UTILIZATION.
11. Mr D. Terasson presented the synthesis of responses on the theme of the 20th Session, Environmental and Social Issues in Poplar and Willow Cultivation and Utilization. The synthesis was based on 17 responses to a questionnaire that had been circulated to all member countries. 12. Countries fell into three different categories regarding environmental and social issues related to the cultivation and use of the Salicaceae: countries where the cultivation of the Salicaceae was generally considered beneficial, for protective and or productive purposes. Examples were China and countries with low rainfall such as Morocco where cultivation of the Salicaceae could reduce soil erosion and create green corridors; countries where poplar (and to a lesser extent willow) plantations were criticised or opposed, largely because they threatened the integrity of natural systems in wetlands or valleys, mainly in Western Europe; countries neutral towards cultivation of the Salicaceae such as Sweden or Canada, where the Salicaceae occurred naturally rather than in plantations. 13. In general there was little information on the status of natural stands of poplars and willows but it was known that riparian formations, in which the Salicacea were often prominent components, were being reduced for various reasons such as river training works, conversion to agricultural land or to artificial poplar plantations. For this reason several countries had started gene conservation programmes, e.g. Salix humboldtiana in Argentina, Populus nigra in Europe through the EUFORGEN programme. Riparian stands helped to stabilise river banks, and several countries drew attention to the importance of such stands for the capture of soil nitrates. A more favourable environment for fish might be produced through their shading effect in reducing water temperatures, but the decomposition of poplar leaves could reduce water quality. Riparian stands could provide important corridors for animal migrations while they contributed visual and amenity benefits to the landscape. They might make an important contribution to providing fuel, building materials and other products for rural communities, but this role was diminishing.
2 14. Although areas of plantations of the Salicaceae had increased in recent years the genus remained of relatively low importance in plantation programmes, except in China. Information on the environmental and social effects of such plantations was therefore lacking and came from relatively few countries. Such effects might be positive or negative depending on the objectives of the plantations e.g. the effect on the water table was positive where the plantations were established for drainage purposes, but negative if the conservation of wetlands was a priority. The beneficial effects on water quality in capturing nitrates and other pollutants were noted, as with natural riparian stands, but the use of chemicals in the establishment of plantations might have a negative effect on water quality. Plantations were being established in several countries e.g. China, Egypt, Morocco for erosion and desert control and in New Zealand for catchment area protection. On the whole plantations of the Salicaceae were reported as having a negative effect on natural ecosystems and on animal life and in causing gene pollution of natural stands. Both positive and negative assessments of the contribution of plantations to the appearance of traditional landscapes were reported, but on the whole only positive contributions to the well-being of peoples, whether in the provision of goods or services such as leisure activities. Products research was continuing in several countries into the use of the Salicaceae for biomass, and into the environmental impact of wood packing and pallets. 15. The major environmental and social concerns related to the cultivation of poplars and willows were: recognition of widespread threats to natural riparian forest, and the need for the evaluation of the effects of the types of land use which replace them; the need for conservation of natural occurrences of riparian forest, including the conservation of the genetic resources of several poplar species including P. nigra; the potential of plantations of the Salicaceae to capture agricultural and industrial soil pollutants;.
the need to examine the functioning of artificial ecosystems such as poplar and willow plantations, which were scattered in rural areas, related to the general problem of the functioning of fragmented ecosystems; the impact of cultural techniques on biological diversity, especially the use of chemicals;.
the use of biomass derived from the Salicaceae for energy production, and the implications for the maintenance of soil fertility the environmental costs associated with the manufacture and use of various raw materials in packaging and associated recycling processes; the visual impact of the cultivation of the Salicaceae on the landscape and methods for the evaluation of non-market uses.
V SYNTHESIS OF NATIONAL REPORTS ON ACTIVITIES RELATED TO POPLAR AND WILLOW AREAS, PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION AND THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSIONS.
16. National Reports were received from the Poplar Commissions of 27 member countries, including South Africa (see annex IV).
17. Data concerning the areas of poplars were available for most countries. China reported an area of natural and planted poplars of 1.34 mn ha, of which 360 000 ha were established in the period 1991-95. Canada had large areas of natural stands of poplars in mixed hardwood and hardwood/conifer stands. Significant increases of poplar plantations were reported from China, Turkey and Belgium, while decreases were reported from France and Italy The reported areas of poplar plantations were: France 245 000 ha; Romania 163 000 ha of which 80 000 ha were native stands; Hungary 162 000 ha; Turkey 157 000 ha of which 7 000 ha were native stands; Iran 150 000 ha of which c. 40 000 ha were native stands; Germany 103 000 ha; Spain 98 000 ha ; Italy 71 000 ha, Argentina 55 000 ha, Belgium 45 000 ha, Egypt 40 000 ha, the Netherlands 31 000 ha, India 26 400 ha. Less information was available on standing volume; Canada continued to dominate the reported stocks, with 2.9 mn m3, mainly of P. tremuloides, while France reported 27 mn m3 and Italy 4 mn m3. 18. The import and export of poplar wood continued to be of importance in Europe. The main poplar importing countries were Italy, c. 500 000 tonnes, Belgium 313 000 tonnes, France 107 000 tonnes, the Netherlands 62 000 tonnes and Croatia 24 000 tonnes. The main poplar exporting countries were Hungary, c. 500 000 tonnes, Belgium 159 000 m3, France 327 000 tonnes, Romania 40 000 tonnes and Croatia 21 000 tonnes. Several countries reported importing and re-exporting poplar wood, either in the round or in semi-processed form 19. Some countries reported changes that in forest or land use policies that would encourage the planting of poplars and willows. Other countries reported public feeling, sometimes translated into legislation, against poplar plantations on wetlands and riverbeds due to a perceived reduction in biological diversity and their unnatural appearance. The process of privatisation of plantations of wood-using industries continued in some (but not all) of the member countries with economies in transition. Some countries reported new policies regarding "set-aside" agricultural land and the availability of financial incentives that might promote the planting of poplars. 20. There was continuing interest in a few countries such as Sweden and Germany in the growing of poplars and willows for biomass energy. 21. Little information was given in country statements on the cultivation and use of willows. New Zealand reported areas of 53 000 ha in 1962, since when there has been much new planting. Romania reported an area of 50 000 ha, of which 9 400 ha were native stands, Egypt 40 000 ha, Argentina 35 000 ha, Hungary 23 100 ha, Sweden 16 000 ha (for biomass energy), India 15 000 ha of which c. 8 000 ha were native stands, and Croatia 7 400 ha of which 3 000 ha were native stands. 22. Willow production was used in rural areas for domestic and agricultural purposes and thus was not always recorded. Recorded annual production from Romania was 250 000 m3, Argentina 245 000 m3, Hungary 46 800 m3 and Croatia 28 000 m3. 23. National Poplar Commissions were generally reported as being active, and as having helped to promote important exchanges of poplar germplasm between member countries of the IPC.
POPLAR AND WILLOW IDENTIFICATION AND VARIETAL CONTROL.
24. The Chairman of the sub-committee presented a report on developments since the last Session, drawing attention to some weaknesses in the functioning of the present system:.
2 no country requested preliminary authorisation from the system for the designation of cultivars;.
the existence of the International Catalogue of Poplar Cultivars was known neither to breeders nor to the relevant national authorities for the control of forest reproductive material; most National Poplar Commissions did not ensure that the relevant information on new cultivars was transmitted to the relevant national authorities or to the IPC sub-committee; there was no connection between the International Catalogue of Poplar Cultivars and other official international registers (e.g. EU, OECD etc.); no system for the registration of poplar cultivars existed for non-member countries of the IPC.
JOINT MEETING OF THE WORKING PARTIES.
25. A joint meeting was held of all the Working Parties. The following papers were presented: Poplar as a model tree - keynote address (R. Stettler); Willows in the Republic of Argentina (R. Arreghini and T. Cerillo); Towards global management of poplar genetic resources (V. Steenackers); Technical guidelines for the safe movement of poplar germplasm (J. Ball) Value-added utilization of poplar in Hungary (Zs. Kovacs and Gy Szabadhegyi).
POPLAR AND WILLOW PROTECTION.
a) Report of the Working Party on Poplar Diseases.
26. The theme of the Working Party meeting was Diversity among pathogens of poplars and willows and the evolution of their populations. Professor. Martin Hubbes described different methods of molecular biology to determine diversity among pathogens to representatives of 8 countries who took part in the discussions. 27. Other items raised and reviewed in the meeting of the Working Party were: a review of published literature on poplar pathology for the past 35 years has been made for Central Europe by Dr Bohar . This work could now be used as the basis of a study of the distribution of diseases of poplar in Central Europe; within the European Union collaboration has already started on the evaluation of the reaction of poplar clones to the main diseases; members of the Working Group identified two important diseases for European populiculture, namely Marssonina brunnea (as shown by the presence of an aggressive strain attacking stems and branches in Bulgaria and France) and Discoporium populeum which has severely attacked clones selected as resistant.
2 once again the members of the group identified the problems arising from the transfer of diseases from one continent to another, as has happened in the case of M. larici-populini and M. medusae in South Africa; members of the Group proposed the general theme of Diversity among pathogens of the poplars and willows for the meeting in the year 2000. In view of the complexity of this proposed theme the Group elected three Vice-chairmen, namely Professor Hubbes (Canada), the former secretary of the Group, Dr Jean Pinon, (France) and Mme M. Steenackers (Belgium), and confirmed Professor Cellerino (Italy) as Chairman. b) Report of the Working Party on Poplar Insect Pests 28. Members of the Working Party met and reviewed the threats of methods of pest control to humans and natural ecosystems, the prevention of accidental introduction of poplar pests through the exchange of germplasm between countries, the harmonisation of methodologies for testing genetic resistance to poplar pests and the promotion of exchanges among young scientists through fellowships.
LOGGING AND UTILIZATION.
29. Forty participants from 16 countries attended the sessions of the Working Party. A general paper on the economic modelling of poplar production and utilization was presented, followed by 11 scientific papers on topics ranging from wood quality of poplars and willows, the production of structural panels, value-added products and harvesting techniques. 30. It was agreed that the evolving field of certification of forest management practices and products would be reported at the next meeting of the Working Party, and that the topic of logging and harvesting should be placed on the agenda of the same meeting.
BREEDING AND SELECTION OF POPLARS AND WILLOWS.
31. Over 50 scientists from 20 countries attended the meetings of the Working Party. Thirty seven technical papers and 12 posters were submitted for discussion and the activities for the following four years were reviewed; co-ordination of activities and the exchange of information between members of the Working Party and with members of the relevant IUFRO Working Party were seen as the most realistic goals. The need for the allocation of more time for future Working Party meetings was discussed as well as improved co-ordination between and within the Working Party. 32. Dr Stefano Bisoffi (Italy) was elected Chairman of the Working Party for the forthcoming period, with Dr Wout Boerjan (Belgium), Dr Khalid Siddiqui (Pakistan) and Dr Teresa Cerrillo (Argentina) as Vice-chairmen.
BIOMASS PRODUCTION SYSTEMS FOR THE SALICACEAE.
33. Thirty five scientists from 17 countries participated in the sessions of the Working Party. Sixteen papers were presented.
2 34. The Working Party discussed the title and scope of the group, the need for the integration of all IPC Working Party activities, the importance of intensively managed plantations for the production of industrial wood and biomass, and research and the plantation programmes in Hungary.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
35. Delegates reviewed the recommendations formulated by the subsidiary bodies and, after discussion, adopted the following recommendations: Nomenclature and Registration 36. The Secretariat of the IPC was requested to circulate a letter to each of the member countries of the IPC concerning the International Catalogue of Poplar Cultivars, with an example of the.
2 registration form, recalling the responsibilities of the IPC for the registration of poplar cultivars, and the procedures. 37. Each member country of the IPC should, further, be requested to designate a correspondent with responsibility for providing information necessary for registering new cultivars and for co-ordinating with national authorities responsible for the control of forest reproductive material. 38. The Secretariat should examine, in collaboration with the sub-committee, means of involving nonmember countries of the IPC in the registration of new cultivars. 39. The coherence of the Catalogue with catalogues published by other organisations should be checked. Poplar and Willow Protection a) Diseases 40. The Working Party on Diseases made the following recommendations for their future activities: the preparation of a world map of the principal diseases of poplars (and of their clones and races); to extend the existing collaboration with the European Union in the evaluation of the reaction of existing clones of poplars to the main diseases to other countries and continents, harmonising the results to make them comparable; to make a detailed study of the diversity of the two pathogens Marssonina brunnea and discoporium populeum. 41. The Working Party proposed to meet only every four years, except in a case of emergency, such as the appearance of a new disease. b) Insect Pests 42. The Working Party on Poplar Insect Pests made the following recommendations on guidelines for its future activities: the improvement of methods of pest control in order to reduce threats to humans and to natural ecosystems; increased emphasis on methods for the prevention of the accidental introduction of new pests through germplasm exchange, or the introduction of susceptible material that would permit the transformation of presently harmless indigenous phytopathogens into major pests; the harmonisation of methodologies for research into genetic resistance to poplar pests, in order to make results comparable between countries; the encouragement of young scientists through a system of fellowships.
43. The Working Party recommended to the Secretariat of the IPC that an additional day should be allowed for future Sessions.
3 Logging and Utilization 44. The Working Party identified the following research priorities for the group: wetwood (causes, problems in processing and prevention); tensionwood (formation and utilization); biodeterioration of poplar wood, and its prevention.
45. The Working Party identified the subject matter for three Technical Leaflets, to be prepared by members and passed to the Secretariat: economics and the modelling of poplar production; production, technical characteristics and the utilization of willows; production, technical characteristics and the utilization of poplars. Breeding and Selection 46. In view of the nature of breeding programmes for improved wood production and other benefits, the Working Party drew the attention of member countries of the IPC to the need for the long-term commitment of adequate funding. 47. The Working Party acknowledged with great satisfaction the actions taken by FAO in following up previous recommendations on the monitoring the status of P. euphratica and P. ilicifolia. It recommended that active conservation programmes be undertaken on these two species and that a similar effort be extended to other low-latitude species adapted to the warm and dry climates of many subtropical countries, especially P. yunnanensis and P. ciliata in Asia and species of the Aigeiros, Abaso and Tacamahaca sections of poplars in Mexico. 48. While it was recognized that in situ conservation was the best strategy for the maintenance of a wide genetic diversity there were nevertheless important and diverse ex situ collections of poplar germplasm in many national institutions. Some of this germplasm might no longer be used in one country but might be useful in another, and the Working Party therefore recommended that member countries maintained such collections. 49. The Working Party recommended that special attention was devoted by member countries with long experience in poplar and willow growing to the transfer of knowledge to countries where such culture was relatively new. 50. The Working Party drew the attention of member countries to existing international agreements and to the ongoing debate on breeders' and farmers' rights. Biomass Production Systems 51. Members recommended a change in the name of the Working Party, which was subsequently reviewed and agreed in the informal meeting of the new Executive Committee as Production Systems for.
4 Poplars and Willows (see para. 13). Furthermore, members recommended that a plan.
5 for the integration of all Working Party activities is prepared and presented at the satellite meeting of the IPC planned at the World Forestry Congress in 1997. 52. The Working Party recommended that member countries support programmes for intensively managed and bioenergy plantations of poplars and willows, in the first case to reduce pressure on natural forests and in the second to providing a carbon-neutral source of energy. 53. The Working Party recommended that member countries support Hungary and neighbouring countries in the establishment of poplar and willow plantations on land taken out of agricultural production, with the aid of subsidies if required. Members also recommended that member countries offer support to poplar research programmes in these countries.
ELECTION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 1997-2000.
54. Twenty candidates were proposed by fifteen member countries for election to the Executive Committee for the period 1997-2000. An election was held by secret ballot involving 26 member country delegates authorised to represent their respective governments (Argentina, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Egypt, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Korea (Republic of), New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Turkey, UK and USA) 55. The following were elected to the Executive committee for the period 1997-2000: R. Arreghini (Argentina), I. Bach (Hungary), J. Isebrands (USA), E. Noh (Korea, Rep.), A. Padro (Spain), J. Richardson (Canada), W. Shiji (China), V. Steenackers (Belgium), D. Terrasson (France), T. Verwijst (Sweden), H. Weisgerber (Germany), A. Wilkinson (New Zealand). The collection and counting of the votes was scrutinised by F. Gaillard (Switzerland), F. Páscoa (Portugal) and Z. Somogyi (Hungary).
DATE AND PLACE OF THE NEXT SESSION.
56. Delegates were advised that invitations had been received from Chile, the Islamic Republic of Iran and a combined invitation from the USA and Canada to host the 21st Session of the IPC. FAO was requested to approach these countries, and on the basis of their responses, to decide the venue of the next Session.
CLOSING OF THE SESSION.
57. Mr Victor Steenackers thanked the hosts for their organization of a most successful meeting and study tour. Dr Erno Fuhrer, Director-General of the Hungarian Forest Research Institute, referred to the determination of the national forestry sector to continue activities in poplar and willow cultivation and development, in spite of economic difficulties. In closing he thanked FAO and all colleagues and participants for their part in making the meeting a success.
THIRTY-EIGHTH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE Budapest, Hungary, 1 October 1996 PROVISIONAL AGENDA.
8. Opening of the Session Adoption of the Agenda Activities of the Working Parties and Sub-Committee on Nomenclature and Registration of Poplars since the Thirty-seventh Session of the Executive Committee in Turkey in October 1994 Proposals for the composition of the Executive Committee for the period 1997-2000 Proposals for the date and place of the next session of the Executive Committee Responsibilities of Working Groups Arrangements for the 50th Anniversary of the IPC Other matters.
TWENTIETH SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSION AND RELATED SESSIONS Budapest, Hungary, 2-4 October 1996 PROVISIONAL AGENDA.
10. 11. 12. 13. Adoption of the Agenda Election of Officers Admission of New Member Nations Environmental and Social Issues in Poplar and Willow Cultivation and Utilization Poplar and Willows: Summary of Statistics and Economics, Cultivation and Silviculture, Policy and Legislation and Operation of National Poplar Commissions Poplar and Willow Identification and Varietal Control Poplar and Willow Protection Poplar and Willow Logging and Utilization Bre