<title>Bibliography on gender and agricultural engineering for small farms in developing countries</title>
<section>1</section>
2 Gender, agricultural equipment and energy
2 Gender, agricultural equipment and energy
Grellier, R.
All in good time: women's agricultural in sub-Saharan Africa. Publications Distribution Office, Natural Resources Institute (NRI); Chatham; UK; pp 68
AB: This bibliography is the first part of a study of women's participation in agricultural production in the semi-arid regions of sub-Saharan Africa. The study looks at women's agricultural strategies, especially their use of particular tools and crop production techniques. It focuses on ways in which the use of draught animals affect labour and resource use, and generate increased income differentials at the household and community level. Literature is included that presents information on women's crop production, and particularly information on how women presently address critical timing issues. The literature falls into three areas: access to and control of agricultural resources including land, labour, capital, agricultural services and information; division of labour and timeliness of task completion; technology and production relations.
Key words: participation; gender relations; time allocation; division of labour, women; agricultural production; bibliographies; rural development; Africa South of Sahara
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jackson, C.
From conjugal contracts to environmental relations: some thoughts on labour and technology.
In: IDS Bulletin vol. 26, no 1, pp 33-39; 1995. University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
Rana, M.; Grover, I.; Bansal, N.K.; Grover, D.K.
Development of light-weight, wheel hand-hoe for farm women.
In: Indian-Farming. 1994, 43: 12, pp 8-9. New Delhi: lndian Council of Agricultural Research; India
AB: A number of tasks carried out on Indian farms, such as transplanting, weeding and harvesting, are still performed without mechanization. A study into an improved, wheel mounted hoe for women was carried out. Specifications for two models, an improved version and a lightweight version, are given in comparison with existing local hoes. Field trials involving 40 women in 4 villages were undertaken. The lightweight hoe was judged the best by the women for improving the quality of life. In producing a lightweight hoe the cost was reduced.
Key words: mechanization; hoes; women; comparisons; working conditions; costs; manual operation; appropriate technology; equipment; weed control; India
Kumagai, Sonoko Matsuda
Farm Mechanization and Women's Life Pattern-Changing Time Allocation
In: International Journal of Japanese Sociology; 1994, 3, Oct. pp 99-119.
AB: Changes in the time allocation of Japanese farm families after farm mechanization are examined through comparison of 1957 8 1987 surveys of the Aural community in Okayama. A 1990 survey of Yamagata supports a regional comparison of time allocation.. Findings show that postmechanization time allocation is a function of generation 8 gender. Younger family members spend more time on private activity outside of farming, while older family members remain on the farm. Since mechanization, women's time allocation shows less seasonal fluctuation; time spent in secondary activities has decreased, & that in leisure activities increased. In 1957, time spent by women working outside of farming was negligible, while in 1987, young farm wives spent 74% of their time in off-farm jobs. Length of farm work increased, however, for middle-aged farm wives. Data for Yamagata suggest that differentiation & individuation were slower there due to underdevelopment of the nonfarm labor market. 16
Tables, 4 Figures, 18 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1995, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Rural Women; Japan; Family Farms; Time Utilization; Working Women; Agricultural Technology; Industrial Development; Modernization
Afford M.
Weeds and weed management in small-scale cropping systems in northern Zambia.
In: Crop Production Science; No. 21; pp 6, 1994
Institutionen for Vaxtodlingslara, Sveriges Lantbruksuniversitet (Department of Crop Production, Swedish University of Agricultura Sciences); Uppsala; Sweden
AB: This dissertation reports on various aspects of weeds and their management. They were studied in small-scale cropping systems in the Luapula province of northern Zambia. There were 4 major cropping systems: citemene (slash-pile-and-bum), icisebe (levelled fields, usually tilled in the dry season), ibala (fields where all crops are planted on mounds) and ifwamu (cash crops grown with mineral fertilizers). Each cropping system varied in mode of land preparation, crop sequence, vegetation management, commercialization and degree of permanence, but were all based on hoe cultivation and relatively short cropping cycles. The principle crops were cassava (Manihot esculenta), maize (Zea mays), groundnuts (Arachis hypogaea) and finger millet (Eleusine coracana). Direct weeding was usually canted out once a year. A main reason for weeding cassava was fire protection. Relay intercropping resulted in several opportunities for indirect weed control. Farmers did not aim at a total
control of weeds. Grasses, shrubs and composite herbs dominated among weeds. Zizka (Melinis repens) was the most feared species. The composition of the weed flora varied between cropping systems, crops and fields of different ages. The weed density was least in young citemene fields and greatest in old cassava fields. It suggested that farmers have limited knowledge of the biological properties of weeds. Most weeds had some traditional use, but very small quantities were utilized. Women did more weeding than men, especially in subsistence crops. Great variation in crop yield occured, both within and between farmers' fields. In annual crops, average yield losses due to weeds were about 20%. Farmers were generally aware of the magnitude of losses caused by weeds. Weeds were a concern for Luapula farmers, but not to the same extent as soil fertility or cash restraints.
Key words: female labour; crop yield; soil fertility; economics; cultural control; cropping systems; fertilizers; intercropping; seedbed preparation; weeds; cassava; maize; groundouts; physical control; hoeing; control; plant communities; population density; yields; utilization; weed control; cereals; root crops; fatty oil plants; Zambia
Appleton, H.
Technical innovation by women - implications for small enterprises.
In: Small Enterprise Development. 1994, 5: 1, pp 4-12.
Institutional Relations Unit, Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby, UK. 1994
AB: Women's technical skills and innovations are often ignored because they may relate to their domestic responsibilities, or because they do not have obvious income-generating potential. Those working with women need to be aware of these skills, to help women derive the maximum benefit from them. Some attention has been paid to the role of technology in small businesses and micro-enterprises and to the importance of recognizing and supporting existing technical capacity among male and female entrepreneurs. The understanding that technology comprises both hardware and software elements of production, tools and machinery and skills and knowledge is widely articulated in the literature describing technical assistance. To facilitate a more realistic identification of technical capacity, this article focuses equally on hardware and software elements of technology and considers processes of technical innovation as important as the output. For men and women, different experiences
have different impact differently on their respective capacities and priorities in relation to the use and innovation of technology, whether within enterprises or other activities. There are three ways in which agencies working with small enterprises can use information from a gender analysis of technology: to understand better the dynamics of decision making and technical activity within enterprises; to increase understanding about widening the range of options available through understanding technical capacity derived from other areas of work; in the development of equipment to improve the profitability or relieve the drudgery of the production process. Three case studies, from Peru, Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka, show women's coping strategies and roles in employment.
Key words: technology; women; small businesses; rural development; Peru; Zimbabwe; Sri Lanka; Developing countries
Bryceson, D.F.; Howe, J.
Rural household transport in Africa: reducing the burden on women?
In: World development 21(1993)11, pp 1715-1728.
Rural household travel patterns have been largely ignored in African transport studies. Donor agencies are now focusing efforts on 'appropriate' technology interventions to directly enhance rural mobility and to indirectly improve agricultural productivity
Key words: agricultural transport; households; appropriate technology; women; Africa; rural areas; development projects
Kaul, R.N.
Gender sensitivity of agricultural mechanization in developing countries.
Paper American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 1993, No. 93-8006, pp 17.
AB: Most technological innovations in the past, have been focused on men, leaving women to perform tasks which are arduous and time consuming. The sensitivity of the often neglected gender issue in agricultural mechanization and the complexities of improving women's work load are discussed. Attempts to introduce crop threshers, water carriers, milk churners, etc. to women using a participatory research-extension approach are reported. A greater international focus on developing farm tools for women in developing countries is advocated.
Key words: Women; mechanization; agriculture; ergonomics; technology transfer; rural development; Developing countries
Brun, Thierry
The Assessment of Total Energy Expenditure of Female Farmers under Field Conditions
In: Journal of Biosocial Science; 1992, 24, 3, July, 325-333.
AB: Methods of measuring the daily energy expenditure of rural women in developing countries are assessed. Many methods, eg, carbon dioxide production, heart rate recording, & doubly labeled water, are used, but with little standardization. Calibration with a reference method based on direct or indirect calorimetry is essential.. The occurrence of large intra- & interindividual variations in the energy cost of a single activity also requires the use of repeated measurements. Examples of the use 8 limitations of techniques of total energy expenditure assessment are provided from water collection & food preparation in Burkina Faso, 8 work capacity in tropical regions of the People's Republic of China 8 Gambia. 3 Tables, 19 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1993, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Burkina Faso; Energy; Rural Women; Developing Countries; Food; Water Supply
Kaul, R.N.
Gender issues in farming, part II: selected case studies in development and extension of farm and other equipment to women in northern Nigeria.
In: Journal for Farming Systems Research Extension. 1992, 3: 2, pp 25-38.
AB: It is well established that women the world over perform a wide variety of tasks. Such tasks as cooking (partly for daily sale), water fetching, milk processing, and crop threshing were chosen for closer study, and this paper reports the findings as case studies in two states in northern Nigeria. Sample surveys, including Rapid Rural Appraisals (RRA), were done to assess the scope of the technological constraints and other problems faced by women. Improved equipment development was targeted to ease drudgery and to allow more output and release time for other activities. Maximum emphasis was given to modifying existing technologies using available infrastructural facilities. Women in groups and as individuals were involved during the phase of the project devoted to development/adoption of tools. This paper discusses these approaches, illustrating successes and failures with women food sellers, milk processors, introduction of crop threshers/shellers, water-carrier
improvement, and formation of women's cooperatives. Additional tasks for income-generation (such as raw sugar preparation, use of solar driers, etc.) are being introduced to generate extra income in the time saved by use of better equipment. Care was exercised to ensure that technologies being developed enable women to retain their traditional tasks.
Key words: milk; processing; threshing; rapid rural appraisal; women; female labour; tools; appropriate technology; cows; milk processing; rural development; Nigeria
Kaul, R.N.; Ali, A.
Gender issues in African farming: I. A case for developing farm tools for women.
In: Journal for Farming Systems Research Extension. 1992, 3: 1, pp 35-46.
AB: Women in Africa contribute up to an estimated 70% of the labour involved in food production and nearly 100% in rural food processing. Their range of daily activities (food preparation, water and fuel transportation, farm weeding, crop threshing, and dairy product preparation) is far wider than men's and demands high energy input. Despite awareness of this, most technologies developed for small-scale farmers are geared to men with no concern for their appropriateness for women, who possess different physiques and energy capabilities in comparison to men. This paper examines farm tools and processes that are predominantly used by women in Africa and explains, with available research data, the inadequacies of such tools and processes when linked to women's physiques and energy levels. Specific examples of tool design-parameter selection for operations such as weeding and rural milk processing are highlighted to show the applications of the research. They also illustrate the
need to design and develop farm tools specifically for female operators in order to improve overall ease of use, safety, and effective integration of women in farming system innovations.
Key words: Hoes; Milk; Processing; women; female labour, tools; appropriate technology; rural development; Africa
IRRI
Ultralight rice transplanters can make life easier for women.
In: Indian-farming. 1991, 41: 2, p 29;
AB: Women have traditionally transplanted the rice crop but equipment designed for the process does not always suit their build. A new transplanter made of steel, aluminium, and wood and half the weight of earlier hand-operated transplanting machines is described. A worker can transplant one-fifth of a hectare in a working day with the new transplanter.
Key words: Transplanters; rice; female labour; anthropometric dimensions; Farm, machinery; Philippines; Developing Countries
Truscott, K.
Women and tillage: strategic issues posed by farmer groups
Proceedings of a workshop on "Tillage, Past and Future", Conference: Tillage, Past and Future; Harare (Zimbabwe).; 14-15 Nov 1989.
CIMMYT; Harare (Zimbabwe); pp 15;
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement, Harare (Zimbabwe), Dept. of AGRITEX; CIMMYT, Harare (Zimbabwe); FAO, Harare (Zimbabwe)
AB: This paper argues that in order to promote any change within small scale production systems, we need to recognise the complexity of the existing household/collective farming systems in the small scale sector; understand the benefits and disbenefits to small scale farmers of their existing tillage systems; put forward the issues involved in "minimum" tillage (or any other technological change) to tampers themselves for discussion and feedback; adapt any proposed new tillage recommendations to take into account the farmers' views and capacities; consider any tillage recommendations (or other change in technology in terms of economic productivity including returns to labour and capital inputs).
Key words: Tillage; women; farming systems; Small scale farming; common lands; Zimbabwe
CIMMYT
Tillage, past and future
CIMMYT FSR Networkshop Report (CIMMYT) on Workshop on Tillage, Past and Future;
Hatcliffe, Harare (Zimbabwe) 14-15 Nov 1989. pp 62.
Key words: Zimbabwe; tillage; zero tillage; appropriate technology; economics; farm inputs; ridging; role of women; small scale farming;
Carr, M. (ed)
Women and food security: the experience of the SADCC countries.
pp 210; Intermediate Technology Publications (IT); London; UK
AB: Women in the SADCC (Southern African Development Coordinating Conference) region play a major role in the production, processing, and marketing of food. However, for the main part, they have been constrained from contributing fully to the development of this sector by the lack of availability of efficient technologies relating to their tasks, as well as lack of access to those technologies which do exist. In recognition of this fact, and in light of the vitally important role which women have to play in the enhancement of food security in the region, the Government of Tanzania hosted a regional conference in Arusha in May 1988 to identify food technology projects of benefit to women which could be channelled through the SADCC mechanism. In order to have as much information as possible on women and food technologies, each of the nine member states was asked to prepare a background country paper on women's access to and use of improved food-related technologies. These
technologies were to cover the full range of 'hardware' relevant to food security: simple tools and equipment for land preparation; seeding, weeding, harvesting, threshing, and winnowing; storage and drying devices; various types of crop-processing machines; small-scale irrigation devices; fish, fruit and vegetable processing devices; low-cost transport devices; and energy conservation technologies; as well as 'software' techniques such as village woodlots and vegetable gardening. The papers were to look in depth at the important facts which influence successful introduction and diffusion of these technologies to women, such as access to credit and training; involvement of women in technology design and adaptation; availability of raw materials, infrastructure, and markets; and the policy environment. Where possible, examples of successful projects were to be included which could serve as a basis for discussion of potential replication in other countries in the region. This
was the first attempt to undertake a review of the situation concerning women and food technology in the SADCC region as a whole, and the collection of country papers is published in this book.
Key words: Food supply; women; food production; food technology; projects; rural development; Developing Countries; Southern Africa; SADCC Countries
Kim, H.N.; Lee, H.l.; Choi, J.H.; Rhie, S.G.; Cho, N.H.
A study of the reduction in rural work effort by using supplementary tools for female farmers.
Research Reports of the Rural Development Administration Agricultural Engineering, Sericulture, Farm Products Utilization and Farm Management. 1990, 32: 3, pp 65-72. Language: Korean
AB: In 22 female farm workers with an av. basal metabolism of 1270 Kcal/day, a rest metabolism of 1724 Kcal/day, daily urinary N excretion of 9.16 9, a daily creatinine excretion of 0.887 9 and an av. age of 47, energy expenditure when removing seedlings from a seedbed or filling pots with soil was decreased by the use of a stool. The stool also decreased energy expenditure during weeding but not during lifting of sweet potatoes. Using a table did not affect the energy used in trimming green onions or sorting strawberries, but it did change the diurnal pattern of energy expenditure and reduced some measures of fatigue.
Key words: Appropriate technology; transplanting; ergonomics; women; weed control; Energy requirements; harvesting; postharvest treatment; Physical control; manual weed control; weeds; onions; sweet potatoes; strawberries; handling; sorting; Korea Republic; Developing countries
Tarfa, S.B.
Developing appropriate technology to meet the needs of the Nigerian rural women: the Kenyan experience.
In: Noma, 1990, no 8. pp 33-35.
nr 1212 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract
Doran, J.
A moving issue for women: is low cost transport an appropriate intervention to alleviate women's burden in southern Africa? 1990, Gender Analysis in Development Discussion Paper, no.1, Norwich, School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia.
Kurwijila, RV.
Role of appropriate technology in reducing women's workload in agricultural activities in Tanzania.
Working Papers, Women in International Development, Michigan State University. 1990, No. 208, pp 10; BIDS;
East Lansing, Michigan; USA
AB: A review of the role of women in African agricultural production in general and Tanzania in particular, is presented, highlighting the fact that African women produce food by using labour-demanding production tools such as the hand-hoe. A survey of the use of appropriate technology devices in a rural area of Tanzania reveals that women are either unaware of the technology available or consider it too expensive for their needs. The establishment of Rural Women Training Centres is suggested along with increased involvement of women professionals in the design and dissemination of appropriate technologies aimed at improving agricultural production.
Key words: Rural women; appropriate technology; female labour; agricultural production; rural development; East Africa; Developing Countries; Tanzania
Battcock, M.
A future for solar drying?
In: Appropriate-Technology. 1990, 17: 2, pp 21-24.
Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby, UK.
AB: Methods and problems of solar drying in developing countries are summarized. Structures for solar drying eliminate some of the problems of product quality, dust contamination, damage from sudden rainstorms, animals or birds, etc. Such structures include the Brace drier for fruit and vegetable drying, chimney driers for rice, tent drier for fish and forced convection drier for red peppers. Reasons cited for the unpopularity of solar driers are lack of capital for construction, loss of valuable ground area while they are operating, extra labour required for loading and unloading, heavy trays that cannot be lifted by women. Further arguments against solar drier use are that higher quality products do not necessarily mean higher prices, and that crop losses are often exaggerated by certain agencies. Although solar driers are successful for cashew nuts in Honduras and desiccated coconut in Bangladesh, there is little future for driers for high vol., low value crops; only
large driers processing 1 t/d are likely to be useful.
Key words: Driers; solar drying; technology transfer, Appropriate technology; Cashews; Coconuts; solar energy; rice; fruits; vegetables; Grain driers; Developing countries
Singh, G.; Pariyar, M.P.
Manufacturing and testing of AIT jab seeder in Nepal.
Paper American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 1990, No. 90-5010, pp 17.
AB: A manually operated AIT (Asian Institute of Technology) jab seeder was manufactured in Nepal using locally available materials. Farmers, both men and women, found the seeder convenient to use and less tiresome as it avoids bending or squatting, resulting in savings of about one-fourth in labour use. The cost of the seeder could be recovered by sowing 1 ha of maize and soyabeans. The seeder should be an effective substitute for manual dibbing in the hills of Nepal.
Key words: Drills; manual operation; tests; design; Equipment; maize; Nepal; Developing countries
Elliott, K.; Sobhan, S.; Scott, A.; Marshall, K.; Harper, M.; Inger, D.; Roy, S.; Norton, J.; Katz, M.; Carr, M. (ed)
Barefoot book economically appropriate services for the rural poor. pp 97; Intermediate Technology Publications; London; UK
AB: The book explores the potential of 'intermediate' services, namely how to provide the services which rural communities need to work themselves out of poverty on a sustained basis. The first chapter (K. Elliott) sets the context by examining the 'barefoot' approach in its original application. This is followed by an account (D. Hadrill) of 'barefoot vets' in Nepal and India, where traditional healers and the livestock owners themselves have been trained in improved techniques of animal health care. Chapter 3 (S. Sobhan) writes about the experience of training selected members of rural communities in Bangladesh to be paralegals who provide advice on family, land, inheritance and constitutional law. This is followed by an account (A. Scott) of attempts in Ecuador and Nepal to enable rural communities to be involved in the planning and administration of their own development. Chapter 6 (K. Marshall) on 'barefoot bankers' describes the experience of the Grameen Bank in
Bangladesh which lends to thousands of rural landless, the majority of whom are women. Chapter 7 (M. Harper) examines experiences from Kenya and elsewhere in providing management consultancy services to rural entrepreneurs; and the next (D. Inger) considers village artisans in Botswana. Chapter 9 (S. Roy) describes an example of the provision of maintenance services for village-level equipment, namely, the 'barefoot handpump mechanics' of Rajasthan State, India. Chapter 10 (J. Norton) describes programmes which have upgraded the skills of traditional builders and introduced basic knowledge of building techniques to community workers in various parts of the world. Geologists are the subject of Chapter 11 (M. Katz) which examines the 'barefoot' approach to natural resource development by which rural communities identify and conserve the resources around them. The final chapter tries to draw some general conclusions from the various case studies and provides recommendations on
how 'intermediate' services can reach even greater numbers of rural communities.
Key words: Veterinary services; Training; Law; Self help; Construction technology; Banks; Women; Appropriate technology; Services; paraprofessionals; poverty; rural development; Developing Countries; Nepal; India; Bangladesh; Ecuador, Kenya; Rajasthan; Handpumps;
United Nations, Economic Commission for Africa.
Role of technology in small farmers' productivity in Africa. pp 43. Addis Ababa; Ethiopia
AB: This study provides an overview of technologies and techniques which are already in use, and could be put to more widespread use, on small farms in Africa, in order to improve small farmer productivity. Emphasis is placed on intermediate technologies, and also on technologies which can be produced indigenously or with the least possible amount of foreign inputs. The study considers hand tools, human-powered technologies, crop storage, animal traction, motor-driven machinery, cropping and fertilizing methods, transport technologies, and fuelwood and other energy sources. It concludes that widespread adoption of sustainable technology is a vital first step towards higher productivity. As higher productivity is achieved the farmer will be able to afford more sophisticated equipment and the rural areas will become more attractive, especially for men who tend to migrate to urban areas leaving women to tend the land.
Key words: Small farms; appropriate technology; farm equipment; rural development; Developing Countries; Africa
Kaul, R.N.
Farm tools for women: a case for theirspecific design requirements on ergonomic principles.
In: Agricultural engineering, Proceedings of the 11th international congress on agricultural engineering (CIGR), Dublin, Ireland, 4-8 September 1989. Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Balkema, pp 2889-2893.
nr 1198 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract.
Siregar, M.; Kikuchi, M.
A note on agricultural mechanization in Indonesia: West Sumatra in comparison with West Java.
In: Quarterly Journal of Agricultural Economy. 1988, 42: 1, Indonesia
AB: In West Sumatra, post harvest mechanization has proceeded rapidly, and in West Java mechanized cultivation has had a rapid impact. Scarcity of labour has encouraged mechanization in both areas. Changes in rice farming are examined for West Sumatra; development of irrigation techniques and seed and fertilizer technology were important advances, while machine milling replaced rice pounding by women in both West Sumatra and Java. Tractor cultivation is more widespread in West Java, but threshing machines are more common in West Sumatra. The economics of mechanization and its consequences are discussed.
Key words: Mechanization; economics; farm comparisons; Farming systems; Milling; Indonesia; Sumatra; Java
Ahmed, S. (ed)
Impact of agricultural and energy technology on the rural poor,
Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP), Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp 164
AB: In 1986 the Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP) launched a research project on the impact of technology transfer. It covered 2 broad issues: (1) agricultural technology transfer and its impact on the rural poor; and (2) the role of rural women vis-a-vis household energy technology. Part 1 of this report contains: abridged versions of the CIRDAP studies in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Thailand; a paper on experiences in Indonesia; and a paper giving an overview of the country studies. Part 2 contains the proceedings of a workshop held in Jakarta in 1987 as part of the project, which aimed to formulate recommendations to help governments and international agencies in drawing up technological policies which will benefit the rural poor.
Key words: technology transfer, agricultural technology; energy programmes; poverty; women's role; science and technology policy; conference proceedings; Asia, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand
Rivera, F.T.
Participation of rural women and children in handwatering agriculture for crop diversification
In: Filipino women in rice farming systems. Los Banos (Philippines), University of the Philippines, pp 133-182
AB: In the Philippines, many small farming families survive in the dry season by planting crops other than rice. These are often watered plant by plant from open wells. This article focuses on the position of rural women and children in hand-watered agriculture. It appears that such agriculture is practiced throughout the dry season. The main crops planted are vegetables, especially eggplants and tomatoes, and tobacco. Manually irrigated crops contribute greatly to total household income. Tobacco contributed 81% of total income in 2 communities studied in Luzon; for eggplant the figure was 7%. Women contributed 20 and 29% of the labour used in hand-watering tobacco and vegetables, respectively; children contributed 16 and 21%, respectively. The effectiveness of a foot pump introduced from Bangladesh was also studied. Eggplant farmers considered it an important innovation. Women generally viewed the pump as tailor-made for men, although they thought it had its value for
household chores such as washing clothes.
Key words: irrigation systems; hand tools; manual workers; women's role; children; crop diversification; case studies; Philippines, Luzon
Bolabola, C.
Appropriate technology for women: has it worked?
In: Environment and Pacific women: from the globe to the village.
Suva (Fiji), Fiji Association of Women Graduates, pp 13-18
AB: Economic development and the introduction of new cooking practices have resulted in the increasing domestication of women in Fiji. Women had to take over some of the traditional roles of men, such as cooking, fuelwood collecting and fishing. The harsh work environment and conditions that rural women face is stated to be directly attributable to the total absence of efficient tools or technology as labour- or time-saving devices. In this paper it is argued that appropriate technology is needed to alleviate physical labour and improve the quality of life and economic power of rural women. Technology introduced under some government development programmes has alleviated the physical work of men rather than women. Therefore, it is suggested that women should be in control of technology right from the initial decision making process of project and fund allocations. Some recommendations for establishing appropriate technology at the service of rural women are made.
Key words: appropriate technology; women; food preparation; women's role; development programmes; decision making; Fiji
Sarin, M.
Development of tools and technology for women's work in agriculture in India.
FAO, Bangkok (Thailand). Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific; pp 23
Key words: India; Women; female labour; inplements; appropriate technology;
Sokona, Y.
Food, energy and the daily chores of women in West Africa.
In: Food-energy nexus and ecosystem; Proceedings of