<title>Estimating Biomass and Biomass Change of Tropical Forests: a Primer. (FAO Forestry Paper - 134). Estimating biomass and biomass change in tropical forests</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Climate change is one of the truly global issues of our time, and forests play an important role in it. Changes in the cover, use, and management of forests produce sources and sinks of carbon dioxide which are exchanged with the biosphere. Estimation of the magnitude of these sources and sinks requires reliable estimates of the biomass density of forests. This is the background to the "primer" for estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests. It focuses on tropical forests whose high potential biomass gives any changes taking place in them a particular significance and it is concerned with one important component of the total biomass, namely above-ground woody biomass in trees with a diameter of at least 10 cm at breastheight.
Describing the state and change with regard to biomass requires observations of the state and change of area and of biomass per unit of area (biomass density in the terminology of this report). As reliable observations of biomass per unit of area are generally scarce, this "primer" endeavours to...
· outline methods that are available for estimating biomass per hectare of tropical forests using mainly existing data,
· describe primary data and measurement requirements for assessment of biomass per hectare and
· presents biomass per hectare estimates for many tropical countries using the methodologies given. It is meant to be useful to planners of forest inventories and in training for forest inventory.
The idea of a "biomass primer" to be used by planners of forest inventories and in training for forest inventory was first launched at a UNEP/FAO Expert Consultation on Environmental Parameters held in Nairobi, Kenya, in December 1992. This Forestry Paper could be realized thanks to cooperation from Dr. Sandra Brown of the University of Illinois, currently on temporary assignment to the US Environmental Protection Agency.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This "Biomass Primer" has been prepared under a contract with FAO by Dr. Sandra Brown of the University of Illinois, Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences; presently on assignment with the US Environmental Protection Agency, National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Western Ecology Division, Corvallis, Oregon. FAO is greatly indebted to Dr. Brown who has generously offered her experience and her time far beyond her contractual obligations.
FAO is also grateful to the following people for input to various phases of the report: Alberto Del Lungo and Aji Perera for estimating biomass from forest inventories for many tropical African and American countries, Andy Gillespie for development of the moist and wet biomass regression equations, and Ariel E. Lugo, Jack Winjum, Micheal Cairns and Reed I. White for helpful comments on this report.
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
BEF
Biomass expansion factor, ratio of aboveground oven-dry biomass of trees to oven-dry biomass of inventoried volume
BV
Biomass of inventoried volume in t/ha
C
Carbon, estimated as 50% of oven-dry biomass
DR
Degradation ratio
EFZ
Ecofloristic zone
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FORIS
Forest Resources Information System (of FAO)
FRA
Forest Resources Assessment
GIS
Geographic Information System
PBI
Potential biomass index
R/S
ratio of root biomass to shoot biomass, or ratio of belowground to aboveground biomass
VOB
inventoried volume over bark of free bole, i.e. from stump or buttress to crown point or first main branch
WD
wood density as oven-dry mass per unit of green volume (either tons/m^3 or grams/cm^3)
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 PREVIOUS ESTIMATES OF FOREST BIOMASS
Forests have traditionally been used for many products, including timber, fuel, and fodder. Determining the biomass of forests is a useful way of providing estimates of the quantity of these components. Typically, the quantity of sawtimber has been assessed by making volume estimations, but this ignores the other useful components such as smaller size wood for fuel use. Furthermore, very few to no assessments have been made of the quantity of wood present in forests that appear to have no potential for sawtimber production. Assessing the total aboveground biomass of forests, defined as biomass density when expressed as dry weight per unit area (see Section 2.2 for expanded definitions), is a useful way of quantifying the amount of resource available for all traditional uses. It either gives the quantity of total biomass directly or the quantity by each component (e.g., leaves, branches, and bole) because their biomass tends to vary systematically with the total biomass.
However, the way the biomass of each forest component varies with total biomass varies by forest type, such as natural or planted forests and closed or open forests. For example, leaves for fodder are about 3-5% and merchantable bole is about 60% of the total aboveground biomass of closed forests.
The quantity of biomass in a forest is a result of the difference between production through photosynthesis and consumption by respiration and harvest processes. Thus it is a useful measure for assessing changes in forest structure. Changes in forest biomass density are brought about by natural succession; human activities such as silviculture, harvesting, and degradation; and natural impacts by wildfire and climate change. Biomass density is also a useful variable for comparing structural and functional attributes of forest ecosystems across a wide range of environmental conditions.
Biomass of forests is also very relevant for issues related to global change. For example, the role of tropical forests in global biogeochemical cycles, especially the carbon cycle and its relation to the greenhouse effect, has heightened interest in estimating the biomass density of tropical forests. The biomass of forests provides estimates of the carbon pools in forest vegetation because about 50% of it is carbon. Consequently, biomass represents the potential amount of carbon, that can be added to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide when the forest is cleared and/or burned. Attempts to estimate the biomass density of tropical forests have been made by the scientific community for use in models that assess the contribution of tropical deforestation and biomass burning to the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide and other trace gases (Brown et al. 1989, Crutzen et al. 1991, Hall and Uhlig 1991, Houghton et al. 1983).
Global interest in climate change led to the establishment of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UN FCCC) at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). Over 130 nations have ratified this convention which means that these nations need to make national greenhouse gas emission inventories. Changes in the cover, use, and management of forests produce sources and sinks of carbon dioxide to and from the biosphere. To estimate the magnitude of these sources and sinks requires reliable estimates of the biomass density of the forests undergoing change.
Biomass density estimates also provide the means for calculating the amount of carbon dioxide that can be removed from the atmosphere by regrowing forests or by plantations because they establish the rates of biomass production and the upper bounds for carbon sequestering. This issue is receiving more attention of late as countries look to forests as a means of mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, particularly carbon dioxide, a major greenhouse gas and the one fixed during photosynthesis. Practices such as sustainable forest management, slowing deforestation, and low-impact-logging decrease emissions or conserve carbon dioxide. Other practices such as plantation establishment or other tree planting programs on previously non-forested land sequester carbon dioxide (Brown et al. 1996). Furthermore, biomass density estimates of forests are extremely relevant for studying other global biogeochemical cycles, such as nitrogen, because the amount of other nutrient elements in
forests is also related to the quantity of biomass present.
Another issue related to forest biomass has emerged since the 1980s. In addition to loss of forest area, forest degradation, resulting in biomass density loss, is known to be occurring (Brown et al. 1994, FAO 1993, 1995). Much of this biomass degradation appears to be unrecorded, thus it is in addition to that accounted for by sanctioned harvesting. An example is the illegal logging practices occurring in many forests of tropical Asia (Callister 1992). Clearly, this process of biomass density reduction has implications for the global carbon cycle, other biogeochemical cycles, and biodiversity. Biomass degradation is due to many factors mostly related to social, economic, and political factors.
1.1 PREVIOUS ESTIMATES OF FOREST BIOMASS
Estimates of the biomass density for many of the world's forests have been made. For example, under the International Biological Program (IBP) biomass density estimates were made for many intensive study sites covering most of the major forest regions of the world (summarized in Reichle et al. 1981). A detailed summary of biomass density studies in tropical forests, from lowland to montane and from wet to very dry zones, was made by Brown and Lugo (1982). A later study by Olson et al. (1983) produced a global map of the biomass density of all ecosystem types, including disturbed and undisturbed forests, at a 0.50 x 0.50 grid-scale of resolution.
All of the above summaries of biomass density were based on ecological studies creating several problems with their use for global-scale analyses. Ecological studies are generally designed to characterize local forest structure and the study sites are usually not truly randomly located nor represent the population of interest (Brown and Lugo 1992). These types of studies are suitable for studying local forests but not for making inferences about larger populations (Brown et al. 1989). Furthermore, the total area covered by these studies is a very small fraction of the total forest area (e.g., less than 0.00001% for tropical forests; Brown and Lugo 1984).
A further problem with using biomass data from ecological studies for national to global analyses is the inherent bias of ecologists to adjust placement of plots based on the notion of what a mature forest should look like, i.e., one with many large diameter trees (Brown and Lugo 1992). The effect of adjusting plot placement to include large diameter trees is to overestimate biomass density of the forests because biomass per tree increases geometrically with increasing diameter. The result of this bias is to yield high biomass density estimates for forests (Brown et al. 1989). Thus data from ecological studies must be used with caution as they may not represent the biomass density of the forest over large areas.
Biomass density estimates for tropical forests have been made by the FAO (1993) based on the FAO FORIS (Forest Resources Information System), a computerized data base. Biomass estimates were computed from estimates of volume over bark (VOB, inventoried volume to a minimum tree diameter of 10 cm) often measured in forest inventories. On the positive side, VOB data from forest inventories are based on a large number of plots, generally collected from large sample areas using a planned sampling design from the population of interest. On the negative side, very few national or subnational inventories that report VOB have been done in the tropics. The compilation of the VOB data base by the FAO required much educated guesswork to produce estimates on a tropic-wide basis. This approach is, therefore, of unknown reliability and any errors in VOB estimates were compounded during the conversion of these data to biomass density values. Clearly, new efforts to estimate biomass density
more directly from forest inventory data will provide more reliable data for national to global assessments of the quantity of forest resources.
<section>5</section>
2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF PRIMER ON ESTIMATING BIOMASS
2.1 WHAT TREE FORMATIONS ARE INCLUDED?
2.2 WHAT IS BIOMASS?
Decisions by policy-makers regarding the management and use of forest and trees require accurate and precise information on the state and patterns and rates of change of the resource. To attain these needs, reliable estimates on the state and change of forest biomass for all countries over the long term must be made. Biomass estimates for forests of tropical countries, in particular, are needed because globally they are undergoing the greatest rates of change and reliable biomass estimates are few. Their biomass and C content is generally high, which influences their role in the global C cycle. Further, tropical forests have the greatest potential for mitigation of CO[2] through conservation and management (Brown et al. 1996).
The main goals of this primer are to (1) present methods that are available for estimating biomass density of tropical forests or tree formations using primarily existing data, (2) give examples of calculations on how the different methodologies are used, (3) describe primary data and measurement requirements to make biomass density estimates, and (4) present biomass density estimates for many tropical countries using the methodologies given. Additional new techniques will be presented that have been shown to be useful for mapping biomass density at regional scales, and that address the change in biomass. It concludes with a discussion on the directions and future studies that are needed to make more reliable estimates of the state and change in forest biomass.
This primer is not intended to be an exhaustive compilation of available information on biomass estimation methodology nor on biomass density estimates for tropical forests. Rather, it is intended to present approaches that have been shown to be useful for application to existing data and to situations where detailed data are lacking, and to emphasize what types of new field data are needed to make improved biomass estimates. Although examples of biomass density estimates for forests in many tropical countries are provided in this primer, they should be used with care when making national biomass inventories because many of the inventories are old (pre-1980s in many cases) and are subject to several of the problems outlined below (see Section 3). Improvements will only occur when estimating biomass density becomes one of the goals of a forest inventory. At this point, collection of the required data for making reliable estimates of biomass will be part of the inventory
design. It is expected that the extra data needed should only incur marginal costs. Many inventories already collect most of the required data. Because of the general interest in forest biomass for the reasons given above, many local to national studies on this topic are already being done. The information given in this primer is not meant to replace these efforts, but rather to complement them, and to ensure that basic standards are used (e.g., all biomass density estimates should be based on oven-dry weight).
2.1 WHAT TREE FORMATIONS ARE INCLUDED?
The methods for biomass estimation presented in this primer are not restricted to just forests but to most formations where trees dominate. This includes closed forests, open forests, woodlands, woody savannas, woodlots, line tree plantings, home gardens, living fences, etc. However, there is a greater choice of available methods for biomass estimation of forest formations than for non-forested lands that contain trees. Forests are defined as land under natural or planted stands of trees with tree crown cover of more than 10 percent and area of more than 0.5 ha, whose primary use is forestry. The trees should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 m at maturity in situ (FAO unpublished report of expert consultation "Kotka III"). A tree is defined generally as a woody perennial with a single main stem, or in the case of coppice with several stems, having a more or less definite crown and a height greater than breast height (1.3 m).
2.2 WHAT IS BIOMASS?
To address many of the issues raised above related to forest biomass requires that the biomass of all forest components be estimated, including the aboveground and belowground living mass of trees, shrubs, palms, saplings, other understorey components, vines, epiphytes, etc., and dead plant mass such as fine litter and wood. How the mass of these components changes with time and with natural and human disturbances is also important. However, for practical reasons, this primer is restricted to the following component of biomass density: the total amount of live aboveground organic matter present in trees including leaves, twigs, branches, main bole, and bark. The biomass of these components generally accounts for the greatest fraction of total living biomass in a forest and does not pose too many logistical problems in its estimation. Consequently, biomass is defined as the total amount of aboveground living organic matter in trees expressed as oven-dry tons per unit area
(tree, hectare, region, or country). It is referred to as biomass density when expressed as mass per unit area, e.g., tons per hectare. The total biomass for a region or country is obtained from the product of biomass density and the corresponding area of forests.
BIOMASS is defined as the total amount of aboveground living organic matter in trees expressed as oven-dry tons per unit area
For most forests or tree formations, biomass density estimates will be based only on the biomass in trees with diameters greater than or equal to 10 cm, which is the usual minimum diameter measured in most inventories of closed forests. However, for forests or trees of smaller stature, such as those in the arid or montane zones, degraded forests, or secondary forests, lower minimum diameters should be chosen.
Woody biomass for many traditional uses does not all originate from forests; significant quantities are obtained from non-forest lands such as small woodlots, wind-breaks, other tree-line formations, home gardens, etc. A methodology for biomass estimation of individual trees, if the primary data are at this level, is presented here as well.
<section>6</section>
3. METHODS FOR ESTIMATING BIOMASS DENSITY FROM EXISTING DATA
3.1 APPROACH 1: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON EXISTING VOLUME DATA
3.2 APPROACH 2: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON STAND TABLES
3.3 BIOMASS ESTIMATES OF INDIVIDUAL
3.4 BIOMASS ESTIMATES FOR PLANTATIONS
3.5 BIOMASS OF OTHER FOREST COMPONENTS
This primer discusses two approaches for estimating the biomass density of woody formations based on existing forest inventory data. The first approach is based on the use of existing measured volume estimates (VOB per ha) converted to biomass density (t/ha) using a variety of "tools" (Brown et al. 1989, Brown and Iverson 1992, Brown and Lugo 1992, Gillespie et al. 1992). The second approach directly estimates biomass density using biomass regression equations. These regression equations are mathematical functions that relate oven-dry biomass per tree as a function of a single or a combination of tree dimensions. They are applied to stand tables or measurements of individual trees in stands or in lines (e.g., windbreaks, live fence posts, home gardens). The advantage of this second method is that it produces biomass estimates without having to make volume estimates, followed by application of expansion factors to account for non-inventoried tree components. The disadvantage
is that a smaller number of inventories report stand tables to small diameter classes for all species. Thus, not all countries in the tropics are covered by these estimates. To use either of these methods, the inventory must include all tree species. There is no way to extrapolate from inventories that do not measure all species.
Use of forest inventory data overcomes many of the problems present in ecological studies. Data from forest inventories are generally more abundant and are collected from large sample areas (subnational to national level) using a planned sampling method designed to represent the population of interest. However, inventories are not without their problems. Typical problems include:
· Inventories tend to be conducted in forests that are viewed as having commercial value, i.e., closed forests, with little regard to the open, drier forests or woodlands upon which so many people depend for non-industrial timber.
· The minimum diameter of trees included in inventories is often greater than 10 cm and sometimes as large as 50 cm; this excludes smaller trees which can account for more than 30% of the biomass.
· The maximum diameter class in stand tables is generally open-ended with trees greater than 80 cm in diameter often lumped into one class. The actual diameter distribution of these large trees significantly affects aboveground biomass density.
· Not all tree species are included, only those perceived to have commercial value at the time of the inventory.
· Inventory reports often leave out critical data, and in most cases, field measurements are not archived and are therefore lost.
· The definition of inventoried volume is not always consistent.
· Very little descriptive information is given about the actual condition of the forests, they are often described as primary, but diameter distributions and volumes suggest otherwise (e.g., Brown et al. 1991, 1994).
· Many of the inventories are old, 1970s or earlier, and the forests may have disappeared or changed.
Despite the above problems, many inventories are very useful for estimating biomass density of forests. In the next two sections, details of the methods for using existing forest inventory data for biomass density estimation are presented.
3.1 APPROACH 1: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON EXISTING VOLUME DATA
3.1.1 GENERAL EQUATION
3.1.2 VOLUME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE WOOD DENSITY (WD)
3.1.3 BIOMASS EXPANSION FACTOR (BEF)
3.1.4 EXAMPLES OF CALCULATIONS OF BIOMASS DENSITY
3.1.5 ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROACH USING VOLUME EXPANSION FACTORS (VEF)
3.1.6 USE OF INVENTORIES OF OPEN FORESTS AND WOODLANDS
The method presented here is based on existing volume per ha data and is best used for secondary to mature closed forests only, growing in moist to dry climates. It should be used for closed forest only because the original data base used for developing this approach was based on closed forests. The primary data needed for this approach is VOB/ha, that is inventoried volume over bark of free bole, i.e. from stump or buttress to crown point or first main branch. Inventoried volume must include all trees, whether presently commercial or not, with a minimum diameter of 10 cm at breast height or above buttress if this is higher. If the minimum diameter is somewhat larger, the VOB/ha information can be used with some adjustments as shown below. However, such adjustments to the primary data introduce larger errors in the estimate.
3.1.1 GENERAL EQUATION
Biomass density can be calculated from VOB/ha by first estimating the biomass of the inventoried volume and then "expanding" this value to take into account the biomass of the other aboveground components as follows (Brown and Lugo 1992):
(Eq. 3.1.1)
Aboveground biomass density (t/ha) = VOB * WD * BEF
where:
WD = volume-weighted average wood density (1 of oven-dry biomass per m^3 green volume)
BEF = biomass expansion factor (ratio of aboveground oven-dry biomass of trees to oven-dry biomass of inventoried volume)
3.1.2 VOLUME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE WOOD DENSITY (WD)
Wood density here is defined as the oven-dry mass per unit of green volume (either tons/m^3 or grams/cm^3). Wood densities for trees of tropical American forests tend to be reported in these units. In contrast, few data on wood density for trees in tropical Africa and Asia are expressed in these units (Reyes et al. 1992). Rather, wood density is expressed in units of mass of wood at 12% moisture content per unit of volume at 12% moisture content. A regression equation was developed by Reyes et al. (1992) to convert wood density based on 12% moisture content to wood density based on oven-dry mass and green volume (Eq. 3.1.2).
(Eq. 3.1.2)
Y = 0.0134 + 0.800 X
(r^2= 0.99; number of data points n = 379)
where:
Y = wood density based on oven-dry mass/green volume
X = wood density based on 12% moisture content
Ideally, a weighted average (based on dominance of each species as measured by volume) wood density value is best used here, calculated as follows.
(Eq. 3.1.3)
WD = {(V[1]/V[t] *WD[1] + (V[2]/V[t]) *WD[2 ]+........... (V[n]/V[t])* Wd[n]
where:
V[1], V[2],.... Vn = volume of species 1, 2,.. to the nth species
V[t] = total volume WD[1] WD[2],..... Wd[n] = wood density of species 1, 2,...... to the nth species
However, sufficient wood density data of forest species to do such calculations are not always available. In these situations it is best to estimate a weighted mean wood density based on known species, using an arithmetic mean from the table below for unknown species. Wood density data for 1180 tropical tree species are given in Appendix 1.
The arithmetic mean and most common wood density values (t/m^3 or g/cm^3) for tropical tree species by region
Tropical region
No. of species
Mean
Common range
Africa
America
Asia
(from Reyes et al. 1992)
3.1.3 BIOMASS EXPANSION FACTOR (BEF)
Broadleaf forests: Biomass expansion factor is defined as: the ratio of total aboveground oven-dry biomass density of trees with a minimum dbh of 10 cm or more to the oven-dry biomass density of the inventoried volume. Such ratios have been calculated from inventory sources for many broadleaf forest types (young secondary to mature) growing in moist to seasonally dry climates throughout the tropics. Sufficient data were included in these inventory sources to independently calculate aboveground biomass density and biomass of the inventoried volume (Brown et al. 1989). The reported inventoried volume in the studies was based on the definition given above. Analysis of these data show that BEFs are significantly related to the corresponding biomass of the inventoried volume according to the following equations (Brown and Lugo 1992):
(Eq. 3.1.4)
BEF = Exp{3.213 - 0.506*Ln(BV)} for BV < 190 t/ha
1.74 for BV>=190t/ha
(sample size = 56, adjusted r^2 = 0.76)
where:
BV = biomass of inventoried volume in t/ha, calculated as the product of VOB/ha (m^3/ha) and wood density (t/m^3)
Conifer forests: No model for calculating biomass expansion factors for native conifer forests is available at present because of the general lack of sufficient data for the type of analysis performed for the broadleaf forests. However, one would expect that BEFs for tropical pine forests would vary less than for broadleaf forests because of the generally similar branching pattern exhibited by different species of pine trees. Biomass expansion factors have been calculated based on a limited data base of 12 stands of Pinus oocarpa growing in Guatemala (Peters 1977) and the methodology given in Brown et al. (1989). The inventoried volume in this case was defined as volume over bark/ha from the stump to the tip of the tree; i.e. main stem based on total height. Volumes of these stands ranged from 64 to 331 m^3/ha. The BEFs based on biomass of the main stem ranged from 1.05 to 1.58, with a mean of 1.3 (standard error of 0.06). No significant relationship between BEF and main
stem biomass was obtained. Until additional data become available, a BEF of 1.3 can be used, with caution, for biomass estimation of pine forests.
3.1.4 EXAMPLES OF CALCULATIONS OF BIOMASS DENSITY
To demonstrate the application of this methodology, aboveground biomass density is calculated for the following examples:
Example 1.
Broadleaf forest with a VOB = 300 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density; WD = 0.65 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate biomass of VOB: = 300 m^3/ha x 0.65 t/m^3 = 194 t/ha
Step 2 Calculate the BEF (Eq. 3.1.4): BV > 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 1.74
Step 3 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 1.74 x 300 x 0.65
= 338 t/ha
Example 2.
Broadleaf forest with a VOB = 150 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density, WD = 0.55 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate biomass of VOB: = 150 m^3/ha x 0.55 t/m^3 = 82.5 t/ha
Step 2 Calculate the BEF (Eq. 3.1.4): BV < 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 2.66
Step 3 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 2.66 x 150 x 0.55
= 220 t/ha
As can be seen from these two examples, although there is a two-fold difference in VOB/ha, there is only a 1.5-fold difference in aboveground biomass density.
3.1.5 ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROACH USING VOLUME EXPANSION FACTORS (VEF)
Forest inventories often report volumes to different standards, e.g., to minimum diameters greater than 10 cm. These inventories maybe the only ones available, and thus it is important that a means to unify the volume data to some kind of standard be developed so that these inventories can be used to estimate biomass density.
In an attempt to unify data on inventoried volume measured to a minimum diameter greater than 10 cm, volume expansion factors (VEF) were developed (Brown 1990). After 10 cm, a common minimum diameter for inventoried volumes ranges between 25-30 cm. Data from inventories that reported volumes to minimum diameters in this range were combined into one data set to obtain sufficient number of studies for analysis. The VEF is defined here as the ratio of inventoried volume for all trees with a minimum diameter of 10 cm and above (VOB[10]) to inventoried volume for all trees with a minimum diameter of 25-30 cm and above (VOB[30]). The uncertainty in extrapolating inventoried volume based on a minimum diameter of larger than 30 cm to inventoried volume to a minimum diameter of 10 cm is likely to be large and is not suggested. Estimates of the VEFs were based on a few inventories from tropical Asia and America which provided sufficient detail for this analysis (see Brown 1990).
Volume expansion factors based on these inventories ranged from about 1.1 to 2.5, and they were related to the VOB[30] as follows:
(Eq. 3.1.5),
VEF = Exp{1.300 - 0.209*Ln(VOB[30])} for VOB[30] < 250 m^3/ha = 1.13 for VOB[30] > 250 m^3/ha
(sample size = 66, adjusted r^2 = 0.65)
To demonstrate the use of this correction factor to estimating biomass density, consider the following example:
Broadleaf forest with a VOB[30] = 100 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density; WD = 0.60 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate the VEF from Eq. 3.1.5: = 1.40
Step 2 Calculate VOB[10]: = 100 m^3/ha x 1.40 = 140 m^3/ha
Step 3 Calculate biomass of VOB[10]: = 140 m^3/ha x 0.60 t/m^3 = 84 t/ha
Step 4 Calculate the BEF from Eq. 3.1.4: BV < 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 2.64
Step 5 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 2.64 x 140 x 0.60
= 222 t/ha
3.1.6 USE OF INVENTORIES OF OPEN FORESTS AND WOODLANDS
No general approach for estimating aboveground biomass density of open forests and woodlands based on inventoried volume has been developed because of the general lack of suitable data. The method described above for closed forests is not generally applicable because trees have different branching patterns (often multi-stemmed) and inventoried volume of open forests and woodlands is usually measured to different standards than for closed forests. For example, inventories done in open forests and woodlands generally report inventoried volume per ha to minimum diameters less than 10 cm, and also often include branch volume. Earlier work suggested that total aboveground biomass density of open forests could be up to three times the inventoried volume (Brown and Lugo 1984), however further field testing would be needed to confirm this. It is recommended that the approach described in section 3.2 (next) for estimating aboveground biomass density be used for open forests and
woodlands.
3.2 APPROACH 2: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON STAND TABLES
3.2.1 BIOMASS REGRESSION EQUATIONS
3.2.3 PROBLEMS WITH REGRESSION APPROACH
Another estimate of biomass density is derived from the application of biomass regression equations to stand tables. The method basically involves estimating the biomass per average tree of each diameter (diameter at breast height, dbh) class of the stand table, multiplying by the number of trees in the class, and summing across all classes. A key issue is the choice of the average diameter to represent the dbh class. For small dbh classes (10 cm or less), the mid-p