<title>Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
Veterinary medicine's primary roots are in agriculture, public health and comparative biology. Raising livestock productivity to enhance food security, improving human health by preventing zoonotic diseases and studying mechanisms of diseases affecting humans and other animals have been unifying themes for organized veterinary medicine with the aim of improving living standards, human-well being and animal welfare. The problem of food insecurity in some countries is partly related to the low productivity of local livestock.
The table below (adapted from FAO, 1996), in which the ratio between the percentage of world total milk (or meat) production and that of world total number of head of dairy cattle (or sheep and goats) is used as a broad measure of productivity, illustrates wide differences in productivity from dairy cattle and from sheep and goats in four regions.
Relative livestock production in four regions (AGROSTAT/FAO data, 1991-1993 averages)
SSA
ASIA
CSA
OECD
Dairy cattle
percent of world total number of head
Dairy cow milk
percent of world total production
Ratio
milk % / dairy cattle %
Sheep and goat stocks
percent of world total number of head
Sheep and goat meat
percent of world total production
Ratio
meat % / sheep and goats
SSA: 44 sub-Saharan African countries; ASIA: 22 Asian countries; CSA: 31 Central and South American countries; OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development countries (see FAO, 1996, p. 48 for specific countries included in each region)
High levels of production are not synonymous with high efficiency. However, the magnitude of differences in expected production compared to the number of animals in a given region suggests that there are significant differences in production efficiency. When the value and maintenance cost of the animals are included as inputs into the system, these costs increase the denominator of the output: input equation and thus reduce efficiency, particularly if output does not rise.
It is not always recognized that there are technical limits to the scale of losses that can be avoided just as there are diminishing returns from increasing expenditures on disease prevention (McInerney, Howe and Schepers, 1992; Ott, Hillberg Seistzinger and Hueston, 1995). For example, in intensive cattle feedlots a more rational (and reduced) use of vaccines and antibiotics, leading to a reduction in total input costs, was a practical method of raising efficiency without jeopardizing animal health (Howard, 1969). Thus, improved delivery and assured access to appropriate livestock goods and services including health, husbandry, management and extension advice, are predicted to improve livestock productivity to more economic levels.
Schreuder et al. (1995) reported beneficial animal health and financial effects resulting from access to a basic animal health service in southern Afghanistan. In districts with access to basic services and remedies compared to districts without, mortality was reduced on an average of 26 percent and 43 percent in young and adult ruminants, respectively. The basic services consisted of readily available clinic-based and part-time field-based auxiliary animal health staff, vaccines, remedies, and curative treatments. The estimated annual net benefits of the programme were in the order of 500 percent of the costs involved and amounted to some US$120600 per district. Furthermore, there are many studies on the losses caused by individual diseases, groups of diseases or disease complexes and the benefits attendant on their control. Recent examples include studies on tsetse and trypanosomiasis control in Ethiopia (Jemal and Hugh-Jones (1995), (Swallow, Mulatu and Leak, 1995); and
the combination of different tick control strategies with immunization against Theileria parva in Zimbabwe (Peagram et al., 1996) and Kenya (Mukhebi et al., 1995). In semi-arid areas of the Rift Valley in Kenya, Gatongi et al. (1997) demonstrated that deworming mixed sheep and goats flocks (and their offspring) prior to the-onset of rains was equal to or significantly better, in terms of performance measures, when compared to flocks dewormed during the rains. Deworming compared to controls increased performance in almost all performance measures and decreased mortality. All of the above studies document significant loss reductions and/or net financial benefits attributable to specific animal health interventions.
In recent years countries throughout the world have started to implement structural adjustment programmes to refocus government services and improve efficiency. In Africa where agriculture and livestock are so vital to the national economy in many countries, animal health and the delivery of veterinary services have been particularly important components of this process.
Against this background and following a worldwide electronic conference on the subject, an FAO Technical Consultation (held in Rome from 25 to 27 March 1997) and involving national veterinary officers from five sub-Saharan African countries, representatives of funding agencies, international organizations and expert consultants, debated, revised and approved changes to a draft document entitled Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa together with an annex entitled Negotiating framework for rationalizing delivery of public and private veterinary services.
This, the revised document, is now published and it is hoped that the agreed economic, professional, technical and sociological principles will be used by government officials, public and private sector veterinarians, private industry, consultants, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and international development agencies as a guide and framework to change, strengthen and develop the rational delivery of veterinary services within each country as required.
<section>2</section>
2. Essential components for rational delivery of veterinary services
Successful delivery of veterinary services in their broadest sense, which largely takes into account the pressures exerted by major stakeholders, has evolved in many countries to include five essential components. These are (i) livestock producers and their organizations; (ii) a national public veterinary service; (iii) a private veterinary sector; (iv) a statutory regulatory body; and (v) a veterinary professional association. Each component has different responsibilities and may represent different stakeholders. Ideally the five components interact with checks and balances so that all clients are fairly represented. The logic and rationale for the creation of each component, as well as assigning specific tasks and responsibilities, are based on economic, biological and social principles. One objective of this paper is to define those principles that provide a technical framework for rationalizing the delivery of veterinary services.
<section>3</section>
3. Public sector veterinary services
Division of responsibilities
Operational effectiveness
Strategy for restructuring
Strategy for divestment of commercial tasks
Management of privatization
Management structure
Strategy for the transition
Publicly funded veterinary services are expected to be responsible for providing services (i) where no free-market incentive justifies (or creates demand for) a service, e.g. public health; (ii) where there is a free-market incentive but there are economies of scale, externalities, or professional or biological determinants that dictate how best to deliver specific services, e.g. disease eradication by area-wide vaccination; or (iii) when services are provided based on the collective assent of the governed as to the need for specific services and how much the public is willing to pay (be taxed) for them, e.g. quality control of biologicals. Where these principles do not apply, selected services can be legitimately divested to the private sector.
Public sector veterinary services also direct their activities in accordance with national development policies for investment; equity of opportunity; poverty alleviation; food security; environmental protection; full employment; support for vulnerable groups; sustainable agriculture production; and other socially desirable goals. Should veterinary functions in support of national development policies not be fully commercially viable, many governments have chosen to subsidize their delivery.
One crucial question when investment in animal health services is considered is who benefits and who pays, e.g. will those who make the investments reap the benefits or will others? However, national governments will always have to carry the overall burden of maintaining the health of the national herd.
Division of responsibilities
Numerous fore and publications (Cheneau, 1985; CTA, 1985a,b; FAO/RNEA, 1994; FAO/RLAC, 1992; OIE, 1995; Umali, Feder and de Haan, 1992; Schillhorn van Veen and de Haan, 1995; Leonard, 1987, 1993), have considered the distribution of the different animal health functions performed by the public and private sectors. A list of services, derived from these and other publications, was considered and modified at the Technical Consultation held by FAO in March 1997. This list (which is not exhaustive), presented below, is intended as a guide for consideration by governments; it gives functions that could be considered as falling under the responsibility of the private sector, remain under the responsibility of the public sector, or are candidates for shared responsibility and shared execution. The consultation recognized the primary responsibility of the livestock producer for the health of his/her animals; that the process of structural adjustment is a dynamic one involving
transitional periods; and that all countries are different in their manner and stage of implementation.
The criteria for assigning functions to the responsibility of one or the other of the two bodies were economic theory; technical judgement by national veterinary authorities; tradition; and prevailing sociocultural conditions within the various countries.
Services under the responsibility of but not necessarily executed by the public sector: ensuring the health of the national herd including disease surveillance, compliance monitoring, quarantine, quality control of remedies and vaccines, planning for emergencies and reporting to international bodies and neighbouring countries; oversight of food safety, import and export inspection and certification according to international standards; regulation, monitoring and support of other partners in the animal health care system; accreditation of personnel; creation of an enabling environment for the private sector; and general formulation of livestock development policy.
Functions under shared responsibilities: disease diagnosis and reporting; compulsory testing; accreditation; tick and tsetse control; food hygiene and inspection; continuing education and training; diagnostic support; animal welfare; notifiable disease control; disease emergency response; zoonosis control; research; and advice and extension.
Services under the responsibility of the private sector: clinical diagnosis and treatment; production and distribution of remedies and vaccines; artificial insemination; management of herd health and production programmes; marketing livestock and products; and others.
Public veterinary services are generally targeted towards identifiable clients (Ashley, Holden & Bazeley, 1996), but the clients vary according to country. Chief veterinary officers (CVOs) in European countries tend to view the urban public and food processing industry as their main clients for regulatory and quality control services that protect public health, guarantee quality and avoid fraud. In African countries, CVOs see the smallholder livestock owner as their primary client with the aim of preventing losses from disease. In sub-Saharan African countries where livestock productivity is low (see Table) it is evident that either additional services are required or a more rational delivery system needs to be found, or both, in order to raise productivity.
Operational effectiveness
Times change. In many African countries there is now an abundance of trained animal health professionals and paraprofessionals. However, focusing on the wrong priorities, undertaking the wrong tasks, and decreasing government operational budgets all limit the ability of public sector veterinary services to deliver services appropriately. Effective management under these financial constraints has often been found lacking.
Macro-economic structural adjustment plans are being implemented by numerous countries in order to curtail domestic government spending, reduce national debt and control inflation. Restructuring of public veterinary services may sooner or later be the inevitable result of economic reforms. One major intention of restructuring is to allocate costs where benefits are expected, e.g. increased production is to be paid for by the livestock owners while overall environmental and public health aspects remain under government responsibility.
Livestock owners in some developing countries have recent memory of receiving a wide range of nominally free veterinary services. However, in most cases where goods and services must be paid for, livestock owners are readily persuaded to do so provided that these are consistently available, genuinely wanted, and perceived to be beneficial to the health of the animals and thus to enhancing the livestock owners' welfare.
A government's operational capacity and effectiveness can be improved by rationalizing the delivery of public good veterinary services while divesting those services that can be commercialized and that benefit individual owners of livestock. The overall aim is delivery of efficient and effective animal health services, with three parties directly involved, namely: livestock owners and their animals, private animal health care providers, and government agencies. A fourth group consisting of the consumers for whose benefit animals are kept and their products marketed is indirectly involved. From the consumer's point of view, it is imperative that the concerted efforts of the three other parties result in sufficient output of good quality products at reasonable prices. One way to achieve this is by focusing on what each party is best able to contribute, i.e. livestock owners raising livestock; health care providers delivering appropriate services; and government agencies
securing overall stability through regulation, monitoring and the provision of an enabling environment.
Strategy for restructuring
Restructuring and divestment free up funds for operations. Managers of public veterinary services need to evaluate all tasks in order to (i) determine which tasks can be commercialized or made contestable; (ii) solicit potential providers of these commercial, contestable tasks; (iii) reconcile items (i) and (ii) with professional technical judgement and experience; and (iv) divest those tasks that pass the filter of not being essentially in the public good, or recognized as being non-contestable at that moment.
The public veterinary services must recognize the shift to a regulatory and a monitoring role implicit in the divestment of selected services to the private sector and in trends towards devolution. New roles will necessitate a new mix of skills among staff. In some cases a veterinary medical degree may not be required (such as for information management, laboratory testing, public relations). Alternatively, a veterinary degree is necessary as a first step towards technical specialization (toxicology, epidemiology, and so on). Opportunities for retraining are clearly needed. Salaries commensurate with the redefined responsibilities, enhanced skills, and to ensure integrity may be required to retain highly trained (and retrained) skilled staff. The new professional philosophy is that the public veterinary service needs to:
(i) focus on monitoring delivery of commercialized tasks to ensure that the public interest is fairly served, thus calling for a skilled, well-paid, non-corruptible civil service able to take on a regulatory role to ensure quality;
(ii) market and deliver effectively specific professional services generally recognized as non-contestable public goods, but for which the consent of the governed is continually required;
(iii) deliver high-quality and effective services and foster good public relations in order to maintain public support and funding;
(iv) provide effective in-service training for new public veterinary service staff and for those whose work is reoriented to ensure their ability to deliver effective services to the public;
(v) encourage veterinary professional associations to take on additional responsibilities for the continuing education of members and for promoting codes of ethics; and
(vi) establish an independent statutory body (veterinary registrar, council or board) that fairly represents the interests of all stakeholders, including consumers.
Strategy for divestment of commercial tasks
Commercialized tasks can be identified as those where the public veterinary service already charges fees, either officially or unofficially. Such tasks may include mandatory vaccinations; clinical services for farm animals or pets; surgery; clinical diagnosis and treatment; laboratory disease diagnosis; breed improvement advice; artificial insemination; pregnancy diagnosis; and advice on feeding strategy or health maintenance. Additionally, liberalized procurement and distribution of remedies, vaccines, chemicals and equipment need to accompany divestment in order to give the private sector greater and assured access to inputs.
The identification of functions or tasks already enjoying a high degree of commercialization, e.g. clinical diagnosis and treatment, leads to a consideration of their potential economic viability when implemented by the private sector. Further steps in the process are to carry out a macro-economic assessment of the public versus the private good nature of each task; identify potential economies of scale in delivering the task; look for the presence of externalities; and benefit from the experience of other countries to classify tasks further as candidates for divestment to the private sector.
Sound professional technical judgement based on biological characteristics of diseases, epidemiology and sound management must be used to reconcile candidate tasks with commercial potential. Knowledge and experience of disease agents and their control (the technology), model veterinary professional associations, principles of management and the sociocultural context in each country should be carefully assessed in the evaluation of candidate tasks for divestment. If such care is not taken, veterinarians are in danger of losing the privileged position historically afforded to the professions.
Chief veterinary officers or a restructuring (transition) team can publicize a roster of tasks and assets to be divested or privatized in order to attract interested bidders. Accounting information for enterprises, including a breakdown of costs and gross revenues, indebtedness, plus the terms of management, lease or sale, will have to be prepared and publicized (Babjee, 1996; Baker, 1995). The cycle is repeated until only the essential, non-contestable tasks remain with the public veterinary service. Contestable tasks are divested for implementation by private sector entities. Tasks identified as shared responsibility (see Division of responsibilities, p. 3) can be contracted out to the private sector under public monitoring and supervision.
Management of privatization
Funding agencies, advisers, and international organizations need to support the change in the role of the public as well as the private veterinary services during the transition process. In most respects, privatization should be seen as a process that refocuses government veterinary activities on achieving better services for the public and not necessarily as a vehicle for reducing the real magnitude of government expenditures and responsibilities.
In principle, veterinary tasks delivered by the private sector will be justified and offered when (i) financial conditions permit; (ii) enabling legislation reduces apprehension by would-be entrants; (iii) competition by the public sector is removed; and (iv) capital is available for new investors. The first three items are directly under the control of the government and require enlightened management by the public veterinary service, the transition team and concerned government bureaus, such as legal advisers. Capital (item iv) may be available as government loans, government-backed bank loans or private capital. Freezing the automatic hiring of all veterinary graduates gives a potent stimulus for the emergence of private veterinary practices (Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995) while removal of unfair competition by the public sector is crucial to their early viability (Ilemobade, 1996; Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995).
In areas with high potential for livestock production, for pet or mixed animal practice, or for development of private industry, private sector justified tasks can spontaneously be assumed under a market-driven system (Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995). Special attention needs to be directed towards the provision of veterinary services in marginal areas where livestock producers are frequently among the nation's poorest. In such areas, purely commercial private goods and services may not be readily accessible and both private and public sector services may need to be subsidized if they are to be made available. However, private practitioners may offer better concrete (as opposed to theoretical) access to animal health services even in these conditions, but such an outcome depends critically on the way in which privatization is implemented.
Public sector responsibilities, e.g. disease surveillance and reporting, are no less required in marginal areas and can be carried out effectively through the use of contracts with veterinarians, animal health assistants (AHAs), animal health technicians (AHTs), and auxiliaries for their delivery. Simple contracts to undertake given tasks, such as vaccination of x number of animals, y number of hours of abattoir inspection per week (Fassi-Fehri and Bakkoury, 1995), can be awarded, thus making essential services available while enhancing the financial viability of private practice in low-potential areas. Numerous examples of pure subsidies (Quebec, Scotland, Sweden), incentives (Morocco, western Canada) or public service contracts (Morocco, Afghanistan) can serve as guidelines. Effective delivery of goods and services in low potential areas presents managerial and public relations challenges to CVOs. Funding agency support and guidance would be useful for continued
experimentation and evaluation of delivery schemes, infrastructure development and in-service training.
The judicious provision and use of credit by the private sector requires careful planning. Examples (New Zealand, Kenya, Mali) of prudent personal financial planning strongly suggest that taking on a heavy debt burden in order to launch a private veterinary practice is unnecessary and even contra-indicated. Normal banking controls and time will determine the prudence of recent donor-funded credit schemes for stimulating private practice establishment in African countries. The use of informal loans, credit from pharmaceutical distributors and personal assets all appear to provide viable alternatives to formal bank credit. Experience to date suggests that government decision-makers need not be too concerned with the availability of credit provided overall enabling policies are in place.
Management structure
Efficient control of disease outbreaks depends on the ability of local and national veterinary authorities to receive information on animal diseases quickly and to take immediate action in response. The risk for critical delay of disease notification is increased when public veterinary service staff are not a part of the line management structure, particularly where there is decentralization and animal health responsibilities are mixed with animal production and extension functions, or where reporting in the field goes through a non-veterinarian. Especially when veterinary systems are devolved to subnational governmental units or are privatized, the reporting of notifiable diseases needs to be a statutory and ethical responsibility of all animal health care practitioners.
Likewise, CVOs need assured access to the Minister of Agriculture or Permanent Secretary, or their equivalent, in order to obtain political support and funds with which to respond in emergency situations. Emergency preparedness, including legislation, access to funds, availability of human and other resources, and an action plan, are essential in the control or eradication of major epizootic diseases. National resources for emergencies are especially important for securing collaboration from local government authorities and private practitioners. Direct access to politically responsible authorities greatly enhances the two-way communication with officials who provide information directly to the public. Public support is always needed for carrying out disease control measures which can be difficult, disruptive and financially disastrous for livestock owners. Rapid access to information from the field is essential for informing the public.
Strategy for the transition
The overall objective of restructuring of veterinary services should be to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of animal health care delivery and, consequently, livestock productivity; safeguard public health; and contribute to national development. The end result should be (i) a public veterinary service better able to carry out its redefined responsibilities; (ii) a functioning private sector; and (iii) the necessary supporting personnel and infrastructure able to contribute to the overall objective.
The institution of a special transition team to plan and oversee the implementation of any restructuring process has been found useful. This team should be guided by an advisory council with stakeholder representatives including members appointed from the national veterinary service; the national treasury; the pharmaceutical industry; livestock producer groups; and consumer groups. Advice should be sought from countries that have successfully gone through a similar transition process. Should external funding be envisaged, representatives of funding agencies may be invited to be members of the restructuring council. An agreed negotiating framework (see Annex 2) may be used as a guideline for discussions and review of the restructuring process.
The Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa are recommended as a guide for restructuring and should be publicly debated. The principles will be based on economic theory and current biological understanding, and take into account sociocultural conditions prevailing in each country. Likewise, experiences of other countries with similar conditions need to be considered.
Stakeholders should be informed of the outcome of deliberations for the sake of transparency and be consulted frequently for their input. Experience shows that only when there is free flow of information and consultation as well as participation of stakeholder representatives can a workable agreement for change be reached (Till, 1995).
<section>4</section>
4. Private veterinary sector
Enabling private sector development
Contracts with government
Oversight
Delivery of veterinary services not specifically under the responsibility of the public sector should, by default, reside with the private sector. Nonetheless, the relationship between the two sectors is dynamic and mutually supportive. Private practitioners may be contracted to execute tasks under the responsibility of the public sector and the latter should enable the full development of private practice.
The private veterinary sector's raison d'être is to deliver preventive, curative and promotive services that largely benefit individual animals and their owners, i.e. to deliver private goods and services (Leonard, 1987). This means that a private practice veterinarian should debit (commercialize) livestock owners' the full cost of examination and diagnosis, medicines, economically motivated preventive vaccinations, surgery, husbandry advice, and other services provided, together with his or her time and transportation costs.
Enabling private sector development
In general the private sector thrives best in environments without government interference. However, governments can help by creating and ascertaining conditions and regulations that support private initiative and private sector operation. As such it is important to obtain input from the private sector, whether producers, processors, consumers or veterinarians in the process of policy formulation and drafting of quality control regulations.
Subject to the prevailing code of laws (as implemented by the veterinary registration body), the private sector should not be obstructed but encouraged to provide new services as technological change presents opportunities; as consumer demand evolves; as consumer willingness to pay for services increases; and as the oversight authority of government bodies permits. In the abridged words of Umali and Schwartz (1994), encouraging private sector participation implies promoting private sector investment. The prevailing economic, cultural, social and political character of the economy will determine the optimal programme for the privatization process. What is clear is that the private sector will invest only if a favourable economic environment prevails and barriers to entry are eliminated. This requires macroeconomic stability, essential infrastructure, changes to the regulatory framework, and a functioning legal system. One commonly recognized barrier to entry of private
veterinary practitioners has been (and still is in some countries) the delivery of recognized private sector responsibilities and functions (see Division of responsibilities, p. 3) by the official veterinary service. Unfair competition needs to cease before private practitioners will risk establishing their practices. These are the "public goods" that governments have to provide.
Contracts with government
Private practitioners, NGOs and membership organizations, acting with registered veterinarians and other animal health care providers, could be readily contracted and paid by government agencies for activities related to the long-range maintenance of the national herds' health as well as the public health situation in the country, i.e. contracted to deliver selected public goods and services. Public contracts may also be used to expand the extension role played by private practitioners beyond their normal provision of husbandry advice. It is well to remember that the public character of goods or services does not imply that the body providing them must be public. There are many examples (brucellosis vaccination and testing, vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease, tuberculosis testing, etc.) where public veterinary services employ private agents to deliver selected functions or tasks.
Oversight
The private sector delivery of selected services is subject to compliance monitoring by national government agencies, ethical standards agreed upon by the professional veterinary association, disciplinary measures from the registration body and civil authorities, and competition in the market place. Consumers may be represented on statutory registration bodies (see Statutory registration body, p. 12), in hearings on the introduction of proposed regulations, and in debates on the use of public funds.
<section>5</section>
5. The veterinary profession
Enabling legislation
Statutory registration body
Veterinary professional associations
A profession is defined by the combination of its advanced technical training, adherence to publicly oriented ethics, and some degree of autonomy such that members look at least partly to their peers for approval and advancement. The welfare of a profession is in a symbiotic relationship with the public interest.
Enabling legislation
It is self-evident that clear enabling legisl