<title>Irrigation in the near east region in figures</title>
<section>1</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
Foreword
With increasing pressure on natural resources in the Near East, and considering the regional dimension of water resources development and management, the need for reliable and systematic information on water, its quality and its use is increasingly recognized as being of prime importance for sustainable economic development in the region.
In 1993, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations initiated a programme, known as AQUASTAT, to meet the demand for information on water resources and its use at regional level, with particular emphasis on irrigation. The objectives of the AQUASTAT programme are to collect and present, in a systematic way, data on rural water use at country level.
The Near East Region has a concentration of most of the complex water allocation issues of the world. With a population of about 560 million inhabitants, or 10% of the world's population, increasing at a rate of 2.7% per year, it receives only 3.5% of the world's precipitation and has as little as 2.2% of its renewable water resources. Considering that more than 90% of the water withdrawal in the Near East is used for irrigation, and in view of the increasing importance of joint management of water resources, reliable information on agricultural water use at regional level is of critical importance. This is why FAO decided to launch a special AQUASTAT survey for the Near East Region.
This publication presents a description of the rural water situation in the 29 countries represented by FAO's Regional Office for the Near East, with relevant tables and maps, and a regional synopsis emphasizing the sub-regional characteristics of this large and diverse region. It is hoped that the information provided here will be of use to all those working for sustainable water resources development in the region.
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared and written with the collaboration of a large number of individuals. It is a joint activity of FAO's Land and Water Development Division (AGL) and its Regional Office for the Near East (RNE).
The whole project was coordinated and managed by Karen Frenken, acting as main author and editor of the survey, in collaboration with Jean-Marc Faurès and Mathieu Bousquet, from the AQUASTAT team of the Land and Water Development Division of FAO in Rome. Coordination of the project at the Regional Office for the Near East was carried out by Selim Sarraf, Regional Water Resources and Management Officer.
Country surveys were carried out in cooperation with national experts: Waleed Al-Zubari, Mohamed Abdelmonem El-Nahal, Karim Shiati, Hazim el Naser, Khalid Masabahi, Adib Salim Geadah, Tony Misfud, Asadullah Taqi, George Soumi, Huseyin Yavuz, Abdelkader Hamdane, Mohamed Saqr Al-Asam and Nasser Mohamed Nasser.
The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance provided by Jean Margat and Philippe Pallas in reviewing all the information related to water resources. Valuable contributions were also received from Azad Azad, and colleagues from the Land and Water Development Division of FAO. The data processing software was developed by Dario Berardi and Mauro de Castro. Data processing was performed by Marco Tagliaferri.
The publication has been edited by Jennifer Ann Parkinson and prepared for printing by Chrissi Smith Redfern, Edoardo Buricchi and Franco Buricchi.
UNITS
1 km³ = 1 x 109 m³ = 1 000 x 10 6 m³
1 km² = 100 hectares
1 dunum = 0.10 hectare
1 feddan = 0.42 hectare
1 acre = 0.4046 hectare
The information presented in this publication is collected from a variety of sources. It reflects FAO's best estimates, based on the most accurate and up-to-date information available at the date of printing.
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
<section>2</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
Presentation of the survey
Introduction
Country profiles
Data collection, processing and reliability
Definition of the main variables
Other definitions and conventions
Introduction
In 1993, FAO started to develop a programme named AQUASTAT, which is an information system on water use for agriculture and rural development. Its aim is to collect information at country and subcountry level and to make it available, in a standard format, to users interested in global, regional and national perspectives. In 1994-95, the 53 African countries were surveyed, which resulted in FAO Water Report 7 'Irrigation in Africa in Figures'. The present survey concentrates on the country members of FAO's Regional Office for the Near East.
The purpose of the survey is twofold:
* to provide a clear picture of the situation of rural water resources management on a country basis, with emphasis on irrigation, and featuring major characteristics, trends, constraints and perspectives;
* to help support continental and regional analyses by providing systematic, up-to-date and reliable information on water for agriculture and rural development, and to serve as a tool for large-scale planning and forecasting..
In order to obtain information that was as reliable as possible, the survey was developed and carried out for each country as follows:
1. Review of literature and existing information on the country and the sub-region.
2. Data collection by means of a detailed questionnaire.
3. Data processing and critical analysis of the information, with the assistance of the AQUASTAT data processing software and selection of the most reliable information.
4. Preparation of a country profile.
Lastly, regional and sub-regional tables and maps and a general summary were prepared. Crosschecking of the information took place wherever possible.
Country profiles
Each country profile describes the situation regarding water resources and use in the country, with special attention to the water resources, irrigation and drainage sub-sectors. Its aim is to emphasize the particularities of each country, as well as the problems encountered in rural water management and irrigation. It also summarizes the trends of irrigation in the countries, as described in the available literature. It was a deliberate choice to try and standardize the country profiles as much as possible. All profiles follow the same pattern, organized in six sections:
* geography and population;
* climate and water resources;
* irrigation and drainage development;
* institutional environment; trends in water resources management;
* main sources of information.
Standardized tables are used for all country profiles. When information is not available, this is indicated by a dash (-). As most of the data are available for a limited number of years only, the most recent reliable data are used in the tables, with an indication of the year to which they refer.
Data collection, processing and reliability
The main sources of information were:
* national water resources and irrigation master plans; national yearbooks, statistics and reports;
* reports from FAO or other projects;
* international surveys;
* results from surveys made by national or international research centres.
In total, 65 variables were selected and are presented in the tables attached to each country profile. They are grouped into categories corresponding to the profile sections. A detailed definition of each variable is given below.
In most cases, a critical analysis of the information was necessary to ensure consistency between the different data collected for a given country. When several sources give different or contradictory figures, preference was always given to information collected at national or sub-national level and, unless proved wrong, to official rather than unofficial sources. In the case of shared water resources, a comparison between countries was made to ensure consistency at river-basin level.
Nevertheless, the accuracy and reliability of the information vary greatly between regions, countries and categories of information, as does the year in which the information was gathered. These considerations are discussed in the country profiles.
Definition of the main variables
The main variables presented in the tables in the country profiles are defined as follows and in the order in which they appear in the tables:.
Area of the country: (ha) The total area of the country, including area under inland water bodies. Data in this category are obtained from the United Nations Statistical Office, except for Bahrain where the area has increased due to sea reclamation. The total area of Oman is being revised by the UN. In the meantime, the official government figure has been retained, as agreed with the UN.
Cultivable area: (ha) Area of land potentially fit for cultivation. This term may or may not include part or all of the forests and rangeland. (see the note on cultivable land in the next section).
Cultivated area: (ha) Area under temporary (annual) and permanent crops. This refers to the physical area actually cultivated and does not include land which is temporarily fallow (see the note on arable versus cultivated land in the next section).
Annual crops: (ha) Physical area under temporary (annual) crops.
Permanent crops: (ha) Area cultivated with crops that occupy the land for long periods that do not need to be replanted after each harvest. This does not include woodland and forests.
Total population: (inhabitants) The figures are the UN estimates for 1995.
Rural population: ( %). The figures are the UN estimates for 1995.
Water supply coverage: (%) The percentage of urban and rural population with access to safe drinking water (criteria may vary between countries).
Average precipitation: (mm/yr and km³/yr) Double average over space and time of water falling on the country in a year.
Internal renewable water resources: (km³/yr) Average annual flow of rivers and recharge of groundwater generated from endogenous precipitation.
Total (actual) renewable water resources: (km³/yr) The sum of internal renewable water resources and incoming flow originating outside the country, taking into consideration the quantity of flows reserved to upstream and downstream countries through formal or informal agreements or treaties. This gives the maximum theoretical amount of water actually available for the country (see note on the computation of water resources in the next section).
Dependency rang: (%) That part of the total renewable water resources originating outside the country.
Total dam capacity: (10^6 m³) The total cumulative capacity of all dams.
Water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) Gross amount of water extracted from the resources for a given use. It includes conveyance losses, consumptive use and return flow (see note on water withdrawal in the next section).
Agricultural water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of water withdrawn for agricultural purposes including irrigation and livestock watering (see note on agricultural water withdrawal in the next section).
Domestic water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of water withdrawn for domestic purposes. It is usually computed as the total amount of water withdrawn by public distribution networks, and usually includes the withdrawal by those industries connected to public networks.
Industrial water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) This sector usually refers to self-supplied industries not connected to any distribution network.
Total water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of water withdrawn for agricultural, industrial and domestic purposes. It does not include other withdrawals (see below).
Other water withdrawal: (10^6 m³/yr) This includes all other sectors: energy, mining, recreation, navigation, fisheries and environment. These sectors usually 'have a very low consumption rate.
Average groundwater depletion: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual amount of water withdrawn from aquifers and which is not replenished (mining of rechargeable aquifers or extraction from fossil aquifers).
Produced wastewater: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of wastewater produced in the country. This does not include agricultural drainage water.
Treated wastewater: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of wastewater which is treated.
Reused treated wastewater: (10^6 m³/yr) Annual quantity of treated wastewater which is reused.
Desalinated water: (10^6 m³/yr) Installed capacity of desalination plants.
Irrigation potential: (ha) Area of land suitable for irrigation development, taking into account land and water resources. It includes land already under irrigation. The definition may vary among countries (see note on irrigation potential in the next section).
Full or partial control irrigation: equipped area: (ha) Irrigation schemes carried out and managed either by government, private estates or farmers, and where a full or partial control of the water is achieved. Gardening is included in this category.
Surface irrigation: (ha) Part of the full or partial control area under surface irrigation: furrow, border, basin, and flooded irrigation of rice.
Sprinkler irrigation: (ha) Part of the full or partial control area irrigated by aspersion (sprinkler).
Micro-irrigation: (ha) Part of the full or partial control area irrigated by micro-irrigation.
Percentage of area irrigated from groundwater: (%) Part of the full or partial control area irrigated from wells (shallow wells and deep tubewells) or springs.
Percentage of area irrigated from surface water: (%) Part of the full or partial control area irrigated from rivers or lakes (reservoirs, pumping or diversion).
Percentage of area irrigated from non-conventional sources: (%) Part of the full or partial control area irrigated from non-conventional sources of water such as treated wastewater or desalinated water.
Percentage of equipped area actually irrigated: (%) Part of the full or partial control area which is actually irrigated. Often, the whole area equipped is not irrigated for various reasons, such as lack of water, absence of farmers, damage, organizational problems, and so forth. It concerns the actual physical areas. Irrigated land that is cultivated twice a year is counted once.
Spate irrigation area: (ha) Area of land equipped for spate irrigation.
Equipped wetlands and inland valley bottoms: (ha) Part of cultivated wetlands and inland valley bottoms which have been equipped with water control structures (intake, canals, etc.). Developed mangroves are included in this category.
Total irrigation: Area equipped to provide water to the crops. It includes areas equipped for full and partial control irrigation, spate irrigation areas, and equipped wetland and inland valley bottoms. It does not include flood recession cropping areas. In the text it is also referred to as irrigated area or area under irrigation.
Flood recession cropping area. (ha) Area along rivers where cultivation occurs in the areas exposed as floods recede. The special case of floating rice is included in this category.
Total water managed area: (ha) The sum of full or partial control irrigation equipped areas, spate irrigation areas, equipped wetland and inland valley bottoms and flood recession cropping areas. It does not include water harvesting areas. Other cultivated wetland and inland valley bottoms (i.e. wetland and inland valley bottoms which have not been equipped with water control structures but are used for cropping) are included in this definition, but are not reported present in the Near East Region.
Power irrigated area as percentage of water managed area: (%) Part of the water managed area where pumps are used for water supply. It does not include areas where water is pumped with human- or animal-driven water lifting devices.
Full or partial control schemes: (ha) Areas of large, medium and small schemes, following the criteria used by the country, with the criteria given.
Total number of households in irrigation: Total number of households living directly on earnings from full or partial controlled irrigation schemes.
Total irrigated grain production: (tons) The total quantity of cereals harvested annually in the water managed area.
Harvested crops under irrigation: (ha) Total harvested irrigated area for the crop for the given year. Areas under double cropping should be counted twice. For permanent crops data generally refer to the total planted area.
Drained area: (ha) The area equipped with subsurface or open drains. It can be broken down into drained areas in full or partial control irrigated areas; drained areas in equipped wetland and inland valley bottoms; and other drained areas, equipped for drainage but not equipped for irrigation. Flood recession cropping areas are not considered as being drained.
Flood-protected area: (ha) Area of land equipped with flood control structures.
Area salinized by irrigation: (ha) Total irrigated area affected by salinization as a result of irrigation. This does not include naturally saline areas.
Other definitions and conventions
Notwithstanding the detailed description of each variable, some problems persist due to the fact that it is not always clearly indicated in the available literature which definition has been used in computing the figures. The most frequent problems encountered in computing the figures are listed below. In addition, a number of terms used in the country profiles but not in the tables are also explained below.
Arable versus cultivated land: The official definition of arable land is 'land under temporary crops, temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, land under market and kitchen gardens, and land temporarily fallow'. In this study, 'land cultivated with annual crops' has been preferred to 'arable land' and refers to the physical area actually cultivated with temporary crops, excluding the temporarily fallow land. However, the way multiple cropping and inter-cropping are accounted for is not always clearly explained in the literature.
Cultivable land: The notion of cultivable land in arid areas is closely linked to the capacity to provide water to the crops. Assumptions made in assessing cultivable land vary from country to country. In this survey, national figures have been used, whenever available, despite possible large discrepancies in computation methods.
Irrigation potential: Assumptions made in assessing irrigation potential vary from country to country. In most cases it is computed on the basis of available land and water resources, but economic and environmental considerations may also have been taken into account. Some countries include the possible use of non-conventional sources of water for irrigation. Except in a few cases, no consideration is given to the possible double counting of shared water resources. Wetland and flood plains are usually, but not systematically included in irrigation potential.
Water withdrawal: This term includes all the water used for agricultural, domestic and industrial purposes. The use of desalinated and treated wastewater is thus included, although in the strict sense this should be called 'water use' rather than 'water withdrawal'. Desalinated water and treated wastewater are also referred to as non-conventional sources of water.
Agricultural water withdrawal: Methods for computing agricultural water withdrawal vary from country to country. The figure was reviewed for each country on the basis of crop water requirements and irrigated areas, and comments were added in the country profiles to explain the figure when necessary.
Livestock water withdrawal: By default, livestock water withdrawal is accounted for in agricultural water withdrawal. However, some countries include it in domestic water withdrawal.
Computation of water resources: The following terms have been used in the computation of water resources: Internal renewable water resources is the average annual flow of rivers and recharge of groundwater generated from endogenous precipitation. A critical review of the data was made to ensure that double counting of surface water and groundwater was avoided. Total natural renewable water resources is the sum of internal renewable water resources and natural incoming flow originating outside the country. Special rules are used to take into account the flow of border rivers. Natural incoming pow is the average annual amount of water which would flow into the country in natural conditions, i.e. without human influence. This figure is not time dependent. Total actual renewable water resources is the sum of internal renewable water resources and incoming flow originating outside the country, taking into account the quantity of flow reserved to upstream and downstream countries
through formal or informal agreements or treaties and reduction of flow due to upstream withdrawal. It corresponds to the maximum theoretical amount of water actually available for a country at a given moment. The figure may vary with time. Manageable water resources, or development potential, refer to that part of the resources which is considered to be available for development under specific economic conditions. This figure considers factors such as the dependability of the flow, floods, extractable groundwater, minimum flow required for non-consumptive uses etc.
Safe yield of groundwater: The definition varies between countries and is explained in the country profiles. It may or may not include fossil water. For example, in Malta, the safe yield of groundwater is considered less than the renewable groundwater potential in order not to deplete the storage capacity of the main aquifer without causing salt water intrusion. In Qatar, it includes fossil water from the aquifers underlying a large part of the Arabian Peninsula.
Kareze or Qanat: Unlined tunnel in the hillside, bringing water by free flow from underground aquifers to the surface.
Shat or Chott: Salty depression.
Sabkhas: Evaporative areas.
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
<section>3</section>
minimppv.gif (940 bytes) minimtoc.gif (878 bytes) minimpnx.gif (858 bytes)
General summary
Introduction
Climate, geography and population
Water resources
Water withdrawals
Irrigation potential
Water managed areas and irrigation
Indicators of irrigation intensity
Irrigated crops
Salinization, drainage and environment
Introduction
The Near East region (grouping the countries represented in the FAO Regional Office for the Near East) extends from the Atlantic Ocean (Mauritania and Morocco) in the west to Pakistan and Kyrgyzstan in the east and from Turkey and Kyrgyzstan in the north to Somalia in the south. It falls between longitudes 17° west and 80° east and latitudes 43° north and 2° south. In May 1996, it comprised 29 countries with a total area of 18.5 million km² (Table 11), which is about 14% of the total area of the world (including the interior lakes).
For the purpose of this study, the 29 countries have been grouped in five sub-regions based primarily on geographic conditions and, as far as possible, on hydro-climatic homogeneity. These subregions, presented in Figure 1, are here referred to as Maghreb, North-eastern Africa, Arabian Peninsula, Middle East and Central Asia .
Climate, geography and population
Because of the aridity prevailing in the region, the Near East is the poorest region in the world in terms of water resources, globally and per inhabitant, even when considering the contribution of rivers flowing from the bordering and more humid regions of tropical Africa (the Nile) or Himalayan Asia (the Indus).
However, the water resources distribution within this vast area, extending over three continents, is far from being uniform: land relief, location with respect to the sea, latitude and resulting hydro-climatic conditions, diversity in hydrographic and geological structures, and matching or mismatching of the river basins with the national territories, all give rise to extremely different water situations.
Many countries in the region are characterized by long coastal boundaries. The coasts are located on the North Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea, the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. In addition, several important interior seas can be found in the region: the Black Sea to the north of Turkey, the Caspian Sea to the north of Iran and to the west of Turkmenistan and the Dead Sea to the west of Jordan. The Aral Sea is not bordering the Near East region, but the northern part of Central Asia is located within the Aral Sea basin. Only three countries, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, are landlocked.
Several international rivers cross the Near East Region (Figure 2). The most important rivers are the Nile in North-eastern Africa, which originates outside the region in the Equatorial Lake
Plateau and the highlands of Ethiopia, the Euphrates and the Tigris in the Middle East, the Amu Darya, the Syr Darya and Indus in Central Asia (the latter originating outside the region in the Himalayas). Smaller rivers, like the Jordan and the Orontes in the Middle East, also play a fundamental role in international relations regarding water resources.
The area extending between the Atlantic Ocean and the Persian Gulf is covered with vast deserts. The Great Desert (the Sahara), extending between the Atlantic Ocean and the Red Sea, comprises large parts of the Maghreb and North-eastern Africa. The area extending between the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf includes the Rub Al Khali (Empty Quarter) desert in the south of the Arabian Peninsula and the Badiat-EI-Sham desert in the north of the Arabian Peninsula and the south of the Middle East. In Central Asia, a large part of Iran is covered with desert, as is the case for the southern part of Afghanistan and the south-western part of Pakistan. The Kara Kurn desert comprises 80% of the total area of Turkmenistan.
Many mountain ranges can be found in the Near East Region. In the centre of the Great Desert, several mountains appear, with the highest peak at an elevation of 3 000 metres at Tebetsy Mountain in Libya. In addition to these internal mountains, there are mountain ranges running parallel to the coasts of the Mediterranean and Red Seas. The Atlas mountain range occupies the north-westem corner of the Maghreb, with its peak in Morocco at an elevation of 4 165 metres. In Lebanon, the Lebanon mountain chain has its highest crest at just over 3 000 metres. In Yemen, there is a mountain peak at an elevation of 3 268 metres; in south-eastern Turkey, at an elevation of 4 135 metres. The peak of the Zagros mountain chain in Iran reaches 4 432 metres. The highest peak of the Hindu Kush range on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan reaches 7 690 metres (Tirichmir). In the north-eastern part of Central Asia, the Himalayan mountain ranges have peaks reaching almost 8 000 metres.
The total population of the region was about 561 million in 1995, of which almost 52% rural. Population increased by 2.7% between 1994 and 1995, ranging from 2.2% in the Maghreb and Northeastern Africa to 3.1 % in Central Asia. During the last 10 years (1985-1995), average annual population growth was 3.0% in the Near East Region as against 1.7% in the world. Over 43% of the population of the region is concentrated in Central Asia, which occupies 21 % of the total area of the Near East; 25% of the total population lives in Pakistan alone, which occupies only 4% of the total area. Population density is lowest in the Maghreb, with 12 inhabitants per km, and highest in the Middle East, with 71 inhabitants per km². The least densely populated country is Mauritania, with 2 inhabitants per km². Malta and Bahrain are the most densely populated countries, with 1 158 and 811 inhabitants per km² respectively, followed far behind by Lebanon and Pakistan, with 288 and 177 inhabitants
per km² respectively. All the remaining countries have less than 100 inhabitants per km² (Table 12).
Water resources
In this study, a distinction has been made between renewable and non-renewable water resources. The following indicators have been compiled or estimated for each country. Internal renewable water resources (IRWR) is that part of the water resources generated from endogenous precipitation. It is computed by adding up surface runoff and groundwater recharge occurring inside the countries' borders. Special care is taken to avoid double counting of their common part. Total renewable water resources refers to the sum of IRWR and incoming flow originating outside the countries' borders. A distinction is made between natural flow (NRWR), computed by assessing the long-term yearly average of flow without any human-induced abstraction, end actual flow (ARWR), which is the maximum theoretical amount of water actually available for a country. Actual flow takes into account abstraction in upstream countries and the volumes allocated through formal or informal agreements or treaties
between countries. The IRWR figures are the only water resources figures that can be added up for regional assessment and they have been used for this purpose.
TABLE 1 - Sub-regional distribution of the renewable water resources
Region Area Population '95 Annual precipitation Annual internal renewable water resources
thousand
km² thousand inhabitants mm km³ mm km³ as % of
precipitation m³ per
inhabitant
Maghreb 5 777 71 544 86 495 8 48 9.8 677
North-eastern Africa 4 168 100 856 306 1 275 10 43 3.4 427
Arabian Peninsula 3 103 39 110 79 246 2 8 3.1 197
Middle East 1 512 106 635 421 637 162 245 38.4 2 294
Central Asia 3 926 243 316 304 1 195 138 541 45.3 2 226
Total Near East 18 486 561 461 208 3 848 48 885 23.0 1 577
World 134 223 5 716 407 820 110 000 298 40000 36.4 7 0
N. East as % of world 13.8 9.8 3.5 2.2 22.5
Note: Rainfall figures have been estimated for Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan
While the Near East covers 14% of the total area of the world and contains 10% of its population, its water resources are only about 2% of the total renewable water resources of the world. Further to this, large differences exist between the five sub-regions, as is shown in Table 1. The Maghreb, North-eastern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula have very limited water resources, with less than 10 mm annually on average and suffer severe water scarcity, with values per inhabitant varying between 200 and 700 m³/year. In contrast, the Middle East and Central Asia show much higher values, mostly thanks to the abundant flows generated in the mountainous areas of Turkey and in the Himalayas.
The internal renewable water resources per inhabitant in the Near East are among the lowest in the world. The average for the region is 1 577 m³/inhabitant per year, as against over 7 000 m³/year per inhabitant for the whole world. It ranges from near 0 for Kuwait, which has practically no internal renewable water resources, to about 10 000 m³/inhabitant per year for Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan (Table 13). For 16 out of the 29 countries the internal renewable water resources per inhabitant are below 500 m³/year and for 11 of them even the total actual renewable water resources are below 500 m³/year (Figures 3 and 4 and Table 2).
For only four countries (Turkey, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan) the internal renewable water resources per inhabitant are above 2 000 m³/year and three of them act as 'water towers' for the region, with large amounts of water flowing to downstream countries. They are: Turkey (the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers mainly), Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan (the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya). Two countries, Syria and Sudan, are intermediate countries in that they depend to a large extent, around 80%, on upstream countries for their renewable water resources (mainly the Euphrates from Turkey and the Nile from Ethiopia)' but on the other hand they are located upstream from other countries depending on the same rivers (Iraq and Egypt respectively). Five countries depend for over 90% on other countries for their renewable water resources: Turkmenistan, Egypt and Mauritania for surface water and Kuwait and Bahrain for groundwater. To a lesser extent, but still over 50% dependent on
other countries are Somalia and Iraq (Figure 5 and Table 3).
Non-renewable groundwater
Several countries, that have few renewable water resources, overlie important non-renewable (fossil) groundwater basins, partly shared with neighbouring countries. In several countries (Saudi Arabia, Libya or the United Arab Emirates) by far the largest part of the total water withdrawn is fossil water, as seen in the next section (Table 6). However, although groundwater reservoirs may all