<title>Pacific Rim demand and supply situation, trends and prospects: implications for forest products trade in the Asia-Pacific region. (Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study - Working Paper Series) APFSOS/WP/02</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The present report has been prepared for the Forestry Policy and Planning Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy as a background document for the proposed Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study "The Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector - Towards 2010". The Terms of Reference for the present study fully recognize the extensive body of existing study reports, regional analyses, country reports, and related studies documenting forestry sector status and trends, including outlook projections for likely future developments. The present study does not seek to duplicate this body of information; rather, the purpose of this study is to review, summarize, and integrate the major themes and directions outlined in the existing literature, to identify major determinants of forestry sector developments, to outline a 'most likely' regional scenario to the year 2010, and to propose additional areas of work required for the proposed Asia-Pacific Forestry
Sector Outlook Study.
In undertaking the proposed study, the support provided by the technical officers and staff of the FAO Forestry Department has been critical to the completion of the report. The identification of key analytical studies, the access to the FAO Forest Products Statistics Database and the Forest Resources Information Database, the consultations on critical elements of the study, and guidance and support relative to synthesis of the near-overwhelming amount of descriptive and analytical source information is gratefully acknowledged.
The present study is presented in two volumes. Volume I (Main Report) provides the basic synthesis and information on a Asia-Pacific and Sub-Region basis as set forth in the Introduction. Volume II (Statistical Appendix) provides detailed statistical information at a desegregated Sub-Region and Country level whenever possible. Information compiled by the authors is supplemented by reproduced charts, tables and other forms with full recognition and credit to the original sources. Volume I contains a detailed Bibliography of primary source materials used in this review, together with an extensive listing of Supplemental Sources identified as useful in support of a better understanding of the status and outlook for the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific Region. While extensive, these listings of reference materials is yet incomplete.
There are also known to exist many additional country studies prepared by individual governments, bilateral assisted national or sub-regional studies, International agency reviews, project formulation documents, internal evaluation reviews, and many academic and scholarly articles and monographs. While it has not been possible to examine and document this extensive information base completely, the ideas and findings reflected in major studies cited here are contributing elements to our present level of understanding.
While every effort has been made to accurately report the themes and findings of prior studies and analyses, and to document primary sources, the interpretation of information by the authors may differ from the original source. Responsibility there for rests with the authors of this report whenever such differences arise. This is particularly important in the formulation of the 'most likely' scenario where the array of outlook projections have been tempered by judgments balancing the differing and often inconsistent methodologies and assumptions used in the source materials.
As reported in this study, there are an almost endless number of 'issues' confronting the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific region. A matrix format was utilized to screen the general and specific items noted in the literature in order to formulate a comprehensive framework for structuring the presentation and discussion. Judgment was exercised in identifying the major content of the literature reviewed, and the classification of issues is largely judgmental and does not directly reflect the precise or specific terminology used by various researchers and authors. Issues have been necessarily broadened and generalized for the purpose of regional synthesis. Readers are urged and encouraged to consult the source documents for a more complete and detailed understanding of each specific source.
The Asia-Pacific Region is of critical importance to the global forestry sector from both a utilitarian forest products perspective and as a critical component of the world's natural resources and environment. The region is experiencing many significant changes economically and socially, giving rise to increased concern about the stewardship and use of forests. It is hoped that this synthesis will contribute to the formulation and completion of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study in support of the future well-being of those linked to this important sector.
Thomas R. Waggener
Christine Lane
Seattle, Washington
May 30, 1996
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Background
Study purpose and structure
The Asia Pacific Region
Background
Forestry in the Asia Pacific Rim continues to receive extensive attention from many perspectives. This region, home to some estimated 3 billion inhabitants as of 1994, and including over 2.8 billion ha. of land, contains an extensive range of land forms, climate, socio-economic conditions, forest types, stages of economic development, and levels of forest sector development and utilization.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) has been the primary source of ongoing information about the status of the forestry sector, including the component countries of the Asia Pacific region. In cooperation with the Asia Pacific Forestry Commission, FAO has initiated planning for a two year analysis leading to the completion of an Asia Pacific forestry sector outlook study, "The Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector - Towards 2010".
Prior evaluations and analyses have been undertaken by many organizations, including FAO itself. Periodic publications of global and regional Resource Assessments and the related Forest Products Yearbooks are widely recognized as authoritative sources for forestry sector information. Other primary sources of recent regional analyses have included significant works sponsored or undertaken by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank (WB), and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). Other significant work has been undertaken by the Center for International Trade in Forest Products (CINTRAFOR) at the University of Washington, Seattle. These analyses have been supported by major international consulting organizations with longstanding expertise in the forestry sector.
There has also been significant in-depth analysis and review of individual country forestry situations as components of the Tropical Forestry Action Programme, Master Plan Development projects, the formulation documents for international assistance projects, and individual government studies of national conditions. What has frequently been lacking, however, is a broader regional context for understanding the dynamics of forestry sector developments. In part, this is internal whereby individual countries pursue their immediate interests, aggregations of countries are viewed as either 'developing' or 'developed', as 'tropical' or as 'temperate', as 'importers' or as 'exporters'.
In reality, the Asia Pacific Region is a mixture of all of these components - and more. Diversity is a hallmark of the region, yet the dynamics of the region dictates the need for a more integrated and total perspective if the future of the area is to be understood in a global context. External to the region are other significant 'players' who may be either consumer-markets and/or potentially competitive producers of forest products. In many cases they are both. The future of the forestry sector of the region will be dynamically determined by both internal developments within individual countries and in response to regional and global factors beyond the influence or control of any individual nation.
Study purpose and structure
The proposed Asia Pacific forestry sector outlook study will seek to build upon the considerable information base that exists. At the same time, the dynamics and interdependencies of the diverse forest economies of the region must be-reflected in a broader and integrated framework capturing the essential determinants of sector development for the region as a whole.
The present study has been undertaken an initial effort to provide a synthesis of the major existing information base for the forestry sector within the Asia Pacific region. Major trends are summarized by sub-region within the Asia Pacific Region. Recent developments in the forestry sector are presented by sub-region. Recent analyses covering all or parts of the region have been reviewed with an emphasis on identification of the determinants of past trends and indicators of likely future developments. Where available, outlook projections are summarized and presented. Drawing upon this depth of information, a summary of major 'issues' confronting the region is developed, and a 'most' likely near term outlook is synthesized in qualitative terms.
The report concludes with a brief identification of major areas where additional research and analysis can contribute to a more complete understanding of the opportunities and challenges confronting the region as it seeks to develop and implement sound policies and direction for a productive and sustainable forestry sector. This policy and direction will undoubtedly be as diverse and unique as are the forest conditions and countries involved. What will emerge, it is hoped, is a collective recognition of a common interest and purpose so that the individually determined strategies can be based on a realistic understanding of the broader regional context.
The Asia Pacific Region
Analysis of the forestry sector must necessarily begin with a definition of the inclusive region of study. Previously, major reviews and studies within the Asia Pacific Region have been limited in scope, necessarily focusing on specific sub-grouping of countries. Groupings of countries have included 'tropical' and 'temperate', 'developing' or 'developed', 'importers' or 'exporters', etc. In the present study, the focus is on the geographic region, preserving the obvious diversities of the various sub-regions and individual countries.
The scope of the present study is provided in Table 1. In general terms, this includes China and Mongolia to the north, Pakistan to the west, New Zealand and Australia to the south, and the Pacific Island countries to or near the International Date line to the east. As identified in Table 1, five sub-regions have been identified, based on geographical location.
TABLE 1: COUNTRIES OF THE ASIAN PACIFIC REGION ASIA PACIFIC REGION/SUB-REGIONS
SOUTH ASIA
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
CONTINENTAL SE ASIA
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Thailand
Viet Nam
NORTH ASIA
China
Hong Kong
Japan
Korea, DPR
Korea, Rep
Macau
Mongolia
INSULAR SE ASIA
Brunei/Darussalam
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
OCEANIA-S. PACIFIC
Am. Samoa
Australia
Christmas Island
Cocos Island
Cook Island
East Timor
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Norfolk Island
North Mariana Isl
Pacific Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitacairn
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tavalu
Vanuatu
Wake Island
Wallis & Fatuna
The present study is integrative and a synthesis of presently available information. It draws heavily on major existing studies. An extensive bibliography of the major sources reviewed and utilized in this report is provided, together with an extended listing of supplemental sources. While extensive, these listings are not comprehensive as to all current literature bearing on the forestry sector of the Asia Pacific Region. Many formal and informal publications and reports were unavailable during the preparation of this report. Many analyses are presumed to exist within the files of individual countries, major international organizations, and consulting organizations, university and research centers, and individual companies and public interest organizations.
Much of the basic resource and trade information derives from the work of FAO through the various component studies of the "Forest Resources Assessment 1990" and the related FORIS database maintained by FAO. It also utilizes the FAOSTAT database for forest products production, import and export statistics, together with the related Forest Products Yearbook. Compilations of information from this source is based on the 1996 update of FAOSTAT with statistics generally inclusive to 1994. Major works utilized in this review include the following:
· The World Bank, "Tropical Deforestation in Asia and Market for Wood", report prepared by Jaakko Poyry, November 1992
· Asian Development Bank, "Status of Forestry and Forest Industries in Asia-Pacific Region", report prepared by Jaakko Poyry, November 1995
· International Tropical Timber Organization, "Analysis of Macroeconomic Trends in the Supply and Demand of Sustainably Produced Tropical Timber from the Asia-Pacific Region", Phase II, report prepared by Simons-Reid Collins, March 1995
· International Tropical Timber Organization, "The Economic Linkages between the International Trade in Tropical Timber and the Sustainable Management of Tropical Forests" (2 volumes), report prepared by London Environmental Economics Centre, March 1993.
· International Tropical Timber Organization, "Annual Review and Assessment of the World Tropical Timber Situation", 1996 and prior years.
· Center for International Trade in Forest Products (CINTRAFOR), Global Trade Assessment Reports and Reviews, including:
a) Working Paper 18, "An Economic Analysis of Short-Run Timber Supply Around the Globe", 1988
b) Working Paper 22, "A Preliminary Analysis of Timber and Timber Product Production, Consumption, Trade, and Prices in the Pacific Rim Until 2000", 1989
c) Working Paper 29, "Production and Trade in Tropical Hardwoods: An Asian-Pacific Case Study" (with FAO), 1990
d) Working Paper 33, "An Assessment of the Impacts of Recent Environmental and Trade Restrictions on Timber Harvest and Exports", 1991
e) Working Paper 43, "Global Forestry Impacts of Reducing Softwood Supplies from North America", 1993
f) Working Paper 47, "The Impact on Domestic and Global Markets of a Pacific Northwest Log Export Ban or Tax", 1994
g) Working Paper 50, "An Analysis of Proposed Domestic Climate Warming Mitigation Program Impacts on International Forest Products Markets", 1994
In addition to these major CINTRAFOR analyses which utilize the CINTRAFOR Global Trade Model (CGTM), related country analyses completed by the principal author (including Russia, Japan, China) have been extensively utilized here, together with other analyses undertaken by CINTRAFOR staff (including component studies undertaken for the World Bank, ITTO and Jaako Poyry reviews noted above).
· FAO/UNEP, "After UNCED - Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Forest Principles in Asia and the Pacific", 1995
· Forestry Technical Services Pty, Ltd. "Pacific Islands Forest Products Market Prospects, Consultancy report to the World Bank", 1989.
Although these major studies play a central role in the present review, numerous additional country, product, or partial reviews and outlook reports have been examined in the course of this project. Country Tropical Forest Action Programs and similar Country Forest Master Plans exist for the majority of Asia Pacific countries and have been referenced where possible. These additional sources are cited in full in the bibliography and supplemental sources list. A comparative listing of primary country coverage in the major regional analyses is included in Appendix 1 (Study Volume II).
<section>3</section>
Over view of the Asia-Pacific Region
Population and socio-economic status
Land and forests
Deforestation
The Asia Pacific Region, as defined above for this study, is an immense region, covering some 2.8 billion hectares of land area, or approximately 22 percent of the global land area. Stretching from the borders of China-Mongolia with the NIS to the north to the southern tip of Australia and New Zealand to the south, this region covers the spectrum of conditions from northern temperate and boreal through the range of tropical and subtropical zones and back to temperate. From the high plateaus and mountains of Pakistan to the west and extending to the island countries of North Asia and the South Pacific, the Asia Pacific region incorporates conditions of moist tropical to arid and semiarid desert. As would be expected by this geography, the human and social dimensions of the Asia Pacific Region are equally diverse.
Population and socio-economic status
A summary of broad social and economic indicators is given in Table 2.^1 More detailed information for each country is contained in the Statistical Appendix. The largest sub-region in terms of land area is the North Asia region, containing the People's Republic of China with almost 933 million ha. The diverse Oceania-S. Pacific region is the second largest, with over 835 million ha. and dominated by Australia. The smallest sub-region is Continental SE Asia with just over 190 million ha.
^1 Throughout this report, summary tables are provided covering the five sub-regions of the Asia Pacific Region. Whenever possible, detailed companion tables reporting information by country for each sub-region are contained in the Statistical Appendix (Volume II).
Population for the Asia Pacific Region is large and growing. Total Region population was estimated at 3.08 billion in 1990, or over 57 percent of the total global population. According to estimates by the World Bank, the Region's population had grown to almost 3.09 billion by 1994. Annual growth rates exceed 2.0 percent per year in most of the Region's countries (See Appendix Table 2). For the period 1981-90, the Asia Pacific Region grew by about 48 million persons, representing over 56 percent of global population growth.
The population is disproportionately distributed in the Region, resulting in widely differing population densities. South Asia is the most densely populated, with a regional average of some 311 persons per square kilometer. Bangladesh (888.0) and Sri Lanka (266) are the most densely populated within this sub-region. Lowest population density is found in Oceania-S. Pacific at only just over 3 persons per square kilometer.
As measured by Gross National Product, the North Asian region leads substantially, reflecting the dominance of Japan. This is reflected in the GNP per capita of $US 25,840 for 1990 and $US 34,630 for 1994 for Japan, well above the Region averages. Regional GNP per capita was $US 1,195 in 1990 for the Continental SE Asia region, $US 826 for Insular Asia, and only $US 347 for South Asia. Incomplete data prevents a determination of average sub-region per capita income for Oceania-S. Pacific, although Australia and New Zealand are developed countries with per capita incomes well above the sub-region average. With the exception of these two countries, Oceania-S. Pacific would be expected to have an average below $US 2,000.
Incomplete data prevents complete analysis of the rates of economic growth in the Asia Pacific Region. Incomplete information does indicate that growth rates vary widely. The Continental sub-region leads with an average growth in per-capita incomes at 5.6 percent although data is not reported for Cambodia and Myanmar. South Asia growth was 3.2 percent for 1981-90, while Insular SE Asia per capita incomes grew by 2.6 percent. Oceania-S. Pacific growth for reported countries ranged from 2-3 percent with the exception of the Solomon Islands (6.7 percent) and Papua New Guinea (-0.7 percent).
Table 2: Socio-economic data of the Asian Pacific Region
Population
Land
Population
Density
Ann Growth
Ann Rate of Growth
GNP
Gross National Product
Average
Area
Total 1990
Total 1994
Per Cap ($US)
Annual Growth (%)
Inflation
000 ha
000 inh
000 inh
inh/km²
000 inh/yr
$US
South Asia
Continental SE Asia
North Asia
Insular Asia
Oceania-S. Pacific
na
TOTAL - ASIAN PACIFIC REGION
Developed, All
Developing. All
WORLD
ASIAN PACIFIC SHARE OF WORLD
Source: FAO, Forest Resources Assessment 1990; World Bank Atlas 1996
Land and forests
Basic information about the forests of the Asia Pacific Region as compiled from the FAO Forest Resources Assessment reports (1990) is summarized by sub-region in Table 3 and Appendix 3 by country.^2 As shown, the Asia Pacific Region included a total of 820 million ha. of forest and wooded lands, or approximately 16 percent of the global total. North Asia had the largest total, at just over 214 million ha., followed by Oceania-S. Pacific at almost 201 million ha. In North Asia, the region is dominated by the forest and wooded area of China, at 162 million ha. In Oceania-S. Pacific, Australia accounts for the greatest share, at almost 146 million ha. South Asia contains the smallest total of forest and wooded land, at just over 100 million ha., with India the leading country at 82.6 million ha. For the Continental SE Asia sub-region, Myanmar with almost 50 million ha. is the leading country. For Insular Asia, with 181 million ha. of forest and wooded lands, Indonesia is the
leading country with 145 million ha. As shown in Table 3, over 565 million ha. in the Asia Pacific region is considered forest. This also represents just over 16 percent of the global total. Forest lands cover an estimated 20 percent of total land area for the Asia Pacific Region as a whole, ranging from a high of 58 percent for Insular SE Asia to a low of only 10.6 percent for Oceania-S. Pacific. Asia Pacific forest cover is below the global average of 27 percent. Because of the significant differences in forest as a percent of land area, and the variance in population densities, the reported forest per capita differs significantly. For the Asia Pacific Region, forest per capita is 0.19 ha./inh., compared to the global average of 0.64. Within the Asia Pacific Region, Oceania-S. Pacific has the highest forest cover per capita, (3.33 ha./inh) in spite of the lower forest cover, due primarily to the much lower population density. South Asia, in contrast, has a per capita
forest cover of only 0.07 ha., reflecting the much higher population density together with a forest cover of only 18.9 percent.
^2 In Table 3, only countries reported as having forest lands in the FAO Resource Assessment (1990) are shown. Other countries included in the definition of the Asia Pacific Region (Table 1) participate in forest products trade or production but do not contain forest lands.
Table 3 also shows the estimated growing stock volumes and the average stocking per hectare. The Asia Pacific Region contains some 61.2 billion cubic meters of growing stock, with an average stocking of 108 cubic meters per ha. This represents just under 16 percent of global growing stock and compares closely to the share of both forest area and combined forest-wooded area. Average global forest stocking is 114 cubic meters per ha., slightly higher than that for the Asia Pacific Region. Growing stock is greatest for the Insular SE Asia sub-region, at 1-76 cubic meters per ha., reflecting the greater forest stocking in Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia.
Table 3: Forest resources of the Asian Pacific Region
Land Area
Population
Forest &
Forest
Volume
Other
Total
Wooded
Area
Per Capita
Total
Per Ha
Wooded
ASIA PACIFIC REGION/SUB-REGION
(1000 ha)
(1000 inn)
(1,000 ha)
(Mill CUM)
(CUM/Ha)
(1,000 ha)
South Asia
Continental SE Asia
North Asia
Insular SE Asia
Oceania-S. Pacific
TOTAL - ASIAN PACIFIC REGION
Developed, All
Developing, All
WORLD
ASIAN PACIFIC SHARE OF WORLD
FAO Forest Resource Assessment 1990
In addition to the forest lands, the Asia Pacific Region contains an estimated 255 million ha. of 'other wooded' lands, with over 112 million ha. of this being in the Oceania-S. Pacific sub-region (primarily Australia). Other countries with significant amounts of other wooded lands include India, Myanmar, China, Indonesia and Viet Nam.
Additional forest information is reported in Table 4, with a slightly different grouping of countries (See Appendix 4 for Country Statistics). This table reflects the differences between developing and developed countries. Japan has been removed from the North Asia sub-region, while Australia and New Zealand are removed from Oceania-S. Pacific. Together, these three countries are grouped as "Developed Asia" in Table 4 and Appendix 4.
In addition to basic statistics on population and total land area, Table 4 includes FAO estimates of 'exploitable' and 'non-exploitable' forest. Also included are statistics showing the degree of change over the 1981-90 period (as annual averages) for the combined forest and other wooded lands, natural forests, and plantations. Of the total forest lands of the Asia Pacific Region 480.7 million ha. are reported as 'exploitable' while some 84.5 million ha. are 'unexploitable'. The largest share of unexploitable forest is found in the Temperate-North Asia sub-region (33.8 million ha. - primarily in China), and the Developed sub-region (28.6 million ha. - mainly in Australia). India and Indonesia both also include important areas that are considered 'unexploitable'.
While the North Temperate developing countries show a net increase in forests over the 1981-90 period, at 881 thousand ha./year, all other sub-regions have shown a decline. Overall, the Asia Pacific Region had experienced a decline of almost 1.2 million ha. per year over this period. The decline in natural forests was at 4.3 million ha./year, offset in part by an increase of 2.7 million ha. in plantations. For the Temperate North Asia region, plantation development was almost entirely in China, where gains were at a rate of 1.1 million ha./year, offset by losses of natural forest at 400,000 ha./year. The other sub-regions experiencing net overall were greatest for Insular Asia and Continental SE Asia. Within the Insular sub-region, losses were largest for Indonesia, at -1.2 million ha./year, offset by a gain of 332 thousand ha./yr. of new plantations. Losses in Malaysia and the Philippines were not significantly moderated by new plantations. For the Continental region,
largest losses were in the natural forests of Myanmar and Thailand, at -401 thousand and -515 thousand ha./year respectively. Within the developed Asian countries, reported deforestation was minimal in comparison, primarily reflecting a decline of -4 thousand ha./yr. in Japan within 'other wooded' lands.
Information for the tropical countries in the Asia Pacific region as identified by ITTO is summarized in Table 5 showing the estimated status of management for production forests, as well as the degree to which those productive forests are sustainably managed. For the countries shown, the reported total of natural forests was 311.3 million ha., while the total of productive natural forests is 203, million ha. While the status of management is not reported for India, Indonesia and the Philippines, some 21 million ha. of the natural forest in the other reported countries is considered as sustainably managed with a total of 47.5 million ha. under some form of management. Plantations are estimated at 28.6 million ha. hardwoods with only 12 thousand ha. of softwoods.
Table 4. Status of Forest Lands and Changes 1980-90 (Asia-Pacific)
Summary by Region: Status of Forest Land and Changes 1980-90
Sub-Region
Population
Total
Land
Area
Forest &
Other Wooded
Land
Forest
Other
Forest
Population
Annual Change
Total
% of
Land
Exploitable
Forest
Un-exploitable
Forest
Wooded
Land
Per Cap.
Density
Forest &
Other
Forest
Lands
Natural
Forests
Plantations
1000 ha
1,000 ha
1,000 ha
Area
1,000 ha
1000 ha
1,000 ha
ha.
Inh/km²
1,000 ha
1,000 ha
1,000 ha
Temperate-North Asia
Pacific-Oceania
Insular
Continental
South
Developed
ASIA-PACIFIC REGION TOTAL
Source: FAO forestry paper 124
Table 5. Tropical Forest Areas for ITTO Producers as of 1992 (1000 ha)
Country
Total Land Area
Natural Forest
Plantations
Total Tropical Forest Area
Productive
Unproductive
Legally Reserved
Total
Hardwood
rapid growth
Softwood
Total
Managed
Sust. managed
Unmanaged
Unexploited
Asia-Pacific
India ^F
Indonesia ^F
Malaysia
(Peninsular)
(Sabah)
(Sawawak)
Myanmar
PNG
Philippines
Thailand
Source: ITTO 1995b. Annual review and assessment of the world tropical timber situation 1993-4.
F: FAO 1990 Forest Resource Assessment. I: ITTO estimate.
Deforestation
Results of the FAO Forest Resources Assessment (1990) related to deforestation by forest type is summarized in Table 6 and data for selected countries for which this information was reported (tropical countries only) is contained in Appendix 5.^3 Total estimated deforestation was 3.9 million ha. annually, or approximately 1.3 percent annually. Deforestation was the greatest for Insular SE Asia, at 1.9 million ha./year, or a rate of 1.4 percent annually. However, the deforestation of 1.3 million ha./year in the Continental SE Asia region was actually at a higher rate, 1.7 percent per year. As widely reported, the deforestation was greatest in the tropical rainforests, where deforestation was 2.16 million ha./year, or at a rate of 1.2 percent. Although the annual amount of deforestation was considerably less for the moist deciduous forest type (656 thousand ha./yr.) this was actually at a higher rate of 1.6 percent per year. Almost 77 percent of the moist deciduous
deforestation took place in Continental SE Asia, primarily in Myanmar and Thailand. Deforestation in other forest types is more modest but important. Deforestation of 467 thousand ha./yr. in the dry deciduous forest type in concentrated in India, Thailand, and Cambodia, and represents a rate of 1.1 percent per year overall. Deforestation I the hill and montane forests was estimated at 584 thousand ha./yr., or 1.2 percent annually. Indonesia accounted for 147 thousand ha./yr., followed by Myanmar (65 thousand ha./yr.) and Pakistan (59 thousand ha./yr.). For Pakistan, this represents a rate of 4.1 percent annually, considerably higher than the sub-region or Asia Pacific as a whole.
^3 Information was reported for Tropical countries only. The temperate countries of North Asia are thus not included in this summary. Further, only Papua New Guinea was reported among the Oceania-S. Pacific sub-region.
The status of logging for the tropical countries is summarized in Table 7 and reported by country in Appendix 6. North Asia countries are not included in this summary, while Papua New Guinea is the only Oceania-S. Pacific sub-region country included. As shown, approximately 2.15 million ha. were logged annually within the countries reported, including 1.76 million ha. newly entered and 385 thousand ha. of previously logged forest. This represents an annual logging rate of just under 1 percent annually. Average annual logging density was approximately 556 cubic meters/ha. overall for the Asia Pacific Region. Total logging was highly concentrated in Insular SE Asia, where 1.72 million ha./yr. were logged, including over 1.2 million ha. in Indonesia and 455 thousand ha. in Malaysia. About 305 thousand ha./yr. were logged in Continental SE Asia, including almost 200 thousand ha./yr. in Myanmar. Rates of logging were less than 1 percent/yr. in all sub-regions excepting Insular SE
Asia, although rates were greater for individual countries, including Bangladesh (2.5 percent), Viet Nam (1.4 percent), Indonesia (1.2 percent) and Malaysia (2.6 percent). Entry into newly logged forests was lowest for South Asia, where only 11 thousand ha. were entered in contrast to 53 thousand ha./yr. of previously logged forest. In Continental Asia most new entry was in Myanmar, where approximately 178 thousand ha./yr. were entered. Over 1 million ha. of new forest was logged in Indonesia annually, while 385 thousand was entered for logging in Malaysia. A comparison of Table 6 (deforestation) and Table 7 (logging) indicates that with the exception of Insular SE Asia the area of deforestation considerably exceeds area logged on an average annual basis for 1980-90. While total estimated deforestation was 3.9 million ha./yr., total reported logging was 2.1 m