<title>Strategic grain reserves - Guidelines for their establishment, management and operation. (FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin - 126)</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
These guidelines have been prepared to assist those countries which have moved, or are in the process of moving, towards a liberalised system for marketing agricultural produce and who wish to maintain a strategic grain reserve to guard against possible failures of the free market to cope adequately for the food needs of the population.
Past experience of maintaining strategic grain reserves has mostly been associated with strictly regulated cereal markets in which the government, or a government controlled agency, was the only official participant. With liberalisation interventions by government, unless they are carefully designed, are likely to distort the normal functioning of the market which, in turn, will have implications for the activities of private sector participants. To minimise such disruptions there is a need to adopt a different approach for the management and operation of such reserves which takes into account the mechanisms operating in the free market.
Various options are available for the design and operation of a reserve depending on the medium- to long-term objectives of government and the general conditions influencing the functioning of the market. To assist in this process, various options which should be considered in deciding which are the most appropriate to meet the government's policy objectives are presented in these guidelines.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge the help given by many people and organisations, both wittingly and unwittingly, in contributing to the preparation of these guidelines. They draw heavily on the thoughts and experiences expressed by many FAO colleagues over the past twenty years, in particular Elmar Müller of the FAO Food Security Assistance Scheme. Special thanks go to Frans Van de Van of FAO Zambia and his team for the many discussions relating to issues involved in market liberalisation and the establishment of strategic grain reserves in a market economy and the abundance of information provided which has been used extensively in the preparation of these guidelines. Other valuable contributions were made by senior staff of ADMARC (Malawi) and the Food Security Reserve (Tanzania). The author would also like to thank the delegates to the meeting of the Association of Food Marketing Enterprises in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFMESA) held in Lilongwe in October 1996,
where the first draft of these guidelines was presented, for their helpful suggestions and comments for improving the relevance of the contents and their presentation.
The author would also like to thank colleagues of the Marketing and Rural Finance Service of FAO who assisted in the preparation and editing of this publication, especially Ed Seidler who conceived the idea and made valuable suggestions relating to the content and presentation.
<section>3</section>
Acronyms
ADMARC
Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation (Malawi)
AFMESA
Association of Food Marketing Enterprises in Eastern and Southern Africa
CBOT
Chicago Board of Trade
EFSR
Ethiopian Food Security Reserve
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FRA
Food Reserve Agency (Zambia)
FSAS
Food Security Assistance Scheme (FAO)
FSC
Food Security Committee (Ethiopia)
FSU
Food Security Unit
IMF
International Monetary Fund
MIS
Market Information System
NCPB
National Cereals and Produce Board (Kenya)
NGO
Non Governmental Organisation
SADC
Southern Africa Development Council
SGR
Strategic Grain Reserve
WFP
World Food Programme of the United Nations
<section>4</section>
Section one - Introduction
The need to maintain stocks of grain in years of good harvests to guard against famine in those years when production falls short of needs has been recognised throughout history. Perhaps the earliest recorded instance was the biblical reference to the build-up of stocks by the ancient Egyptians during seven years of plenty to cover for the prophesied seven lean years.
In modem times the establishment and maintenance of Strategic Grain Reserves, or Food Security Reserves, stems from the events of the early 1970s when a prolonged drought in the Sahel, resulted in a series of disastrous harvests throughout the region. The seriousness of the situation was compounded by a simultaneous world-wide cereal shortage which led to prices rising to record levels. With limited availability and high prices the donor community was only able to provide limited amounts of food aid with the result that many people in the region experienced famine. The effects of these events were also felt in many other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa which, because of scarcity and cost, had difficulty in making adequate provision for needed imports to supplement their own shortfalls in production. To reduce the severity of such events in the future, governments in several vulnerable countries, in consultation with the donor community, embarked on the development of
programmes aimed at ensuring an adequate availability of food for affected populations and the development of national food security strategies^1 Emphasis was put on propositioning stocks of basic cereals in vulnerable Sahelian countries to be held in readiness for use in the event of future food emergencies. These stocks were not intended to cope with the entire emergency, but rather to provide for the basic needs of the affected population during the lead time required for arranging the availability of alternative supplies. Priority was generally given to ensuring an adequate availability for the urban population, i.e. market dependent population, as it was assumed that the rural population would have retained sufficient stocks, or otherwise made adequate provision for meeting its basic food needs, e.g. through the production of alternative drought resistant crops such as cassava. Subsequently, it was realised that there were vulnerable groups amongst the rural population
which should also be included when considering releases from the reserve.
^1 The establishment by FAO of the Food Security Assistance Scheme (FSAS) was one of the outcomes of these international deliberations.
Determination of the need for a reserve, its size and the arrangements for its management and operation were set by government, frequently with the help of aid agencies such as FAO and bilateral donors. The physical establishment of the reserve was often an integral part of donor supported programmes aimed at strengthening national food security. Typically an initial quantity of grain would be donated by a donor, e.g. WFP, in the expectation that it would act as a catalyst for contributions from other donors. Grain from the reserve which was sold into the market was expected to be replenished through purchases in the domestic market following harvest by the agency responsible for managing the reserve. Funding for these purchases was expected to come from the monies generated from sales from the reserve. It was also expected that donor assistance would be forthcoming to help replenish those quantities which had been distributed, either free or at subsidised prices, to
vulnerable population groups under relief programmes during food emergencies.
Throughout the period from independence until the late 1980s the grain market in most countries of the Sahelian and Sub-Saharan region was strictly regulated by government, with normally a strong bias towards the politically more active urban population. Low consumer prices were maintained by a combination of low producer prices and heavy subsidies. Pan-territorial and pan-temporal pricing systems were the norm for both producer and consumer prices, and private sector participation in the market was actively discouraged. Parastatal companies, or marketing boards, with monopoly rights for the marketing of designated cereals, and in some instances the provision of inputs, were established to administer the system. These companies were also normally given responsibility for managing and operating the reserve stocks^1 However, problems faced by governments in providing adequate funds to the parastatals to finance their operations often led to reserve stocks being used for normal
market operations. Financial pressures on both governments and the parastatals resulted in insufficient resources being made available to replenish the reserve stocks at the start of the following marketing year. At the same time the donor community, which was facing increasing demands for food aid, was becoming steadily more disenchanted with the way that reserves stocks were being used and was increasingly unwilling to provide the resources necessary for rebuilding stocks. Progressively, the quantities held in reserves dwindled, eventually ceasing to exist in most countries. The Malawian grain reserve was a notable exception to this generalisation as were the reserves held as buffer stocks within the normal operational stocks of the parastatal grain agency, e.g. Kenya and Zimbabwe. Thus, for many countries the strategic grain reserve, while continuing to form an integral part of the government's food security programme, tended to exist in theory rather than in practice.
Following the collapse of the socialist system at the end of the 1980s there has been a general move throughout Africa towards economic restructuring and market liberalisation which has led many countries to introduce policies aimed at deregulating markets and encouraging private sector participation. Cereal markets, traditionally one of the most politically sensitive areas, are increasingly becoming involved in this transition process. Subsidies have, or are being, eliminated and governments are progressively withdrawing from intervention in the market. To encourage private sector participation parastatal grain companies have lost, or are in the process of losing, their privileged monopoly positions and for the first time have to face competition in the market. Prices controls have also been relaxed or eliminated leaving market forces to set prices while other restrictions, which had served as a barrier to entry into the market, have been abolished. However, because of its
sensitivity, there is often concern in government circles that a liberalised cereals market, driven by profit motivated private sector traders, would cater adequately for the needs of the population. To act as an insurance against the failure of the private sector to make adequate provision, particularly in times of production shortfalls, there has been a reawakening of interest in government of the role strategic grain reserves could play in ensuring an adequate availability of basic cereals in a liberalised market.
^1 Food Security Reserve stocks were established in several Sahelian and Sub-Saharan countries over the period 1975-1980 e.g. Burkina Faso, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, Ethiopia, and Tanzania
The mechanisms required for maintaining and operating a reserve under free market conditions are very different from those which were suitable for a regulated market in which the government, or a government controlled agency, was the only official participant. Due regard now has to be given to ensuring that the basic requirements of a free market are not being violated and that the operations associated with reserve do not disturb the orderly functioning of the market. Clearly, there are several possible options open to governments wanting to make the change from a regulated to a free market and for the manner in which a reserve functions. Countries which already have a functioning reserve (e.g. Malawi and Tanzania) or are maintaining a buffer stock which also serves as a reserve (e.g. Kenya and Zimbabwe) still need to consider the various options available for progressively adjusting the manner in which their reserves operate to meet the changing circumstances as the
transition process proceeds. Similarly, those countries which are considering establishing, or re-establishing, a reserve stock need to assess the various options to identify those which best suit their situation.
While they may have similar objectives and common features, the management and operation of strategic grain reserves will differ between countries to take into account their specific circumstances and government policy. Other factors which could also have an influence include: the likely cause and nature of food emergencies and the available mechanisms for coping; the market structure and the effectiveness of market participants to cater for market needs with food emergencies. By presenting various options these guidelines are intended to provide a practical guide for those involved with determining the need, and an appropriate structure, for a strategic grain reserve.
<section>5</section>
Definitions
A generally accepted definition of food security is "a situation in which all people at all times have access to adequate quantities of safe and nutritious food to lead a healthy and active life". This definition requires three basic conditions to be met: 1) adequacy, i.e. supplies from domestic production, stocks and imports are sufficient to meet the nation's needs, 2) availability i.e. stability of supply both spatially and temporally throughout the year and 3) access, i.e. the population has sufficient purchasing power to gain access to its food needs. Strategic grain reserves help address the stability problem.
In most countries there groups of people who are, or are vulnerable to, food insecurity. These are usually separated into two groups, those who are chronically food insecure and those who are transitory food insecure. The chronically food insecure include those sectors of the population which lack adequate income, assets and/or resources at the household level to produce or otherwise gain access to the basic food needs of the household. Chronic food insecurity results from structural problems and as such cannot be overcome by periodic interventions of food from the reserve. Its resolution requires programmes aimed at identifying and conquering the underlying reasons for the population's inability to produce sufficient foodcrops, or other economically tradable outputs, e.g. non-food crops, to meet their needs. In the meantime they require continuing targeted support programmes aimed at providing the means for them to gain access to their basic food needs. Meeting the
supplementary food needs of such population groups would not normally be considered to be a function of a strategic grain reserve, but rather for specialised relief programmes; such as food for work, food stamps or other targeted interventions. The transitory food insecure are those households which, under normal circumstances, are able to produce or gain access to their basic food needs but are vulnerable to supply problems when external shocks affect their food production systems or distribution chains for a limited period of time. For rural populations this is generally related to instances which have a seasonal impact on crop production, e.g. drought and floods, while for urban populations it is related to the availability of, and the ability to access through purchase, food in the marketing chain. By their nature events resulting in transitory food insecurity are usually of limited duration, e.g. a single crop season, and, once conditions return to normal, the affected
population is usually able to rapidly recover its food security. Due to the unpredictability and non-continuing nature of such events, a strategic grain reserve provides a useful tool for helping to cope with the problems of transitory food insecurity when it arises.
By providing a breathing space between the identification of the possibility of either a national or a localised food shortage occurring and making the necessary arrangements for mitigating its impact, a food security reserve provides a first line of defence for coping with food emergencies. For the purposes of a food security reserve a food emergency can be defined as: "when there are clear indications that an acute and widespread food shortage, extensive suffering and dislocation in the life of the community on an exceptional scale are imminent, and that these dangers cannot be overcome by the normal supply procedures". Such an emergency would normally be caused by drought, floods, storms, earthquakes, crop failures resulting from pests or disease as well as from man-made causes, such as war and civil strife.
<section>6</section>
Section two - Policy and strategy considerations
From regulated to free markets
The role of strategic grain reserves
From regulated to free markets
The collapse of Soviet Union has led to a general recognition that the adoption of central planning as the role model for economic development had failed to live-up to its expectations. As a result, and with encouragement from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the donor community, many governments which had followed the interventionist path have now embarked, or are in the process of embarking, on a programme of structural adjustment. A cornerstone of this transition process is market liberalisation.
Within the agriculture sector the ultimate objective of market liberalisation is the abolition of existing regulations controlling and/or restricting the production and marketing of agricultural commodities in favour of a free, and competitive, market in which the private sector is the major participant and government intervention, if not eliminated, is minimised. Achievement of this objective will require that many long and closely held political convictions, conceived in the interests of developing social equality, will have to be revised. Chief amongst these are the concepts of government price regulation, in particular pan-territorial and pan-temporal prices, and the use of subsidies to keep prices of basic commodities below their true economic levels. If the proper market signals are to be sent to producers and consumers alike and the private sector encouraged to participate in the marketing process, prices have to be free to move in accordance with the prevailing
market conditions. The private sector will, however, only be interested in investing in the grain market if an acceptable margin can be made by either moving grain from surplus to deficit areas, i.e. there are spatial price differences, and/or by storing grain early in the season for sale later in the marketing year when prices rise, i.e. there are temporal price differences. An essential first step in the liberalisation process is therefore to allow prices to vary from location to location and throughout the marketing year to reflect local and ultimately national availability and demand. Initially the extent to which prices are allowed to vary may be limited to avoid too great a shock on the existing system and to allow time for the private sector, and consumers, to adjust to the new circumstances. Subsidies, which have a distorting influence on the production and market decision making processes, also need to be abolished at an early stage to ensure that the correct market
signals are sent to producers and market participants alike.
While full market liberalisation may remain the ultimate objective, due to the political sensitivity of the cereal sub-sector, it is probable that many governments will want to retain some supervisory influence, or involvement, to ensure that the market is adequately providing for the needs of producers and consumers and that attempts to manipulate the market by the unscrupulous are prevented. The extent to which there should continue to be a residual government role will depend on the efficiency and transparency with which the free market is operating and the danger, perceived or real, of circumstances arising in which the private sector is unable, or unwilling, to cater adequately for the needs of consumers. It is thus in the government's long-term interests to allay, to the extent possible, any lingering concerns which the private sector may have with respect to the market to encourage their fall and active participation the market. Any residual government involvement in
the market should therefore be undertaken in support of, and in cooperation with, the private sector rather than in competition with it. This requires that the government gains the confidence of the private sector. Progress towards this goal can be made if the government is prepared to be open about the role it intends to play during the coming marketing year and under which circumstances, and in which manner, it will intervene in the market. Failure by government to recognise the importance of cooperating with the private sector will result in a loss of confidence by traders in the government's intentions which, in turn, will result in them curtailing, or discontinuing, their activities when trader perceptions of the risk of incurring losses through government intervention are high. To promote this spirit of cooperation consideration needs to be given to using private sector channels when government intervention is considered necessary, e.g. by purchasing grain for the
reserve and selling grain from the reserve through private sector traders.
There are two routes open to governments considering moving from an existing regulated to a free market, the "big bang" and the gradual transition. Under the "big bang" major changes are introduced immediately with final restructuring of the market completed within one or two years. The major changes would include: the abolition of subsidies and fixed prices in favour of market determined prices; opening the market to private sector traders and companies; privatising or abolishing parastatal grain agencies or, where they continue to function for the time being in the public sector, requiring them to operate commercially and without access to privileges which are unavailable to private sector traders, e.g. access to cheap credit; removal of restrictions concerning the free movement of grain in the country and opening the import/export markets.
The gradual approach, as it implies, involves a more cautious liberalisation process in which the government progressively relaxes control of, and involvement in, the market while simultaneously encouraging the private sector to take over market activities. The period of time taken to complete the transformation process would depend on circumstances but could typically be spread over 4-5 marketing years. The rate of progress would depend on the rate at which confidence can be built-up in government circles that the private sector is sufficiently developed and responsible to undertake market operations in an orderly manner. Similarly, it would also depend on the response of the private sector to the market opportunities offered and the extent to which their interest can be encouraged. Clearly moving along the liberalisation process one or two steps at a time provides all participants; i.e. government, producers, traders, processors and consumers; with the opportunity for
gradually acclimatising and adjusting to changing market conditions. However, as the private sector is motivated by profit, market regulations need to be relaxed sufficiently from the outset to provide scope for traders to make an adequate margin on their transactions if they are to be encouraged to invest in grain trading. The gradual approach also helps to avoid the likelihood of major shocks occurring in the marketing system which could have serious humanitarian and/or political implications. This is particularly the case for those countries which have operated a strictly regulated market over a prolonged period where it would be unrealistic to expect private sector traders, who have undergone years of suppression, to be able to step into the gap left by a sudden government withdrawal from the market. Traders will need time to build-up their capacities, in particular marketing chains and working capital, as well as their confidence and experience under the new marketing
conditions. While petty traders, many of whom were previously operating informally in the parallel markets, will quickly become established trading small quantities and taking advantage of short-term arbitrage opportunities, traders with the resources to take longer-term positions, or to trade in sizable quantities, will take longer to become established. Market infrastructure will also need to be developed to meet the new conditions, e.g. privately owned or operated storage facilities and marketplaces, in particular assembly and wholesale markets, where grains can be freely traded. Similarly, processors, retailers and consumers will have to learn how to operate in a free market, and government needs to be assured that the market can operate effectively and not against the interests of producers and consumers, i.e. through manipulation of prices and supplies, or against national interests.
Zambia
Government Policy Statement for Grain Marketing
Each year prior to the start of the marketing season the Ministry of Agriculture Food and Fisheries | issuer a pamphlet "Maize and Agricultural Input Marketing Arrangement for the coming marketing year. Relevant extracts from the 1996/97 pamphlet are given below.
Market Supply and Demand Conditions wilt Determine Prices
There will be: no producer or floor prices of maize.... the formation of regionally and seasonally differentiated prices for maize, or any other crop..., will be determined by market supply and demand conditions,
Anybody may Buy or Sell Maize
There will be no Government appointed Maize Buying Agents for the 1997/97 season. Anybody may participate m the buying and selling of maize on their own account.
Registration of Maize and Input traders By the Food Reserve Agency
All persons or companies interested in trading in maize and agricultural inputs must register with the Food Reserve Agency,.... to collect, and disseminate market information for the benefit of all marketing; participants,...
Maize Import/Export Trade
The 1995/96 export ban on maize and mealie meal will expire on the 30th April 1996 All intending importers/exporters will be required to register with the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries...,the registration is only for the purposes of statistical information,
Transitory Marketing Support for Outlying Area
The Food Reserve Agency will undertake its purchases for replenishing the National Food Security Reserve in economically disadvantaged areas which may face depressed maize market, conditions. This Is expected to ease the burden of transition in these areas, where private sector operators are unlikely to venture.
Prevision of Market Information
The government will continue to provide market information to farmers, traders, cooperatives etc. By disseminating crop and input prices prevalent in various markets....the Food Reserve Agency is; expected to start providing such information for the Southern African sub-region and internationally....
National Food Security Reserve
The Food Reserve Agency...will manage and operate the National Food Security Reserve on behalf of Government, The Agency will buys $tore and sell reserve stocks on the basis 01 an open tendering process. This will allow any interested party to sell, store for, or buy from the Agency under prevailing market conditions and at the ruling market prices. Details... will be announced and gazetted prior to 1st May 1996.
The role of strategic grain reserves
Coping with food emergencies
Price stabilisation
Loan operations
In addition to their prime function of helping to cope with food emergencies strategic grain reserves can also be used to serve other functions. Most commonly they are given a price stabilisation role and occasionally the role of providing loans of grain to recognised organisations/agencies, e.g. when they experience delays in the arrival of their regular supplies. In determining whether it would be appropriate for a reserve to be used for undertaking such functions an assessment needs to be made of the possible additional risk if the reserve is unable fulfill its prime function as a result of such additional activities. This in turn will depend on the ability of the government, through its early warning or similar systems, to determine the likelihood of a food emergency arising during the current, or approaching marketing year, and the likely quantities of grain which would be required from the reserve to meet any such emergency. Quantities of grain held in the reserve
which are surplus to these requirements could be assigned for other purposes.
As a general rule, the greater the number of responsibilities which a strategic grain reserve is required to undertake the larger will be the size of the reserve, or the resources required by the reserve. Government has therefore to make a value judgement of the additional benefits which could be obtained from broadening the role of the reserve against the likely additional cost.
With a long history of suppression of the private sector and government intervention in the market, it is to be expected that private sector traders will, for some time, be suspicious of government's intentions with respect to the use and operation of a strategic grain reserve and thus be wary of being too exposed in the event of an unexpected government intervention in the market. To allay these concerns government needs to adopt a transparent approach to the management and operation of the reserve by keeping traders fully informed of its intentions and avoiding actions involving use of the reserve in ways which could undermine confidence amongst traders.
Coping with food emergencies
Over the last twenty years many of the countries of Sahelian and Sub-Saharan Africa have experienced food emergencies of varying severity on several occasions, the most common cause of which has been drought. While the area has always been susceptible to erratic rainfall, the frequency with which the rains have failed in recent years appears to have increased with two or three poor rainfall years occurring together. Thus, while people may be able to cope with a single year of drought they face increasing difficulty in sustaining themselves over a period of sequential droughts as occurred in the Sahel in the early 1970s and in Ethiopia in the early 1980s. Although drought is the dominant cause of food emergencies, the countries are also susceptible to other events which can lead to food shortages either on a localised, national or regional scale. These include: floods, pest attack, i.e. locusts, and man-made events such as war and violent civil disorder which destroy the
production base and/or the distribution structure, as have occurred in Burundi, Mozambique, Rwanda and Somalia.
The prime function of a strategic grain reserve is to provide a first line of defence in the event of a food emergency. Excluding the chronically food insecure, the sectors of the population that are vulnerable to periodic food emergencies fall into two broad categories. The first are those who are normally dependent on the market for their supplies, i.e. the urban population. This group is particularly important in Zambia where some 60 per cent of the population are urban based. Urban dwellers would normally have the resources to purchase their food needs from the market, but they can be vulnerable to shortfalls in market supplies and/or exceptionally high prices which, in a free market, are a reflection of supply shortfalls. When shortages start to appear in the market, or when prices reach unaffordable levels, this group can normally be catered for by ensuring that additional supplies are released into the market, e.g. through imports or sales from a grain reserve,
thereby exerting a downward pressure on prices. The second group comprises those people in the rural areas who are normally self-sufficient but, in times of food shortages resulting from poor harvests or damage to their on-farm stocks, do not have the resources necessary for purchasing their additional food needs from the market. This is the typical situation of the vulnerable population groups in Malawi which has a rural subsistence economy. For these groups releasing grain into the market does not resolve their plight as, due to a lack of purchasing power, they are unable to gain access to it. Under these circumstances special relief programmes such as food-for-work, food stamps and supplementary feeding programmes, are required to provide for 