<title>Risk management and food safety - FAO Food And Nutrition Paper 65</title>
<section>1</section>
List of acronyms
ADI
Acceptable Daily Intake
ALARA
As Low as Reasonably Achievable
Acute RfD
Acute Reference Doses
CAC
Codex Alimentarius Commission
CCFAC
Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants
CCFH
Codex Committee on Food Hygiene
CCFICS
Codex Committee on Import and Export Food Inspection and Certification Systems
CCFL
Codex Committee on Food Labelling
CCGP
Codex Committee on General Principles
CCMAS
Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling
CCNFSDU
Codex Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses
CCMH
Codex Committee on Meat Hygiene
CCNFSDU
Codex Committee on Nutrition and Food for Special Dietary Uses
CCPs
Critical Control Points
CCPR
Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues
CCRVDF
Codex Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GAP
Good Agricultural Practice
GEMS/Food
Global Environment Monitoring System - Food Contamination Monitoring and Assessment Programme
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
GSCTF
General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Foods
GSFA
General Standard for Food Additives
GPVD
Good Practice in the Use of Veterinary Drugs
HACCP
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
ICMSF
International Commission on Microbiological Specifications for Food
JECFA
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives
JMPR
Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues
MRL
Maximum Residue Limit
PTWI
Provisional Tolerable Weekly Intake
SPS Agreement
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
WHO
World Health Organization
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
A Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Application of Risk Management to Food Safety Matters was held at FAO Headquarters in Rome from 27 to 31 January 1997. The Consultation participants are listed in Annex 1. The Consultation was opened by Dr. Hartwig de Haen, Assistant Director-General of FAO's Economic and Social Department, who welcomed the participants on behalf of the Directors-General of both FAO and WHO.
In welcoming the participants, Dr. de Haen noted that this was the second joint FAO/WHO expert consultation in the important subject area of the application of risk analysis to food safety, with the first, held in Geneva in 1995, having focused on the risk assessment component of risk analysis.* In this current consultation, the experts were being asked to address a central issue in food safety. Risk management, he observed, involves both the identification of the standards of acceptable risk appropriate to different types of food hazards, and the establishment of procedures to ensure that the risks are kept within the limits set by those standards.
* The first FAO/WHO expert consultation on risk, referred to elsewhere as the 1995 consultation, was the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Application of Risk Analysis to Food Safety Standards, held in Geneva, Switzerland, 13-17 March 1995. The conclusions and recommendations of that consultation are in Annex 2.
Dr. de Haen drew two important underlying considerations to the attention of the participants. The first was the imperative to keep the interest and the well being of the consumer as a fundamental consideration at all times. The ultimate objective of food safety standards is the protection of the consumer, and it is essential not to lose sight of this. The second important issue was that it is in the basic interest of everyone that trade in food be facilitated. This was, Dr. de Haen noted, the fundamental intended outcome of the Uruguay Round Negotiations and had been an important goal of FAO since its founding over 50 years ago.
Dr. de Haen reminded the participants that they had been invited to the Consultation as independent experts charged with the responsibility of advising FAO, WHO and their Member Nations, and that their participation in the Consultation was to be in their personal capacities as international experts in this subject area, and not as representatives of their governments, institutes or other organizations.
The Consultation elected Dr. Stuart Slorach as Chairman and Dr. Steve Hathaway as Vice-Chairman. Dr. Christopher Fisher was appointed as Rapporteur. In his opening remarks Dr. Slorach pointed out that the main goal of the consultation was to arrive at a series of recommendations on the application of risk management to food safety. These should be addressed primarily to the standard setting activities of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC), its subsidiary committees and advisory expert bodies, but they should also be of relevance to those involved in risk management at the national level. He urged participants to aim at providing a general framework for risk management, identifying the essential components in the process and the roles and activities of the principal parties. It was, he said, necessary to deal with the management of risk from both chemical and biological hazards in food, including the full range of acute and chronic adverse health effects. Likewise, it
was essential to bear in mind the problems of both developing and developed countries.
Dr. Slorach pointed out that, even when dealing with risks arising from chemicals that had been the subject of extensive toxicological studies, risk managers find that there still remain gaps in the available information. In other instances, of which bovine spongiform encephalopathy was a good example, it was perhaps more correct to speak of "islands of knowledge in an ocean of uncertainty". The 1995 consultation had pointed out the need for risk managers to be aware of the uncertainty in risk estimates and to include this awareness in their management decisions.
Food safety risk analysis is an emerging discipline, and the methodological basis for assessing and managing risks associated with food hazards is still in a developing phase (1) (2). As discussed in the 1995 consultation, it is important to recognise the difference between "hazard" and "risk". A hazard is a biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause harm. In contrast, risk is an estimate of the probability and severity of the adverse health effects in exposed populations, consequential to hazards in food. Understanding the association between a reduction in hazards that may be associated with a food, and the reduction in the risk to consumers of adverse health effects is of particular importance in development of appropriate food safety controls.
<section>3</section>
2. Background
Scope of the consultation
Risk analysis is widely recognised as the fundamental methodology underlying the development of food safety standards. As recognised in the 1995 consultation, risk analysis is composed of three separate but integrated elements, namely risk assessment, risk management and risk communication. That consultation recognised risk communication as an interactive process of exchange of information and opinion on risk among risk assessors, risk managers, and other interested parties. Risk management is defined within Codex as the process of weighing policy alternatives in the light of the results of risk assessment and, if required, selecting and implementing appropriate control options, including regulatory measures. The outcome of the risk management process, as undertaken by Committees within the Codex Alimentarius system, is the development of standards, guidelines and other recommendations for food safety, m the national situation it is likely that different risk management
decisions could be made according to different criteria and different ranges of risk management options. The overall objective of Codex is to ensure consumer protection and to facilitate international trade.
Risk managers, in developing approaches to managing risk, utilise the risk characterisation that results from the risk assessment process. An important principle that was recognised by the 1995 consultation was the functional separation of risk assessment from risk management.
The significant world-wide increase in foodborne illness that has been recognized in recent years, especially arising from enteric organisms, suggests the need for more effective control using internationally agreed risk management methods.
Scope of the consultation
The Consultation considered the entire scope of the application of risk management to food safety matters, including the interaction between risk management and risk assessment, and between risk management and risk communication. In doing so it took note of the report of
the March 1995 Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Application of Risk Analysis to Food Standards Issues, which dealt primarily with risk assessment. The Consultation did not consider the subject of risk communication, except as incidental to its consideration of risk management. It considered risks arising from both chemical and biological agents, but did not consider risks arising from nutritional deficiencies or imbalances.
<section>4</section>
3. The goal of food risk management
The primary goal of the management of risks associated with food is to protect public health by controlling such risks as effectively as possible through the selection and implementation of appropriate measures.
<section>5</section>
4. International trade
"Safe and wholesome"
The rules that govern international trade are those that were agreed during the Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations and apply to Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO). With respect to food safety matters, those rules are set out in the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the SPS Agreement). The overall objective of the SPS Agreement is to permit countries to take legitimate measures to protect the life and health of their consumers (in relation to food safety matters), while prohibiting them from using those measures in a way that unjustifiably restricts trade. Thus the primary goal of the SPS Agreement is to limit the use of any measures that may restrict trade to those that are justified to provide the necessary level of health protection. It recognises the right of Members to protect their consumers at a level they consider necessary, subject to certain disciplines, such as consistency and transparency.
The standards, guidelines, and other recommendations of the Codex Alimentarius Commission are considered by the WTO to reflect international consensus regarding the requirements for protecting human health from foodborne risks. A Member's food safety measures are considered justified and in accordance with the provisions of the SPS Agreement if they are based on Codex standards and related texts. While the adoption and application of Codex standards remains technically non-mandatory, failure to apply Codex standards creates the potential for dispute if a Member applies standards that are more restrictive of trade than necessary to achieve required levels of protection.
Consideration of risk analysis will play a vital role in the future work of the WTO. The SPS Agreement requires "Members [to] ensure that their SPS measures are based on an assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances, of the risks to human, animal or plant life or health, taking into account risk assessment techniques developed by the relevant international organisations". Members are expected to justify levels of protection higher than those in Codex standards by using risk assessment techniques. They are required to ensure that risk management decisions are transparent, and not arbitrary or unjustifiably different (i.e. are consistent). Furthermore, where different measures have equivalent outputs, the measure chosen should be the one that is the least restrictive of trade.
"Safe and wholesome"
Although industry and national regulators strive for production and processing systems which ensure that all food be "safe and wholesome", complete freedom from risks is an unattainable goal. Safety and wholesomeness are related to a level of risk that society regards as reasonable in the context, and in comparison with other risks in everyday life.
A Codex standard is the minimum standard for a food elaborated by CAC "so as to ensure a sound, wholesome product free from adulteration, correctly labelled and presented" (3). The word "minimum" does not have any pejorative connotations and simply means the level of quality and soundness of a product judged by consensus to be appropriate for trade internationally and nationally.
A review of current Codex standards and related texts suggests that in many cases there is insufficient quantitative information to translate requirements for "safety and wholesomeness" into a definitive quantitative assessment of the risks to human health in consumer populations. The inevitable default to more qualitative assessments of "safe and wholesome" is likely to be challenged as a basis for international trade restrictions, especially in an increasingly risk-based international trade environment.
The development of Codex-wide principles and strategies for risk management requires that explicit attention be given to the concept of "safe and wholesome". Although Codex standards and related texts are generally aimed at the reduction of risks in food, these risks can rarely be quantified and any balancing of the risk reduction against other factors, such as costs and benefits of risk reduction, is normally a matter of judgement.
<section>6</section>
5. Definitions of key risk management terms
Risk management: The process of weighing policy alternatives in the light of the results of risk assessment and, if required, selecting and implementing appropriate control options, including regulatory measures.
This definition of risk management, which has been proposed for inclusion in the Codex Procedural Manual (4), includes consideration of all the elements (listed below) that may be included in the risk management process (i.e. risk evaluation, risk management option assessment, implementation of management decision, and monitoring and review). However, in a practical context, it may not be necessary to include all the elements. For example, risk management decisions at the national level are likely to use all of the elements of this definition, whereas the risk management activities of Codex do not generally include implementation, monitoring and review.
Risk assessment policy: Guidelines for value judgement and policy choices which may need to be applied at specific decision points in the risk assessment process.
Risk assessment policy setting is a risk management responsibility, which should be carried out in full collaboration with risk assessors, and which serves to protect the scientific integrity of the risk assessment. The guidelines should be documented so as to ensure consistency and transparency. Examples of risk assessment policy setting are establishing the population(s) at risk, establishing criteria for ranking of hazards, and guidelines for application of safety factors.
Risk profile: A description of the food safety problem and its context.
Risk profiling is the process of describing a food safety problem and its context, in order to identify those elements of the hazard or risk relevant to various risk management decisions. The risk profile would include identifying aspects of hazards relevant to prioritising and setting the risk assessment policy and aspects of the risk relevant to the choice of safety standards and management options.
A typical risk profile might include the following: a brief description of the situation, product or commodity involved; the values expected to be placed at risk, (e.g. human health, economic concerns); potential consequences; consumer perception of the risks; and the distribution of risks and benefits.
<section>7</section>
6. Risk management framework
A. Risk evaluation
B. Risk management option assessment
C. Implementation of management decision
D. Monitoring and review
ELEMENTS OF RISK MANAGEMENT
A. Risk evaluation
· Identification of a food safety problem.
· Establishment of a risk profile.
· Ranking of the hazard for risk assessment and risk management priority.
· Establishment of risk assessment policy for conduct of risk assessment.
· Commissioning of risk assessment.
· Consideration of risk assessment result.
B. Risk management option assessment
· Identification of available management options.
· Selection of preferred management option, including consideration of an appropriate safety standard.*
* "Safety standard" here refers to the level of acceptable risk, which is adopted by risk managers or is implicit in the chosen risk management option. Examples include "zero-risk" standards (such as are usually implicit in de minimis and ADI levels), "balancing" standards (such as cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness, and ALARA), "threshold" standards (where a non-zero level of risk is stipulated as acceptable), or "procedural" standards (where the acceptable risk level is determined by an agreed process, such as a negotiation or referendum).
· Final management decision.
C. Implementation of management decision
D. Monitoring and review
· Assessment of effectiveness of measures taken.
· Review risk management and/or assessment as necessary.
The outcome of the risk evaluation process should be combined with the evaluation of available risk management options in order to reach a decision on management of the risk. In arriving at this decision, human health protection should be the primary consideration, with other factors (e.g. economic costs, benefits, technical feasibility, risk perceptions, etc.) being considered as appropriate. Implementation of the management decision should be followed by monitoring both the effectiveness of the control measure and its impact on risk to the exposed consumer population, to ensure that the food safety objective is being met.
It is important that all interested parties** who are likely to be affected by risk management decisions have an opportunity for input into the risk management process. These groups may include (but should not be limited to) consumer organizations, representatives of the food industry and trade, education and research institutions, and regulatory bodies. A consultative process can be implemented in many ways, ranging from public meetings to opportunities to comment on public documents. Inputs from interested parties can be introduced and considered at every stage of the risk management policy formulation process, including evaluation and review.
** These interested parties are commonly referred to as "stakeholders" in a number of countries.
<section>8</section>
7. General principles of food safety risk management
Principle 1: Risk management should follow a structured approach.
The elements of a structured approach to risk management are Risk Evaluation, Risk Management Option Assessment, Implementation of Management Decision, and Monitoring and Review. In certain circumstances, not all of these elements will be included in risk management activities (e.g. standard setting by Codex, with implementation of control measures by national governments).
Principle 2: Protection of human health should be the primary consideration in risk management decisions.
Decisions on acceptable levels of risk should be determined primarily by human health considerations, and arbitrary or unjustified differences in the risk levels should be avoided. Consideration of other factors (e.g. economic costs, benefits, technical feasibility, and societal preferences) may be appropriate in some risk management contexts, particularly in the determination of measures to be taken. These considerations should not be arbitrary and should be made explicit.
Principle 3: Risk management decisions and practices should be transparent.
Risk management should include the identification and systematic documentation of all elements of the risk management process including decision-making, so that the rationale is transparent to all interested parties.
Principle 4: Determination of risk assessment policy should be included as a specific component of risk management.
Risk assessment policy sets the guidelines for value judgements and policy choices which may need to be applied at specific decision points in the risk assessment process, and preferably should be determined in advance of risk assessment, in collaboration with risk assessors.
Principle 5: Risk management should ensure the scientific integrity of the risk assessment process by maintaining the functional separation of risk management and risk assessment.
Functional separation of risk management and risk assessment serves to ensure the scientific integrity of the risk assessment process and reduce any conflict of interest between risk assessment and risk management. However, it is recognised that risk analysis is an iterative process, and interactions between risk managers and risk assessors are essential for practical application.
Principle 6: Risk management decisions should take into account the uncertainty in the output of the risk assessment.
The risk estimate should, wherever possible, include a numerical expression of uncertainty, and this must be conveyed to risk managers in a readily understandable form so that the full implications of the range of uncertainty can be included in decision-making. For example, if the risk estimate is highly uncertain the risk management decision might be more conservative.
Principle 7: Risk management should include clear, interactive communication with consumers and other interested parties in all aspects of the process.
On-going reciprocal communication among all interested parties is an integral part of the risk management process. Risk communication is more than the dissemination of information, and a major function is the process by which information and opinion essential to effective risk management is incorporated into the decision.
Principle 8: Risk management should be a continuing process that takes into account all newly generated data in the evaluation and review of risk management decisions.
Subsequent to the application of a risk management decision, periodic evaluation of the decision should be made to determine its effectiveness in meeting food safety objectives. Monitoring and other activities will likely be necessary to carry out the review effectively.
<section>9</section>
8. Current risk management practices in the codex alimentarius commission, its subsidiary bodies, and advisory expert committees
The joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives and The Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JECFA and JMPR)
Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC)
Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants (CCFAC)
Codex Committee for Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (CCRVDF)
Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues (CCPR)
Codex Committee on Food Hygiene (CCFH)
Codex Committee on General Principles (CCGP)
Codex Committee on Food Labelling (CCFL)
Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CCFICS)
The Codex Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses (CCNFSDU)
Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CCMAS)
Codex Committee on Meat Hygiene (CCMH)
The joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives and The Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JECFA and JMPR)
FAO and WHO jointly convene sessions of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR). Participants in sessions are eminent scientists selected by FAO and WHO to participate in these committees in their own personal capacity as scientific and technical experts. They have responsibility for providing FAO and WHO, after thorough evaluation of appropriate chemical, toxicological and other data necessary, with authoratative recommendations on the substances under review. These committees are completely independent of the Codex system and their advice is to FAO and WHO and to Members of FAO and WHO. In addition this meets the need of the Codex system for independent scientific advice in arriving at science based Codex recommendations.
JECFA and JMPR are scientific advisory bodies which were established in the 1950's, prior to the establishment of the CAC. Over the past forty years they have provided independent scientific advice to all FAO and WHO Member Countries. They have also provided science based evaluations of substances which have been requested by CCFAC and CCRVDF in the case of JECFA, and CCPR in the case of JMPR. The traditional and current activities of JECFA and JMPR are mainly in the area of risk assessment, not risk management. The WHO components of JECFA and JMPR provide a permanent formal mechanism for assessing the toxicity of food additives, contaminants, veterinary drugs, pesticides, feed additives, solvents and processing aids in food. Their primary role is to evaluate toxicological data to determine a safe level of human exposure - normally an Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) for food additives, veterinary drugs and pesticides and a Provisional Tolerable Weekly (or Daily) Intake (PTWI)
for contaminants.
The activities of the FAO component of JECFA are mainly in the area of preparing specifications of identity and purity for food additives, estimating intakes of food additives and contaminants, and proposing maximum limits for residues of veterinary drugs in foods of animal origin. The activities of the FAO components of JMPR are mainly in the area of technological efficacy and minimum effective levels of pesticides as they are used in agriculture to control crop pests and diseases, and on likely residues on various crops based on Good Agricultural Practice (GAP). JECFA and JMPR evaluate data on the use and presence of the chemicals they assess in primary agricultural produce, food of animal origin and processed food based on GAP, Good Practice in the Use of Veterinary Drugs (GPVD) and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), respectively. This includes consideration of other relevant data such as plant and animal metabolism and analytical methodology. These activities contribute
to the overall objectives of food safety by assuring that food additives, veterinary drugs and pesticides are used properly and pose the minimum risk to consumers. The levels recommended (MRLs and Maximum Levels) by the FAO components of JECFA and JMPR are used as the initial basis for exposure calculations, which are an essential component of risk characterisation. FAO and WHO jointly estimate intakes of food additives and contaminants.
Risk Assessment Policy in JECFA and JMPR
JECFA and JMPR utilise certain significant risk assessment policies at specific decision points in their work. Such risk assessment policies are properly the responsibility of CCFAC, CCRVDF, CCPR and CAC. They are, however, used by JECFA and JMPR and are described in detail in relevant WHO Environmental Health Criteria documents. They include the following examples:
· Reliance on animal models to establish potential human effects.
· Using body weight scaling for interspecies comparison.
· Assuming that absorption in animals and humans is approximately the same.
· Using a 100-fold safety factor to account for likely inter- and intra-species differences in susceptibility, with guidelines for deviations that are permitted in specified situations.
· The decision not to assign ADIs to food additives, veterinary drugs and pesticides which are found to be genotoxic carcinogens. Quantitative risk assessment has not been employed for these substances. In effect, there is no recognized acceptable risk level for genotoxic food additives, residues of veterinary drugs or pesticides.
· Permitting contaminants at levels "as low as reasonably achievable" (ALARA).
· Establishing temporary ADIs for additives and residues of veterinary drugs pending submission of requested data. It should be noted, however, that this policy is not used by JMPR in the establishment of ADIs for pesticide residues.
In carrying out their work the experts in JECFA and JMPR continually need to select and utilise various scientific assumptions. This is necessary because there are inevitable gaps in the science of risk assessment that need to be filled with default assumptions in order to be able to conduct a risk assessment. These assumptions also need to be constantly re-evaluated to keep them up-to-date with scientific developments. Each of these represent scientific value judgements ("risk assessment policy"), and the assumptions embodied in them can significantly influence the outcome of the risk assessment. Each also represents a choice among a number of plausible alternatives.
Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC)
The primary purpose of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme of CAC is to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair practice in the food trade. CAC formally adopts Codex standards, guidelines and other recommendations which have been developed by its subsidiary bodies. In addition, CAC provides guidance to these subsidiary bodies, including that related to risk management.
The development of standards, guidelines and recommendations has been delegated by CAC to its subsidiary bodies. Normally, the general subject ("horizontal") Codex committees are more routinely involved in risk management. These include the Codex Committees on Food Additives and Contaminants (CCFAC), Pesticide Residues (CCPR), Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (CCRVDF), Food Hygiene (CCFH), General Principles (CCGP), Food Labelling (CCFL), Nutrition and Food for Special Dietary Uses (CCNFSDU), Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CCFICS), and Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CCMAS). In addition, a range of commodity committees is also involved in risk management activities.
The work of these committees is supported by expert advisory groups, such as the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), as well as other expert bodies, such as ICMSF (International Commission on Microbiological Specifications for Food). In addition, FAO and WHO, usually jointly, convene consultations on specific matters of interest to Codex and member countries. However, the most important of these advisory groups for Codex are JECFA and JMPR. Recommendations of JECFA and JMPR are used by CCFAC, CCRVDF and CCPR as well as other Codex committees in the development of Codex standards, guidelines and other recommendations.
Standards may be for world-wide use, or for use by a given region or specific group of countries. All Members of CAC and interested international organisations are invited to comment on proposed standards, including possible implications for their economic interests. In considering such comments, CAC "should have due regard to the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius" (3). Members are encouraged to consult with interested and affected parties in their countries.
Provisions in Codex standards defining description, essential composition and quality factors should not be the subject of risk analysis within the context accepted by CCGP (4). However, the Procedural Manual of CAC notes that essential composition and quality factors can overlap with food safety i.e. "quality factors could include the quality of the raw material, with the object of protecting the health of the consumer" (3).
The production of genetically modified foods is expected to increase dramatically in the coming years. Biotechnology will be under consideration in several Codex committees and is expected to be addressed by CAC as a "horizontal" issue, taking into consideration the report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Biotechnology and Food Safety (30 September to 4 October 1996).
The CAC Statements of Principle Concerning The Role of Science in the Codex Decision-making Process and the Extent to Which Other Factors Are Taken Into Account* state that standards, guidelines and other recommendations of Codex shall be based on the principle of sound scientific advice and evidence, and where appropriate. Codex will have regard to other legitimate factors relevant to the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair practices in food trade (5). Codex principles of risk management must be guided by these statements, as well as by the provisions of the SPS Agreement. To date, these "other legitimate factors" have not been defined or considered in the risk management context.
* The Statement