<title>Long-Term Scenarios of Livestock-Crop-Land Use Interactions in Developing Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
In recent years livestock production in developing countries is increasingly dependent on feedstuffs, whereas the importance of grazing is slowly decreasing. Parallel to this trend there is a strong increase in the per caput demand for livestock products related to strong population growth in developing countries and changes in dietary habits.
This report presents long term scenarios describing interactions between livestock, crop production and land use and the possible consequences for the nutrients required for crop production and animal waste. The livestock-crop interactions also play an important role in the emission of atmospheric pollutants. As an example, scenarios of the emission of ammonia (NH[3]) and nitrous oxide (N[2]O) from animal excreta and synthetic fertilizers are presented, as well as projections of the emission of methane (CH[4]) by ruminating animals.
The starting point is the FAO study World Agriculture: Towards 2010. To ensure that the uncertainty in future projections of agricultural production and demand is sufficiently recognized, three different scenarios are developed: a pessimistic, optimistic and medium scenario. The length of the projection period is determined by the human population in developing countries which is expected to stabilize not earlier than the second half of the twenty-first century.
Scenarios are not forecasts of the future. They are tools to analyse consequences of population increase and economic growth, and to study the effectiveness of potential agricultural or environmental strategies or policies. Future work in this field should include comparison of scenarios from different sources. Recently, the Stockholm Environment Institute developed agricultural scenarios for use in the global integrated assessment model IMAGE, a model which is being developed at the National Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) in the Netherlands. Unfortunately these scenarios were not available in final draft in the period when this report was compiled, but a comparison may reveal certain weaknesses in the different approaches of scenario construction.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The collaboration between FAO and RIVM was undertaken through my work as visiting scientist (March-November 1995) at FAO in Rome. This was made possible through financial support from the FAO programme of cooperation with academic and research institutes in OECD member countries (Academics Scheme), and the National Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) in Bilthoven, The Netherlands. Many persons of FAO have contributed to the scenario development described in the report. First of all thanks are due to J. Bruinsma for his advice and stimulating discussions on the study and comments on earlier versions of the report. The crop production scenarios were constructed by or in collaboration with G. Blaak, W.B. Charles, E. Kueneman, J.P. Marathee and D. Van Tran. Livestock production scenarios were constructed on the basis of advice from J. Garcia de Siles, J. Henriksen and S. Mack. My heartfelt gratitude is extended to M. Sanchez for our many discussions on pig and
poultry production and general issues of livestock production; his comments on earlier versions of the report have led to major improvements. Finally, the author is grateful for the stimulating comments and advice of J. Slingenberg on the data needed on feed intake by animals, of J. Poulisse on fertilizer use and of K. Frenken on irrigation potential. The advice of A. Angé, C. Calpe, T. Gillin, K. Janz, J.M. Suttie is gratefully acknowledged.
Further, thanks are due to T. Janholt (World Food Programme) for advice on the trade scenarios, and K. Van der Hoek (RIVM) for estimates of current emissions from livestock production. The editorial assistance of Ruth de Wijs (RIVM) is gratefully acknowledged.
Finally, the author is very grateful to R. Brinkman for his immediate assistance and advice whenever needed and for reading parts of the draft, and to W.G. Sombroek both for initiating this project and for general guidance during the work.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY
Development of agriculture in many developed countries has led to serious environmental problems. Most of these are related to the pressure on the land, which may lead to intensification on the one hand and land degradation on the other hand. There is concern that agricultural production in developing countries will cause similar environmental threats in the future as production will have to increase to satisfy the growing demand for food. Intensification leads to high inputs of nutrients in the form of mineral fertilizers and animal feed. Important parts of these inputs leak from the system in the form of nutrient leaching to groundwater and gaseous losses to the atmosphere. Additional environmental problems are land degradation and deforestation in many developing countries, which in many instances are caused by pressure on the existing agricultural land as a result of the growing demand for products and degradation of the existing agricultural land base.
The study presented in this report concentrated on the interactions between livestock production, crop production and land use. The link between livestock and crop production is through the demand for animal feedstuffs. This report presents long-term scenarios describing these interactions and the possible consequences for crop production and animal waste production. As the world population is expected to stabilize in the second half of the twenty-first century, the scenarios must cover a period of 50-100 years to include the impacts of human population numbers. The above crop-livestock interactions play a role in the emission of a number of atmospheric pollutants.
Not all environmental consequences can be quantitatively evaluated. World agriculture is currently responsible for more than half of the atmospheric increase of nitrous oxide (N[2]O), two thirds of the global ammonia (NH[3]) input into the atmosphere, and 40% of global methane (CH[4]) emissions. These compounds play important roles in atmospheric chemistry, ozone depletion, aerosol formation and greenhouse warming. Therefore, a number of examples were selected, including the emission of ammonia (NH[3]) and nitrous oxide (N[2]O) from animal waste and mineral fertilizers, as well as projections of the emission of methane (CH[4]) from ruminant animals. A number of other environmental effects related to livestock and crop production are discussed in a qualitative way.
The scenarios presented in this study are examples showing the comparison of assumptions about demography and agricultural production. Scenarios are tools to assess and compare assumptions about the future. Since ideas about the basic assumptions may change in the course of time, and depending on the purpose of the study for which they are developed, in this report all necessary steps that need to be taken to produce a scenario are described in detail. This will help other scenario developers to adapt the assumptions and construct new scenarios.
The scenarios described in this report, supplemented with scenarios for the developed countries, can be used as input for atmospheric models and integrated models of the environment. The results of this study are of interest for studies on ecological effects of N deposition, atmospheric processes under the influence of pollution. In general, description of the possible future magnitude of the problems related to the use of animal feedstuffs, inputs of nutrients and prevention or reduction of "leaks" in the production system, is of interest to fertilizer specialists, agronomists and workers in the field of rural environment. The description of the construction of the scenarios is of interest to researchers involved in the use and development of scenarios.
Starting from the "World Agriculture: Towards 2010. An FAO study" (AT2010) results, a projection of regional domestic demand and production for groups of agricultural products was made on the basis of scenarios for population, GDP and per capita consumption. The general procedure for developing crop and animal production scenarios involved region-specific assumptions of the yield or production ceilings for irrigated and rainfed crops and animals based on climate, CO[2] concentrations, soil suitability, historical developments and new technologies. For the medium scenario the growth rates for yields and animal production parameters of AT2010 were simply extrapolated to the future up to the maximum yield. In the high and low scenarios the rates of increase for crop and livestock productivity are respectively 25% higher and 25% lower than rates for the medium scenario; and yield and animal production ceilings were set higher and lower, respectively. Similar assumptions were
made for the rates of increase in irrigated areas and crop intensities.
These combinations of optimistic or pessimistic assumptions on production within a region into regional optimistic or pessimistic scenarios provide an 'outer' range of uncertainty in the projections. In the medium scenario, with a continuation of trends as in AT 2010, for crop and animal production, the pressure on land by increasing arable cultivation will decrease between 2025 and 2050. This is caused by the simultaneous slow down in the growth of demand for agricultural products and continued possibilities for increasing the land productivity. In the low scenario, more land is required for production and larger numbers of livestock are needed to meet the growing demand than in the medium scenario. In the high scenario the opposite occurs, with a lower land pressure and smaller numbers of livestock required for the same total production than in the medium scenario.
The medium scenario for the developing countries, including China, shows an increase of the irrigated area by 50% in the next 50-100 years (90-100 million ha, of which 40 million ha in the first 20 years of the projection period). For the Near East and North Africa the assumptions on total crop production have been adjusted to prevent unrealistic expansion of irrigated and total arable areas. According to the medium scenario, about half of the total increase in irrigated land would occur in South Asia, which may be an overestimate.
The available data on animal feed, which are derived indirectly from country supply-utilization accounts, indicate that at present, of the total domestic demand, about 16% cereals, 20% starchy foods and 3% oilseeds are used to feed livestock in the developing countries. According to the medium scenario the use of cereals as animal feed increases to 30% of the domestic demand in 2050, and similar increases are projected for the other crops. Major increases in the demand for crop and livestock products may occur in Near East and North Africa. In this region there is not enough productive land or water to increase crop production sufficiently to meet the growth in the demand, so in the future there may be major increases in imports of feedstuffs.
According to the medium scenario the excretion of major plant nutrients by animals may double in the coming 5-6 decades. In the high scenario, with growth towards more intensive production, the waste production is lower and even tends to decrease in the period after 2025. In the low scenario, with less growth in animal productivity, the waste production grows faster than in the other two scenarios. As a result of differential growth in the populations of the various animals, and increasing efficiency of N use by animals, the increase in NH[3] and N[2]O emissions is slower than the growth of livestock production. However, particularly in Asia, animal waste production increases rapidly. Combined with a possible concentration of livestock production, high NH[3] emission densities may lead to adverse environmental effects such as soil acidification.
Emissions of CH[4] from enteric fermentation in developing countries may increase by a factor of 2 in the period up to 2050. If no change in waste management practices occurs, CH[4] emission from animal waste will remain unimportant on a global scale. With intensification and concentration of production, however, animal waste may be increasingly stored in lagoons, in liquid form or as slurry, and CH[4] from animal waste may become a major global source. The global CH[4] emission from rice fields may stabilize if emission rates per unit area do not change. However, if the emission rates are proportional to total biomass production, the global CH[4] emission from rice paddies may increase further in the coming decades.
Future fertilizer use may increase towards the current European NPK application level. The current emissions of NH[3] from fertilizer use account for about 20% of the total use of mineral nitrogen fertilizers (including urea) in developing countries. The NH[3] loss rates may change because they are primarily determined by the type of N fertilizer. Assuming a decrease to the current loss rate of 5% in developed countries, the NH[3] emission from fertilizer use projected for 2025 in developing countries may be lower than at present. The emission of N[2]O from mineral fertilizer will increase by a factor of 3 in the coming 5-6 decades according to the medium scenario.
Conclusions and recommendations resulting from this study are summarized as follows:
- Information on the effect of land degradation on the land's productivity is scarce, in particular for tropical regions. However, such information is crucial for studies such as this one. If yields are negatively influenced by degradation, the crop production scenarios may not be realized, with the arable land areas being affected. Further detailed analysis of the results of the Forest Resources Assessment Project may yield answers to questions on the importance of loss of productivity in shifting cultivation as a driving force of deforestation and other land use changes.
- With the expected impressive increase in animal waste production and the simultaneous increase in demand for plant nutrients, associated emissions of NH[3], CH[4] and N[2]O will show significant increases. Abatement of emissions generally involves strategies to increase the efficiency of nutrient use both in crop and livestock production systems. This includes attempts to reduce the synthetic fertilizer use by integration of animal and crop production and closing the nutrient cycles (Mosier et al., in press).
- There is a need for estimates of the geographic distribution of pasture and arable land areas, their prim-iry production and intensity of use. So far, the understanding of the contribution of grazing to animal nutrition is insufficient to fully comprehend the dynamics of pastures and arable land.
- The amounts of concentrates, fodder crops and crop residues used to feed animals are poorly known. Such information is required to improve the understanding of the interactions between livestock and crop production.
- There is a strong need for further study into the irrigation potential of different parts of the world. Projections of the irrigation potential are uncertain due to the sensitivity of river discharges to climate variability and change. In addition, the seasonal distribution of irrigation water use depends on the cropping patterns and water use efficiency, which may change as a result of adaptation to warming, changes in cloud cover and precipitation and increased atmospheric CO[2]. Scenario analysis of irrigation potential may help in determining future research orientations.
- There is a need for better data on nutrient inputs in crop production from animal waste, recycling of crop residues and biological nitrogen fixation to improve the understanding of changes in mineral fertilizer use and the capability of forecasting fertilizer use.
<section>4</section>
1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Currently there is a concern that activities related to food production in the developing countries may be inadvertently changing the environment. This concern is based on recent experiences of environmental pollution in many developed countries with intensive crop and livestock production. The use of mineral fertilizers^1 and pesticides is growing in the developing countries. While excessive fertilizer application rates are a problem in some irrigated areas, there are also serious problems resulting from insufficient inputs of nutrients in other, particularly rainfed, areas. Additional problems in developing countries are associated with the claims laid on land and water by agriculture. The expansion of land in use for agricultural production is one of the major driving forces behind deforestation in developing countries. There is a growing demand for fresh water and agriculture has to compete with other sectors of society for scarce water resources.
1 The term mineral fertilizer in this report is used to denote all synthetic fertilizers, including urea.
Specific indicators can be used for monitoring the environmental effects of agricultural production. An indicator which has proven very useful for livestock production systems in many developed countries is the emission of ammonia (NH[3]). Other indicators are nitrous oxide (N[2]O) and methane (CH[4]). Methane emissions may be due for some 40% to agriculture (including biomass burning); for N[2]O the proportion is about 25% (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995).
Perhaps more than half of the global emission of ammonia (NH[3]) stems from agricultural production (Table 1). Most atmospheric NH[3] is returned to the surface by deposition (primarily in rain). The re-deposited NH[3] plays an important role in soil acidification, and also in the agricultural and general biospheric N cycle through its contribution to soil nitrogen. In soils part of the deposited NH[3] is converted to NO and N[2]O by nitrification and to N[2]O (and N[2]) by subsequent denitrification (Firestone and Davidson, 1989). Ammonia is also involved in the Earth's radiative balance by its role in aerosol formation and through its transformation to N[2]O in the atmosphere (Dentener and Crutzen, 1994).
Methane is associated with many sectors in the society. Major agricultural sources are livestock production (through enteric fermentation and from animal wastes), rice paddies and biomass burning (deforestation, savannah and grassland burning and agricultural waste burning). Methane is not only a reactive gas involved in ozone chemistry in the lower atmosphere, but it is also a greenhouse gas (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995). A major part of N[2]O from agricultural sources stems from manure and mineral fertilizers. Nitrous oxide is inert in the lower atmosphere, but in the stratosphere it is involved in ozone destruction (Bouwman et al., 1995). In addition, N[2]O is a greenhouse gas, since it very efficiently absorbs infrared radiation (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995).
TABLE 1
Global emissions of atmospheric ammonia (NH[3]) in million metric tons NH[3]-N per year
Domestic animals
Synthetic fertilizers
Undisturbed ecosystems
Croplands
Biomass burning
Human excrement
Oceans
Biofuel combustion
Total emission
61^a
Based on Bouwman et al. (1995).
^a Global annual deposition (primarily in rain) amounts to about 60 million tons of NH[3]-N per year.
Emissions from deforestation and biomass burning have not been considered in this study. Estimates of deforestation for the developing countries were made in FAO (1995) and (FAO, in prep.). Biomass burning is a topic currently in study in the framework of the Global Emission Inventory Activity (GEIA).
Environmental research generally involves interrelated elements of the society-biosphere-atmosphere system. The wide range of issues is reflected in, for example, UNEP (1989), IGBP (1990) and Houghton et al. (1990; 1992; 1995). Scientific and policy oriented assessments of the environment also include reconnaissances of the future on the basis of scenario analysis using different models. For example, the current integrated assessment models include detailed descriptions of society-economy-agriculture-environment processes and interactions and more simple descriptions of the ocean and atmosphere subsystems. Integrated models are appropriate for scientific questions, but since emission scenarios can be adjusted to study the effect of, for example, certain abatement strategies, they can also be used to address policy-oriented problems. Other models to study the interaction between society, biosphere and climate. Global Circulation Models, can also include models of atmospheric
chemistry.
The world population is expected to continue to grow rapidly during at least the coming 5-6 decades. Therefore, reconnaissances must cover a period of 50-100 years to study the environmental impact of population growth and changing societies. As forecasts are not realistic or even possible for such a long term, reconnaissance studies must be done in the form of scenario analyses. Comparison of the various published scenarios have made clear that further work in this field is required, in particular regarding agriculture and land use scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995). The aim of this study is to develop a methodology to calculate regional emissions of atmospheric pollutants derived from agriculture on the basis of scenarios of the linkages between crop and livestock production and land use. The methodology can be used as an input for such global integrated models as IMAGE (Alcamo et al., 1994) to test the various scenario assumptions in a georeferenced model. The IMAGE model
includes a version of the FAO AEZ approach, allowing to test the feasibility of the crop production scenarios.
The purpose of this study is not to present new estimates or forecasts of the magnitude of environmental effects caused by agricultural production and land use changes. In the study comparisons will be made between livestock production scenarios for feed requirements and animal waste production. Crop production scenarios will be compared on aerial extent and land use practices. The indicators for environmental effects resulting from agricultural production include NH[3], N[2]O and CH[4] emissions. The procedures used to estimate these emissions are based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (IPCC, 1995), the FAO Livestock Environment Study, and procedures proposed by the Global Emissions Inventory Activity (GEIA), a project of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme of IGBP (IGBP, 1990).
The scale of the study does not allow quantitative assessment of land degradation and other environmental pollution effects, such as contamination of soil and groundwater with nutrients and agricultural chemicals. Where relevant, these issues will be addressed qualitatively.
The forecasts up to the year 2010 made by FAO in the study "World Agriculture: Towards 2010" (FAO, 1993; Alexandratos, 1995) form the basis and starting point for the projection period of 1990-2100. The results will be presented as scenarios, not as forecasts. In the scenario development the general criteria formulated by Alcamo et al. (1995) were used as guidelines. These criteria include:
· Comprehensiveness. Scenarios must take into account all factors and processes that are related to agricultural production and land use.
· Reproducibility. Scenarios must be documented to ensure reproducibility and traceability of results.
· Uncertainty. Assumptions must reflect a wide range of views to express uncertainties.
· Consistency. Scenarios must be internally consistent.
To comply with these criteria, a range of uncertainty will be used for each entity around the 2010 forecast of FAO AT2010. Specific constraints must be taken into account to meet the consistency criterion. For example, the irrigated area must not exceed the irrigation potential, and the arable area may not exceed the area of productive land.
Chapter 2 of this report will discuss general aspects of the data and methods used. In Chapters 3 to 6 the scenarios for agricultural production are discussed in more detail, starting with animal production scenarios (Chapter 3). Scenarios for animal feed requirements will be developed in Chapter 4. Crop production is discussed in Chapter 5 and fertilizer use in Chapter 6. The implications of the above scenarios for land use, including those for animal feed use, will be presented in Chapter 7. In Chapter 8 the atmospheric emissions associated with the above scenario assumptions will be discussed.
<section>5</section>
2. DATA USED AND METHODOLOGY
Aggregation
Population scenario
Demand
Supply
Land use
Exceptions to the scenario rules
Atmospheric emissions associated with production
The historical data used in this study are taken from the study World Agriculture: Towards 2010 (AT2010, first published as FAO [1993]; and later in expanded form as Alexandratos [1995]). The historical data are standardized to conform to the AT2010 commodity classification. The 2010 projections of this FAO study are at the country level. They are the result of an interdisciplinary analytical analysis described by Alexandratos (1995: 407-420). For this study the FAO data and projections were aggregated; projections were made in different steps.
Although much more simple, the method used is in general terms similar to the AT2010 methodology. The various steps will be discussed in more detail. The order of the various topics discussed below reflects the order by which the different segments of the scenarios were developed. For China the AT2010 study provides forecasts of consumption, total production, trade, other uses and self-sufficiency ratios, but it does not give predictions on future areas, crop yields and animal productivity. In the scenarios for China, therefore, the historical trends were used to develop scenarios of yields.
The population scenario used in this study is different from that used in AT2010. Although the global total and the total population in developing countries is not much different, there are important regional differences (see Alexandratos, 1995: 426). For that reason the 1990 and 2010 projections of this study for food consumption, domestic demand, crop and livestock production deviate slightly from the AT2010 estimates and forecasts. In addition, the projections deviate from AT2010 where adjustments made by FAO were omitted. These adjustments concern mainly crop area and yield estimates for the base year^1. To comply with the requirement of reproducibility, only the unadjusted referenced data were used in this study.
^1 The base year of AT2010 is the 3-year average 1988/1990. indicated as 1989BY, based on data as known in May 1992, but with adjustments. These adjustments are not fully documented, but their implications for regional arable land and harvested land are indicated in Tables 4.5 and 4.6 in Alexandratos (1995).
Three baseline production scenarios have been developed. The medium baseline scenario is an extrapolation of the AT2010 projection. The other two scenarios are identical regarding the general assumptions on demography, GDP and food demand. They are different with respect to the production and technology assumptions. These differences are reflected in the estimates from 1990 onwards to include uncertainty starting from the base year. A summary of the three scenarios is presented in Table 2.
TABLE 2 - Summary of the three scenarios
Aggregation
Analysis of country data is required to analyse and understand certain conditions specific to a country. For this study the country data and projections were aggregated to the level of regions and individual crops were aggregated to crop groups. Livestock products were not grouped. The classification of regions, crop groups and livestock products is listed in Appendix 1. For each group of crops projections were made for both irrigated and rainfed production. Rainfed crop production is the aggregate of seven land classes (see Alexandratos, 1995:151-178).
Population scenario
The AT2010 study is based on the UN (1990) population projections for individual countries. In this study the updated population projection from FAO is used, which is slightly adapted from the UN (1994) population projection for 1990-2050 (Appendix 2). For the period 2050-2100 the growth rates used by Alcamo et al. (1994), which were originally produced for the IPCC IS92 scenarios by Pepper et al. (1992), were taken.
Demand
Food demand
Feed demand
Other uses
Domestic demand
Food demand
For the period 1960-2010 the FAO estimates of the mean regional per capita food demand were used. Scenarios for the period 2010-2100 were based on the relative growth rates of the per capita food demand given by Zuidema et al. (1994). Since Zuidema et al. (1994) give a scenario for total Africa, some assumptions had to be made for the two African sub-regions. The relative growth rates for Sub-Saharan Africa were assumed to be equal to those assumed by Zuidema et al. (1994) for total Africa. The growth rate for North Africa was assumed to be equal to that of the region Near East in Asia. Finally, for some commodities additional adjustments of the regional demand scenarios had to be made (see Appendix 2).
Feed demand
Historical data on the feed use of the different commodities are much less reliable than those for food consumption. Generally, information on feed use is not directly available, but is inferred from the supply-utilization-accounts (SUAs). It is even more difficult to make projections of feed demand. Alexandratos (1995) gives a very simple approach based on the fact that in developing countries much of the beef, mutton and milk production comes from non-grainfed animals, while pigs and poultry are mainly from grainfed production systems. The feed intensity weighted livestock production (referred to as Livestock Production, L.P.), calculated as 0.3 (beef + mutton production) + 0.1 (milk production) + 1.0 (pork + poultry + egg production) was used for individual countries by Alexandratos (1995).
Three scenarios of cereal feed use have been developed. The medium scenario is based on the assumption that the feed conversion rates are constant, i.e., that a 1% increase in L.I. leads to a 1 % increase in feed demand. For the aggregated data this assumption proved to reproduce the historical data reasonably well, and was therefore also used to calculate the future feed requirements for cereals, starchy foods and oil crops. For the other products the use as animal feed was assumed to be proportional to the food demand of the particular commodity in that region. For cereal feed use two other scenarios were developed to illustrate the uncertainty and the effect of variation of the feed use for the crop areas required. Chapter 4 discusses the scenarios of feed intensity.
Other uses
Other uses of the various commodities as given in the SUAs include industry, seeds and waste. The variability in the total of these other uses in the historical periods of the various regions is only small. Therefore, the total of other uses, calculated as a percentage of the food demand + use as feed, is assumed to remain constant in the period after 2010.
Domestic demand
The domestic demand is calculated as food demand (= per capita food demand x total population) + use as animal feed + other uses. For most of the animal products the use as feed and other uses are not relevant. A minor part of the milk is currently converted to animal feed.
Supply
Self-sufficiency ratios and trade
Regional agricultural production
Crop yields and animal production
Irrigated and rainfed cropped areas
Animal populations and harvested areas
Self-sufficiency ratios and trade
Alexandratos (1995) described the forecasts for import, export and self-sufficiency ratios for the year 2010. The regional self sufficiency ratios for the different commodities are assumed to remain constant beyond the year 2010. The resulting net trade for the various commodities is presented in Appendix 22. Exceptions were made for Near East and North Africa, where the expanding demand for feed cereals lead to a demand for land exceeding the land balance or irrigation potential. Analogous to AT2010, it is assumed in these cases that countries prefer to produce meat and import feed stuffs instead of importing meat.
Regional agricultural production
The regional production is calculated as the product of domestic demand and self sufficiency ratio. For sugar and oil seeds an additional term is 