<title>FAO - CL 112/Report. Report of the Council of FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
INTRODUCTION
1. The Hundred and Twelfth Session of the Council was held in Rome from 2 to 7 June 1997 under the Chairmanship of José Ramón López Portillo, Independent Chairman of the Council.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE^1
2. The Council noted the Declaration of Competence and Voting Rights presented by the European Community and adopted the Agenda and Timetable for the Session. The Agenda is given in Appendix A to this Report.
3. The Council welcomed five new members: Denmark, Mauritania, Pakistan, Senegal and South Africa and was informed that two members were deemed to have resigned from the Council in accordance with Rule XXII-7 of the General Rules of the Organization.
ELECTION OF THREE VICE-CHAIRMEN AND DESIGNATION OF THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF DRAFTING COMMITTEE^2
4. The Council elected three Vice-Chairmen for its Session: Nasreddine Rimouche (Algeria), Roberto O. Villambrosa (Argentina) and Constantin M. Grigorie (Romania).
5. The Council elected Daniel Berthery (France) as Chairman of the Drafting Committee with the following membership: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Cuba, France, Germany, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Senegal, Syria, Uganda, United States of America and Uruguay.
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL^3
6. The Director-General delivered his statement to the Council. The full text of this statement is given in Appendix D to this Report.
WORLD FOOD AND AGRICULTURE SITUATION
CURRENT WORLD FOOD AND AGRICULTURE SITUATION^4
7. The Council assessed the current world food situation on the basis of the documents presented. A number of Member Nations reported on their own agricultural situation and outlook and on progress toward implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action. The Council expressed general satisfaction with global agricultural production performance in 1996, and particularly the noteworthy expansion in Africa. Concern, however, was expressed over persistent and emergency food shortages in many countries and the slowdown in production growth rate in Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. The Council appreciated the Secretariat documents while at the same time it noted some alternative projections and interpretations of the near-term outlook. The Council suggested that in future reporting, the Secretariat should take a more future-oriented view, increase its monitoring of prices, stocks, stock to consumption ratio, export earnings and the broad food security situation.
8. Concern was expressed over the decline in food aid, while at the same time it was recognised that food aid was not a long-term answer to sustainable food security.
9. The Council recognised the importance of the reform process underway in world agricultural trade policy. It noted the need for improved access for the exports of all countries, especially the developing countries as a way to increase countries' capacity to import their food needs. The need for improved price transmission to producers was also recognized. Many members stressed that despite the fall in international cereal prices during the past year, food import bills were still a major drain on their balance-of-payments. The Council noted that various steps were planned or underway following the Marrakech Agreement on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries.
10. The Council noted that a continuing problem for the food security of many developing countries was the fluctuations of food production associated with climate variability, which also led to variation in the required volume of food imports. Access to sufficient food was also a continuing problem for food security. The Council recognised that food production fluctuations in developing countries could be reduced by better control of water, especially through appropriate use of irrigation, reducing post harvest losses, strengthening research and extension, and improving agricultural infrastructure.
11. The Council recognised that food production would need to be boosted in many developing countries to support a reasonable degree of self-reliance. Many members welcomed the fact that several key indicators of food security monitored by FAO were moving in a positive direction. While welcoming the rise in cereal stocks in 1996-97, many members noted that the global stock-to-consumption ratio was below the 17-18 percent minimum safe level as estimated by the FAO Secretariat. Other members felt that there was not a close correlation between global food security and this particular indicator.
FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD FOOD SUMMIT^5
12. The Council endorsed the report of the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) on all aspects of the World Food Summit and the follow-up to the Declaration and Plan of Action, prepared in compliance with Conference Resolution 2/95, and decided to transmit this report to the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference, with its own views as reflected below.
13. Conscious that this was its first session following the Summit, which had constituted a milestone in the life of the Organization, the Council reaffirmed its satisfaction that the Summit had met the objectives of sensitizing public opinion to the importance of achieving food security for all, of providing a framework for concerted action to achieve it, and of moving food security higher on the national and international political agenda.
14. The Council stressed the crucial importance of maintaining the momentum generated by the Summit, and reaffirmed the catalytic role of FAO, in supporting this follow-up process in cooperation with all organizations in the UN system, as well as other competent international institutions. The primary responsibility of national governments for ensuring sustained implementation of the Plan of Action was stressed, as was the importance of international support to their efforts. In this connection, regret was expressed by numerous Member Nations that resources for official development assistance and food aid, as well as for international agencies such as FAO, continued to decline.
15. The Council noted with satisfaction steps taken by a number of countries to prepare national plans of action as a follow-up to the Summit, engaging in the process all stakeholders. It also took note of FAO's initiative to encourage preparation of national agricultural development strategies for developing countries and countries in transition and of country food security briefs for developed countries. Stress was placed on the importance of ensuring that the process was demand-driven, and undertaken only with the full participation and agreement of the concerned governments.
16. The Council endorsed the monitoring and reporting process proposed by the Committee on World Food Security.
17. The Council noted with satisfaction the progress already made in launching the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System (FIVIMS) in collaboration with concerned UN system organizations, competent national institutions and non-governmental organizations. It stressed the need for the process to be country-driven and for governments and their respective societies and stakeholders to be closely involved in its development. The Council approved the proposed workplan for the gradual development and establishment of FIVIMS at national and international levels, building upon existing information systems and mechanisms. It noted the need of developing countries for technical assistance to improve the quality and interpretation of statistical data related to FIVIMS.
18. Consistent with the integrated follow-up mechanisms for UN Conferences adopted by ECOSOC, the Council welcomed the arrangements endorsed by the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC), for inter-agency follow-up to the Summit. It was noted that the mechanism established would operate, at the country level, within the framework of the UN Resident Coordinator system, with support provided, at the global level, through the ACC network operated jointly by FAO and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), with the close involvement of the World Food Programme (WFP) and other concerned organizations. The Council also noted with appreciation the cooperation established with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Human Rights Centre to promote work related to the right to food consistent with the mandate of the Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Committee in full accord with Objective 7.4 of the Plan of Action.
19. The Council noted FAO's initiative of launching Telefood in conjunction with World Food Day 1997 to keep the decisions taken at the Summit in the public eye, and to collect additional funds aimed at contributing to the alleviation of hunger in the world. Some members indicated their desire to receive detailed information following the event on costs and use of the funds generated in order to determine whether similar activities should be considered in the future. Other members were concerned by the fund-raising aspects of this event and were worried the effect should not be to reduce contributions to other appeals. The Council was informed that all funds collected would be used to foster food security and would be subject to audit by reputable international firms.
20. The Council re-confirmed its support for the objectives of the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS), and welcomed South-South and extra-budgetary support to the SPFS from members, multilateral institutions, international and regional financial institutions. Members from participating countries reported on their positive experiences and results achieved so far, which they considered were fully in accord with the WFS commitments. Certain members encouraged an expansion of the SPFS coverage to include all the Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries (LIFDCs), while other members considered that the SPFS should be made available to all developing countries where there were pockets of food insecurity. Other members questioned the approach of the Special Programme. The identification of the resources involved in the SPFS was also requested. The essential role of national and international research organizations and institutes was stressed, as was the necessity for evaluation of
the pilot phase results and constraints before moving to the expansion phase of the SPFS. Some members requested and received further clarification on the relationship between the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) and the SPFS. Many members requested the strengthening of the TCP as an indispensible tool for international cooperation within FAO, stressing that this programme should maintain its independence.
REPORTS OF THE TWENTY-SECOND (Rome, 23-30 September 1996, 8-9 and 28-31 October 1996) AND TWENTY-THIRD (Rome, 14-18 April 1997) SESSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON WORLD FOOD SECURITY^6
21. The Council considered and adopted the Reports of the Twenty-second and Twenty-third Sessions of the Committee on World Food Security, noting that the Committee had worked diligently and well to prepare the World Food Summit and to lay the foundations for monitoring implementation of its undertakings.
REPORTS OF THE THIRD EXTRAORDINARY SESSION (Rome 9-13 December 1996) AND THE SEVENTH REGULAR (Rome, 15-23 May 1997) SESSIONS OF THE COMMISSION ON GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE^7
22. The Council considered and adopted the reports of the Third Extraordinary and Seventh Regular Sessions of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. The Council noted the process of the broadening of the mandate of the Commission to all genetic resources of interest to food and agriculture.
23. The Council welcomed the decision of the Commission to establish geographically-balanced, inter-governmental technical working groups on farm animal and plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, to carry out specific tasks assigned by the Commission.
24. The Council emphasized, in particular, the importance of developing the Global Strategy for the Management of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and supporting national efforts to implement the Global Plan of Action on Plant Genetic Resources. It reiterated the priorities set by the Seventh Session of the Commission: the convening, as a first priority, of an Extraordinary Session of the Commission devoted solely to the continuing negotiations for the revision of the International Undertaking; as a second priority, of the Inter-governmental Technical Working Group on Farm Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture; and as the third priority, of the Inter-governmental Technical Working Group on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. It noted that the Organization's ability to meet these priorities would depend upon the budget allocations under the current and the 1998-99 Programme of Work and Budget and urged the Director-General to allocate the necessary
funds in the budget and, if necessary, seek extra-budgetary resources to ensure the holding of the meetings agreed by the Commission.
25. The Council called for the timely conclusion of the negotiation of the revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, keeping in mind the recommendations of the Leipzig Conference. The Council agreed on the urgent need to convene the proposed Extraordinary Session of the Commission, but no agreement was reached on whether this session should be held before or after the Fourth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity.
26. The Council welcomed the contributions that had been made by Switzerland, Sweden and Norway to support the participation of developing countries in the negotiations and to support regional meetings, and invited donor countries to provide further funds to ensure developing country participation in future negotiations.
ACTIVITIES OF FAO AND WFP
REPORT OF THE SIXTY-FIRST SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMODITY PROBLEMS ^8
(Rome, 25-28 February 1997)
27. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Sixty-first Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CL 112/6). It was informed that, at the request of the CCP at its Sixty-first Session, the Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal (CSSD) had agreed on its revised Report.
28. The Council took note of the confirmation given by the delegate of Thailand of his Government's offer to hold the First Session of the Sub-group on Tropical Fruits, in Pattaya, 21-24 April 1998. It also took note of the planned meeting of the Intergovernmental Group on Tea to be hosted by Indonesia, 2-4 July, 1997 in Bali. The Council was informed that this meeting would be held back-to-back with a meeting of the International Business Conference, sponsored by the Indonesian Tea Association and the Ministry of Agriculture.
REPORT OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON FISHERIES ^9
(Rome, 17-20 March 1997)
29. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Twenty-second Session of the Committee on Fisheries. In particular, the Council:
a) reconfirmed the importance of the implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries if fish stocks were to be managed in a sustainable manner and reiterated the need for guidelines to be established on the relevant articles of the Code;
b) reaffirmed the need to increase the contribution of aquaculture to employment and income of rural populations and thus to food security, and called for priority to be given to the sustainable development of environmentally-sound aquaculture;
c) stressed the need for effective regional fishery organizations and arrangements and agreed that FAO regional fishery bodies should be reviewed and evaluated by their respective members on a case by case basis, with a view to strengthening each body as appropriate.
d) stressed that excessive fishing capacity and fishing effort leading to overfishing continue to require special attention by FAO and Member Nations.
REPORT OF THE THIRTEENTH SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY (Rome, 10-13 March 1997)^10
30. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Thirteenth Session of the Committee on Forestry. In particular the Council:
a) supported FAO's activities in the promotion of sustainable forest management, especially in the follow-up to UNCED as Task Manager for the Implementation of Agenda 21 and in support of the Inter-governmental Panel on Forests (IPF);
b) agreed that in view of the post-UNCED importance of Forestry, FAO should allocate additional resources to the Forestry Programme;
c) supported the recommendation of COFO for the further prioritization of FAO's activities in forestry;
31. The Council took note of the statement by the Turkish delegation regarding progress in preparations for the Eleventh World Forestry Congress, to be held in Antalya (Turkey) from 13 to 22 October 1997.
REPORT OF THE FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (Rome, 7-11 April 1997) ^11
32. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Fourteenth Session of the Committee on Agriculture (COAG). In particular, the Council stressed the conclusions and recommendations relating to plant and animal genetic resources, the role of livestock in rural development and food security, agricultural research, global information and early warning, women in agricultural and rural development and follow-up to the Uruguay Round agreements, including Codex and IPPC standards. In line with COAG's recommendations, it decided to transmit the two draft phytosanitary standards - "Guidelines for Surveillance" and "Export Certification System" - to the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference for adoption as International Phytosanitary Standards.
Revision of the IPPC
33. The Council established an Informal Open-ended Working Group to consider the remaining bracketed text of the revised International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) which had been submitted to Council by COAG. The Chairman of the Working Group, in his report to Council, listed the agreed amendments and stated that the resulting text remained without brackets.
34. The Council was informed of a proposal for an additional article, provisionally Article II bis, to specify the relation of the revised IPPC to other relevant international agreements. It agreed to the inclusion of this article without brackets and decided that it would be submitted to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) at its Sixty-eighth Session, to consider its legal implications and to determine its precise wording and place within the Convention.
35. The Council attached great importance to the provision on the reporting of the occurrence, outbreak or spread of pests. It understood that the reports would have to be supplied - as under the current IPPC - to the Secretary of the IPPC. It underlined the importance of establishing relevant procedures applicable to this reporting and urged that high priority be given to this work.
36. The Council endorsed the revised text of the IPPC and unanimously recommended that it be transmitted through the CCLM and the Hundred and Thirteenth Session of the Council to the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference for adoption.
37. In welcoming the revised text of the IPPC as an important step in facilitating and safeguarding international trade in food and agricultural products, the Council noted that the specific need for developing country contracting parties, in particular the least developed countries, should be provided with technical assistance. Such assistance was required in order to enhance their capacity to fulfil their obligations under the Convention and to facilitate its implementation.
38. The Council also recommended that the Conference, in adopting the revised IPPC, consider the necessity for appropriate interim measures for the period between the adoption of the IPPC and its entry into force, including the establishment of an interim Commission on Phytosanitary Measures.
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
First Annual Report of the WFP Executive Board^12
39. The Council expressed appreciation for the new format and the very concise content of the annual report which described, in a comprehensive manner, the activities of the Executive Board and reflected the considerable achievements of WFP in 1996. It welcomed the importance given to the follow-up to the World Food Summit, stressed the importance of WFP for development activities and recognised the usefulness of the synergetic collaboration between WFP and FAO.
40. The Council approved the Executive Board's Report.
41. The Council, after considering document CL 112/13-Sup.1 "WFP Pledging Target", adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 1/112
Target for WFP pledges for the period 1999-2000
THE COUNCIL,
Noting
the endorsement by the Executive Board of the World Food Programme of a target of one billion United States dollars (2,1 million tonnes) for voluntary contributions to the Programme for the period 1999-2000,
Recalling
Resolutions 2462 (XXIII) and 2682 (XXV) of the General Assembly, which recognised the experience gained by WFP in the field of multilateral food aid,
1. Submits for consideration and approval of the Conference of the FAO the above pledging target;
2. Urges Members of the United Nations and Members and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization to undertake the necessary preparation for the announcement of pledges at the forthcoming Pledging Conference of the World Food Programme.
Rome, 7 June 1997
Revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme^13
42. The Council congratulated the Open-ended Working Group of the Executive Board of WFP, the Legal Counsel of FAO/WFP and the WFP Secretariat for their valuable contribution to the work and, in particular, for the very positive climate of the debate within the Working Group and the Board.
43. Some members indicated their intention to seek in future WFP Executive Board sessions an improvement to the draft General Rules that would ensure the timeliness of WFP reports, in particular those related to bilaterally-funded projects.
44. The Council expressed its full support for the revised General Regulations and approved the following draft resolution for transmission to the Conference for its adoption:
Draft Resolution for the Conference
Revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
its Resolutions 1/61, 4/65 and 22/75 concerning the establishment and continuation of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, of the United Nations World Food Programme, its Resolution 9/91 concerning the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme and membership of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World Food Programme, and its Resolution 9/95 transforming the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes into an Executive Board of the World Food Programme and approving revised General Regulations for the World Food Programme;
Noting
Resolution 48/162 adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20 December 1993, on further measures for the restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields,
Having considered
the decision of the Hundred and Twelfth Session of the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, adopted on the recommendation of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme, concerning the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme:
1. Decides to approve the revised General Regulations of the World Food Programme contained in Appendix ... as endorsed by the FAO Council at the ninth meeting of its Hundred and Twelfth Session on 7 June 1997 and by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations in its decision ........ of ........ 1997;
2. Decides further, subject to the concurrence of the General Assembly of the United Nations, that the revised General Regulations shall enter into force on 1 January 1998.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE TWENTY-NINTH SESSION OF THE FAO CONFERENCE ^14
Arrangements for the Session and Provisional Timetable
45. The Council agreed that following their consideration at the Hundred and Thirteenth Session of the Council the following two additional items would be referred to Conference and should be inserted after item 9 in Part I of the Provisional Agenda shown in Appendix A of the document, with the tentative timetable amended as appropriate:
(a) Negotiation of a Legally-Binding Instrument on Prior Informed Consent (PIC);
(b) Desert Locust Control Situation: Measures Taken and Further Action Required.
46. The Council agreed to submit to the Conference for approval the provisional agenda, the tentative timetable and the arrangements outlined in the draft document as amended above, and in particular recommended that:
(a) the Conference be convened from 7 to 18 November 1997;
(b) three Commissions be established to examine Parts I, II and III of the Agenda;
(c) the deadline for the receipt of nominations for election to the Council be at 12.00 hours on Saturday 8 November;
(d) the statements of Heads of Delegation be limited to a maximum of 5 minutes each;
(e) votes to elect Members of the Council, to appoint the Independent Chairman of the Council and to decide on the budget level, be scheduled for Friday 14 November.
Deadline for Nominations for Independent Chairman of the Council
47. The Council decided to establish the deadline for the receipt of nominations for Independent Chairman of the Council at 12.00 hours on Friday 22 August 1997.
Nomination of the Chairman of the Conference, and of the Chairmen of the Commissions
48. The Council noted that consultations had taken place among Heads of Delegation represented at the Council session in order to designate the candidates who would be approached to serve as Chairman of the Conference and Chairmen of Commissions I, II and III.
PROGRAMME, BUDGETARY, FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
PROGRAMME EVALUATION REPORT 1996-97 ^15
49. The Council considered the Programme Evaluation Report 1996-97, and noted with appreciation the several improvements made in the latest report.
50. The Council endorsed the Programme Committee's views on the Programme Evaluation Report 1996-97, especially those on the inclusion of programme managers' comments on the individual programme reviews and the summary assessment on programme performance based on the criteria for programme analysis suggested by the Council at its Hundred and Tenth Session (Rome, 2-3 November 1995). It agreed that these innovations enhanced the transparency of the evaluation process and promoted interaction between evaluators and programme managers. With regard to the criteria, it considered that these could need to be refined to reflect the experience of their application over the last biennium.
51. The Council also endorsed the Programme Committee's recommendations for further improving the analytical content of the Programme Evaluation Report. It highlighted, in particular, the need for more systematic analysis of the effects and impact of FAO programmes, as well as the use of external expertise in programme evaluation while bearing in mind the cost implications of such approaches. It also stressed the importance of improving the quality of programme design, which should contain clear objectives and priorities, implementation strategy and a set of measurable performance targets and indicators. It stressed that the lessons of experience in this area should be built into new project designs. It also noted that the findings of the Programme Evaluation Report should be incorporated into the Medium-Term Plan.
52. The Council further endorsed the recommendations of the Programme and Finance Committees with regard to FAO publications: (a) that the proposed change in publication distribution from the quota distribution system to that based on "national publication accounts" be accepted in principle for further consideration; and (b) that all major FAO publications be issued, in all five official languages, recognizing the need for flexibility in certain cases.
53. On this basis, the Council agreed to transmit the Programme Evaluation Report 1996-97 to the Conference for its approval.
MEDIUM-TERM PLAN 1998-2003 ^16
54. The Council recalled that the submission to each Conference of a rolling Medium-Term Plan covering a six-year period, had been instituted by the FAO Conference through Resolution 10/89. It noted, therefore, that this version was the fourth prepared since then, and that it was a rewrite of the Plan approved in 1995 for the period 1996-2001. The Council observed, in this connection, that due efforts had been made to reflect in particular the outcome of the World Food Summit and the relationship between substantive priorities and the commitments in the Summit Plan of Action.
55. Several members agreed that the Plan included a balanced presentation of priorities, which reflected the varied requirements of the membership and were consistent with the overall goal of sustainable food security. While agreeing that there were positive elements in it, other members felt that this version did not fulfil their expectations, and made clear their perception of gaps and weaknesses. The Council agreed that the Medium-Term Plan should reflect the conclusions and recommendations of the Technical Committees of the Council, in particular the Committees on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
56. Several members offered ideas and suggestions as regarded improvements to the Plan's contents and structure, including that it take account of past achievements and provide a thorough assessment of trends and challenges confronting FAO. Some members suggested that the Medium-Term Plan include concrete proposals for cost-effective actions to increase programmatic and operational savings by expanding collaboration with other international organizations.
57. The Council agreed that the Plan should be a tool for establishing agreement among the membership on broad policy orientations and priorities. It stressed that the prime purpose of the Plan should be to offer a strategic vision of the future work of FAO, taking into account the universal character of the FAO, the synergy between its normative and its operative activities and based on a careful analysis of the operating environment and the strategic choices open to the Organization, together with an implementation programme to carry the vision into effect.
58. In light of this discussion, the Council recognised the force of the recommendation from the Programme Commmittee that the Governing Bodies should revisit medium-term planning practices in FAO. The Council noted that the Medium-Term Plan should be a key component of FAO's overall planning system, incorporating the lessons learned from the Programme Evaluation Report and the Programme Implementation Report, and providing the framework and guidance within which the biennial Programme of work and Budget was developed.
59. The Council also noted that the new programme framework which was being pilot-tested in the Summary and full Programme of Work and Budget was consistent with the key principles which should apply to a revised approach to the Medium-Term Plan. In particular, the concepts of measurable and time-bound targets and indicators should be central to the new programme planning framework.
60. Accordingly, the Council requested the Secretariat to prepare a paper for the Programme Committee at its September 1997 session which reviewed and discussed the options for an adapted medium-term planning process. The Programme Committee would then put proposals to the Council at its session, immediately before the FAO Conference; and the Council would put a recommendation to the Conference.
61. The Council concluded that consideration of the Medium-Term Plan by the Conference together with the proposals for an adapted planning process would facilitate Conference decisions.
SUMMARY PROGRAMME OF WORK AND BUDGET 1998-99 ^17
General aspects
62. The Council welcomed the integration of "other" income into the Programme of Work, and looked forward to its further elaboration and refinement in the full Programme of Work and Budget.
63. The Council also endorsed the new programming approach being tested in the Summary Programme of Work and Budget (SPWB) under Programme 2.1.1 Natural Resources. It would reexamine the merits in the full Programme of Work and Budget 