<title>FAO, forests and forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
FAO, forests and forestry
Forests cover 27 percent of the land surface of the earth. They protect the environment; they provide essential benefits and services and are a pillar of national economies; they are inextricably woven into the social framework of our very existence
The FAO Forestry Programme addresses one of the most important, complex and controversial issues of modern times - how to use trees, forests and related resources to improve people's economic, social and environmental conditions while ensuring that the resource is conserved to meet the needs of future generations.
In assisting its 174 member countries to conserve and utilize forest and tree resources sustainably, FAO works in partnership with governments, international organizations, international financing agencies, non-governmental groups, the private sector, communities and various interest groups and individuals. It strives to use scarce resources efficiently, share experience and avoid duplication of effort.
FAO's work in forestry is a comprehensive, interdisciplinary effort organized into major programmes. The Programme in Forestry Policy and Planning encompasses the policy, institutional and socio-economic aspects of forestry development. It also includes community forestry.
A village nursery. Sustainable forest management depends on the involvement of the people who live in and around forests.
Forestry and food security
Food security means ensuring physical and economic access to food and adequate nutrition for all people at all times. Trees and forests play an important role in providing food security. They provide food for humans and fodder for livestock, energy for cooking for nearly half of the world's population, medicinal products, employment and income. They help maintain the soil and water resource base and the ecological balance essential to food and agricultural production.
Sustainable forest management practices that include the participation of local people are essential if forests and trees are to effectively address people's needs in terms of food security and overall socio-economic development.
The FAO Forestry Programme plays an important role in FAO's broad-based interdisciplinary approach incorporating all development sectors in achieving food security. This approach, and the role of forestry within it, are dearly set out in the Plan of Action adopted at the World Food Summit, hosted by FAO in November 1996, which states, "Food security depends, inter alia, on sustainable management of fish, forests and wildlife".
The FAO Programme on Forest Resources deals with assessment and management of forest and wildlife resources. Under this programme, FAO prepares and promotes the adoption of guidelines for the management of both natural and plantation forests of all types and the biological diversity they contain. Forest resource assessment - the collection, analysis and dissemination of information on the present status and trends of the world's forests is a key element of the programme. The programme also includes protection of forests from pests and diseases, as well as consideration of the impact of climatic change on forests.
Through the Programme on Forest Products FAO promotes the environmentally sound utilization of all types of forest product, both wood and non-wood, at varying levels of complexity of operation and size of enterprise.
FAO works with its member countries through the Organization's headquarters in Rome, Italy; through a network of decentralized but closely coordinated offices at country, subregional and regional levels; and through field projects across the developing world. The Forestry Field Programme provides direct technical assistance through some 180 field projects, mainly in developing countries. The FAO Investment Centre helps countries increase the flow and performance of investment in the forest sector.
FAO stresses capacity-building in all of its work in forestry development. Emphasis is placed on building national capabilities in forest policy development and strategic planning, on institutional strengthening, on human resources development and on assisting local communities and organizations. This includes assistance in training staff, developing efficient methodologies and supporting research in sustainable forest management.
Community forestry
Community forestry enables local communities to control and manage forest and tree resources. This approach has emerged as a major strategy for sustainable forest resource management in many countries. Sustainable forest management is not possible without the involvement the people who live in and around forests - the people who actually use the forest and depend on its products for their livelihoods.
Understanding the social, economic and cultural relationships between people and forests is a key aspect of community forestry. It is also important to understand the incentives which encourage local people to use and manage their resources sustainably.
Through its Community Forestry Unit, FAO has played a lead role in this field, particularly through the development and use of participatory methods and tools to increase local people's awareness and involve them in all aspects of forest management.
Activities have been concentrated in areas such as communal management of forest resources, food security and nutrition, gender, tree and land tenure, conflict management, non-timber forest products, small-scale forest-based enterprises, marketing information systems and farmers' research and extension. The development and dissemination of information materials has been a priority.
FAO's work in community forestry has been intensified through the Forests, Trees and People Programme (FTPP). Launched in 1987 with the overall goal of strengthening local people's ability to manage and use natural resources, FTPP works through regional and national institutions in Asia, Latin America and East and West Africa..
As community forestry moves into its third decade, there will be new areas to explore, including decentralization of planning and implementation to the district/provincial level, forest management through small-scale private ownership, issues related to natural resource management in economies in transition and an even greater focus on the participatory process in natural resource management. This will complement a continuing emphasis on the development and dissemination of information, methods, tools and training materials.
<section>2</section>
A neutral forum
Dialogue at the international level is an essential complement to the efforts of individual countries to develop appropriate forest policies, institutions and practices. Foremost among the means FAO places at the disposal of its member countries is the Committee on Forestry (COFO).
Heads of forest services and other senior government officials meet at FAO headquarters every two years to identify emerging policy and technical issues, to seek solutions and to advise FAO and others on appropriate action.
Other international organizations and, increasingly, non-governmental groups participate in COFO. As the need arises, FAO also convenes special fore of forestry ministers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the private sector.
Forests and trees protect the land and water resources on which agriculture depends.
Six regional forestry commissions complement the work of COFO, one each for Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, Europe, the Near East and North America. The commissions normally meet between COFO sessions and provide a forum for member countries to discuss both technical and policy issues at the regional level.
Drawing on regional experiences, the commissions advise FAO on policy formulation and on priorities for its forestry programme. The regional commissions facilitate the participation of NGOs, particularly local organizations, and the private sector.
The regional commissions often work through special subsidiary bodies. For example, the Forest Genetic Resources study group of the North American Forest Commission has secured grants to fund studies of several species of North American spruce and pine. The group also aided the establishment of the Mexican Centro de Genética Forestal, launched the "World directory of forest geneticists and tree breeders" and has published a Spanish-English glossary of terms for forest genetics and tree improvement.
FAO also supports and benefits from the advice of a number of statutory technical bodies that meet regularly to focus on specific areas of forestry development and management. For example, the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products was established by the FAO Council in October 1996 to subsume and broaden the mandate of two long-standing advisory bodies, the FAO Committee on Wood-Based Panel Products and the FAO Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper.
The merging of these two committees and the expansion of their mandate to include all wood-based forest industries will provide FAO and its member countries with a forum for broader and more coherent coverage of all aspects of sustainable development of the sector; it will ensure input from both government and the private sector across the range of issues; and it is in line with the trend in both developed and developing countries to incorporate all forest industry subsectors into one national professional association.
<section>3</section>
A source of information and advice
FAO forestry statutory bodies
The currently active statutory bodies are:
* The Committee on Forestry
* The Regional Forestry Commissions for Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Europe Latin America and the Caribbean, Near East, and North America
* The Committee on Mediterranean Forestry Questions (Silva Mediterranea)
* The International Poplar Commission
* The Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products
* The Advisory Committee on Forestry Education
* The Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources
Sound forestry decision-making requires accurate, up-to-date statistics. FAO collects and disseminates forest statistics and information; carries out analytical studies to identify trends; reviews the major issues found from the analyses; and publishes monographs, sector analyses, case-studies, meeting reports, training and information materials, statistical compendia and periodicals. The State of the World's Forests, is FAO's biennial policy-relevant summary of data and issues related to the status and trends of forest resources, production and trade and institutional development.
FAO makes forestry information available in both printed and electronic format, including on the Internet (http://www.fao.org).
Through its work in forest resource assessment, FAO strives to improve the quality and coverage of global forestry data and their dissemination; country capacity building; and the sound use of forest resources information in national planning. The Forest Resources Assessment 1990 Project assessed forest area at year 1990 and its changes over the period 1980-1990.
The statistics, based on collection and analysis of information from all FAO member countries and confirmed by satellite imagery, constitute the current baseline data on forest resources and deforestation rates.
A key to sustainable forest management is conservation of natural forests and the biological diversity they contain.
The next global forest resources assessment (FRA 2000) will have an increased focus on biological diversity; the economic potential of forests; sustainable forest management; and components of the carbon cycle.
FAO produces the Yearbook of Forest Products and other statistical compendia of national and international information on the forest sector, as well as economic reviews including, Forest Product Prices and Pulp and Paper Capacities. FAO also helps country-level institutions strengthen their ability to collect, analyse and transmit forestry data.
Outlook studies are an important activity. The study, European timber trends and prospects: into the twenty-first century, was published in 1996 jointly with the Economic Commission for Europe. In 1997 FAO released the Provisional outlook for global forest products consumption, production and trade to 2010 and a study of the forestry sector in Asia and the Pacific is currently under way with completion expected in 1998.
With a 50-year publishing history, Unasylva, FAO's quarterly journal of forestry and forest industry, provides an informative, unbiased analysis of the major issues facing forestry development.
The Forestry Branch Library complements FAO's work in producing forestry information, providing access to multilingual information services on forestry and related subjects, including the 1.5 million documents in the FAO collection as well as paper and electronic databases covering the worldwide literature.
Policy and planning
Sustainable forestry activities can only be undertaken within an appropriate policy and institutional framework. FAO helps countries adapt their forest policies to dynamic socio-economic and environmental demands. Particular challenges relate to the relationship of forestry with other sectors, and to the need to consider the concerns of increasing numbers of interest groups with diverse perspectives.
Regional policy surveys provide an information base against which countries can analyse their current policies and identify "institutional" options, "mechanisms and structures" for developing their own strategies. Studies have been completed for Europe, the Near East, Asia and the Pacific, Africa and countries in transition to a market economy and the survey on Latin America is currently in progress.
FAO undertakes country-specific sector and subsector studies which serve as fundamental starting points for policy review and, where appropriate, revision for subsequent forest development and investment plans. FAO has been active in this respect in countries in transition to market economies, both in Eastern Europe and in other parts of the world.
As part of its policy analysis work, FAO supports the development of trade policies and institutional arrangements that lead to transparent market conditions, are compatible with sustainable development and respect the environment, while allowing fair competition. Attention is focused on trade barriers and on environmental issues connected with trade, especially timber certification and labelling, recycling and waste paper content.
Two recently published studies assess the future effects of the GATT Uruguay Round on wood and non-wood forest products.
In a collaborative effort involving the private sector and NGOs, FAO collects and analyses information to enable its member countries both producers and consumers - to answer fundamental questions about the potential benefits and disadvantages of certification programmes and to develop appropriate policies.
Improved methodologies and capacities for forestry planning are essential for the conservation and development of forests. All concerned groups and individuals governments, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, as well as local communities - must be involved for successful planning (see box on National forest programmes), FAO is developing and field testing new guidelines for improved forestry planning. For example, guidelines on economic accounts for forestry will soon be prepared to complement the recent FAO publication A system of economic accounts for food and agriculture. The FAO Forests, Trees and People Programme is currently developing materials on participatory planning methods and tools for use by both field workers and project managers (see box on Community forestry).
FAO also organizes training seminars in project formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as in forestry statistics as part of its commitment to capacity building in the area of forestry planning.
Global Fibre Supply Study
Where is the raw material going to come from to cover our forest products needs? How much productive forest do we need to supply expected future fibre demand? The FAO Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS) was undertaken to assist in answering these questions. It will include a forecast up to the year 2050. The objective of the study is to contribute to forest policy development through the provision of reliable data, information and analysis of industrial fibre sources.
The study will include a compilation of the latest available inventory data, including recovered and non-wood fibre, focusing primarily on the sources of industrial fibre. It will also include a projection and analysis of future developments in fibre supply, based on explicit consideration of the major factors affecting them. Special emphasis is being placed on the collection and compilation of forest volume inventory and growth data for the developing regions Africa, Asia and the Pacific and Latin America and the Caribbean.
The final report of the study will provide information for policy development to industry, governments, non-governmental organizations and academia. The report will also sensitize governments with respect to raw material sources and uses and the need to improve their data collection and analysis in this field.
The study will complement other elements of the FAO Forestry Programme such as the outlook study for Global Forest Products Consumption, Production and Trade and the upcoming Forest Resource Assessment 2000. The major products of the GFSS will include:
o A database on estimated economic forest volumes from both natural and plantation forests, supported by information on forest area and forest volume;
o A projection of three fibre supply scenarios based on factors deemed to be the most critical;
o A report summarizing forest area and volume information for natural and plantation forest to the year 2050.
Forest management and conservation
Helping countries develop appropriate technical approaches to the challenges of sustainable forest management and to put these approaches into practice is at the heart of the FAO Forestry Programme.
Activities range from efforts aimed at safeguarding and maintaining the forest ecosystem and its functions to those focusing on species or groups of species for the improved production of goods and environmental services.
FAO assists in the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in line with the Organization's role as Task Manager for Chapter 11 of UNCED's Agenda 21.
Each of the different ecological zones - tropical, temperate, boreal presents specific challenges in terms of forest management. In recent years, much attention has been focused on the forests of the humid tropics. Yet dryland degradation is one of the most serious resource management issues facing the world today.
FAO supports regional and subregional approaches to desertification control through forestry, especially efforts to provide food and energy to local communities. FAO also provides assistance in the formulation of national action programmes within the framework of the International Convention to Combat Desertification. A particularly good example is the work undertaken in Mali.
Conservation of natural ecosystems and the biological diversity they contain (within and between species) is an important area of the FAO Forestry Programme, both at headquarters and in the field. FAO has developed a database on the state of forest genetic resources and provides support to member countries in conservation of forest gene resources. For example, the Organization is supporting programmes on in situ conservation of priority species in Brazil, Peru, Indonesia and Malaysia. The information bulletin Forest Genetic Resources serves as a forum and a link between organizations.
Improved processing technologies respond to market demands while ensuring the conservation of natural resources.
Forest plantations complement natural forest formations in both productive and protective functions. FAO supports national programmes in afforestation, reforestation and tree planting, using genetically optimal, high-quality materials that are well adapted to specific site conditions. As in all of FAO's work, due consideration is given to social, environmental and
FAO's programme in forestry looks beyond forests, focusing on the sound management of trees on-farm and in urban and pert-urban areas. FAO works to build a better understanding of the factors that influence the potential of agroforestry and to help strengthen the capacity of government agencies and NGOs to provide adequate support to agroforestry research, training and extension services. Through such FAO-supported networks as the Asia-Pacific Agroforestry Network (APAN). FAO helps strengthen national capabilities and develop regional links.
Demographic trends and related land-use and environmental changes have recently motivated FAO to launch a programme in urban and peri-urban forestry. FAO collects, analyses and disseminates information about urban and peri-urban forestry and provides technical assistance in planning and implementing urban forestry programmes.
FAO's efforts in wildlife and protected area management focus on the promotion of the conservation and sustainable use of wildlife resources, the management of protected areas and the development of ecotourism. Particular attention is directed towards protected area management efforts based on the participation of local people and ensuring direct benefits to them.
Well-trained staff, efficient extension methods and the support of research are essential to achieve sustainable forest management and the conservation of natural resources. FAO, in cooperation with a number of partners Including the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) and the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF), provides assistance in forestry curriculum monitoring and updating; in the modernization of extension methodologies; and in promoting national research systems and networking among countries. For example, FAO's Forestry Research Support Programme in Asia (FORSPA) paved the way to the creation of the Asia Pacific Association of Forestry Research Institutions.
Forest utilization
To survive the many pressures being placed on them by increasing populations and their associated needs, the value of forests as prospering ecosystems must exceed their potential worth under other forms of land use. FAO's programme on environmentally sound forest practices develops specific, practical approaches to forest utilization and to the assessment of the environmental impacts and economic contributions of forest operations.
Forest industries have a key role in overall socio-economic development. FAO helps forest industries, whether public or private, large or small, to develop and apply efficient technologies for the sustainable use of and to assign an appropriate value to forests and their products while increasing income and employment. This involves adapting and improving processing technologies to respond to market demands in terms of better-quality products and larger volumes, while ensuring the conservation of natural resources, the protection of the environment and pollution abatement.
Non-wood forest products enrich the lives of hundreds of millions of people and are essential to disadvantaged groups living in communities inside and around forests. If developed in a sustainable manner, these products could make even greater contributions to overall socio-economic development. The FAO-organized International Expert Consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products, held in Yogyakarta, Indonesia in January 1995, has helped to shape and prioritize FAO's work in this sector. Currently, priority attention is being devoted to information gathering, analysis and dissemination through the non-wood forest products publication series, and the newsletter Non-wood News. A database is also being developed on agencies, institutions and individuals involved with non-wood forest products.
National forest programmes
FAO coordinates the development of national forest programmes (NFPs). NFPs are tools for the planning, implementing and monitoring of forestry and other forest-related activities. They follow a participatory approach to planning and implementation that encourages partnerships among all concerned with forest conservation and development. They emphasize national sovereignty with regard to the management of forest resources and the need for country leadership and responsibility.
As a framework for planning, NFPs provide strategic orientation for the forest sector in harmony with other sectors of the national economy and integrated with other land uses. As a framework for action, NFPs provide an environment for the concerned and coordinated implementation of programmes and activities by all concerned groups and individuals based on mutually agreed objectives and strategies.
The main objectives of the NFP process are to:
o introduce intersectoral planning approaches involving all relevant partners in order to resolve conflicts and generate effective policies and programmes;
o increase the efficiency and effectiveness of both public and private efforts towards sustainable forest development;
o mobilize and organize national and (if necessary) international resources and catalyse action to implement plans and actions in a coordinated manner.
Watershed management sustainable mountain development
Today, countries are striving to develop new and more effective responses to the challenges of upland conservation and mountain watershed management, based on people's participation.
With the lead responsibility for promoting and coordinating follow-up to Chapter 13 (mountains) of UNCED's Agenda 21, FAO has long experience and an important role in helping countries make the transition from a strictly technical approach to watershed management and protection to integrated mountain development and conservation.
Current activities include the organization of regional intergovernmental and non-governmental consultations as part of follow-up to UNCED; the preparation of guidelines for the planning of national mountain development programmes; support for capacity building and new institutional arrangements; and support to networking and information exchange. FAO is helping to focus donor attention on the "Mountain Agenda" and is planning an international meeting on sustainable mountain development.
The FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice
One way in which countries can emphasize a commitment to responsible stewardship of forests is to establish a national code of environmentally sound forest harvesting practice. The FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice produced through a two-year process involving experts in FAO member countries, universities, research institutes, NGOs and the private sector - is a tool to facilitate the work of policy-makers in developing national, regional or local codes of practice. It highlights the wide range of environmentally sound harvesting practices available to forest managers, especially those requiring only a modest level of investment in training and technology . Case-studies are under-way in a number of countries with different partners to demonstrate the code and test its applicability.
Wood-based fuels are an important source of household energy, particularly in the developing countries, and also have a role in industrial energy production. FAO assists in the development of policies, programmes and projects which raise wood fuel productivity and conversion efficiency for traditional and modern energy uses. FAO activities promote new and more appropriate energy-efficient technologies through the exchange of experiences and information across a series of regional wood energy cooperative networks.
FAO's work in forest products marketing is composed of three interrelated elements: assessment of marketing opportunities and practices; development of human resources for forest products marketing; and strengthening the information base to support the planning and operation of forest products marketing. For example, it has helped organize workshops on marketing of sawnwood products for countries in transition to market economies in Hungary and Estonia.
FAO supports regional and subregional approaches to desertification control.
<section>4</section>
Technical cooperation
FAO places its technical expertise in forestry directly at the disposal of member countries through its Field Programme. The FAO Field Programme is supported by a combination of extrabudgetary sources, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), trust funds under the FAO/Government Cooperative Programme, unilateral trust funds, and the World Food Programme (WFP). In addition, FAO's own Technical Cooperation Programme provides funding for urgently needed small-scale, short-term catalytic projects designed to stimulate further activities.
Through partnership arrangements based on the concept of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC), "visiting experts" from national, regional and international centres of high repute work together with FAO staff in programme activities of the Organization for mutual benefit. For example, in 1996 national experts in forest genetics from Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Pakistan and Sri Lanka helped facilitate an FAO workshop on establishing an international network on neem trees.
In 1996, the Forestry Field Programme comprised a total of 179 projects with an annual expenditure of US$60 million.
A key feature of the Field Programme is its interrelationship with the technical work undertaken by staff at FAO headquarters and in the regional and subregional offices who backstop field projects and ensure two-way exchanges of expertise and experience.
Field projects are executed in diverse country situations and respond to varying needs but, across the board, forestry field projects are moving increasingly from technical assistance towards technical cooperation in line with the goal of building up national self-reliance. A basic condition for achieving this objective is the appropriate managerial, technical and institutional capacities in the country concerned.
Several projects are currently under : way to strengthen national planning capability - an example of. this is an Asia and the Pacific - regional project that has provided training in many aspects of forestry planning, including project formulation and incorporation of environmental impact assessment. In Ecuador, an FAO-assisted project is supporting the implementation of the country's national forestry programme (see box on National forest programmes). An FAO interregional project for participatory upland conservation and development is testing participatory planning methods in five countries.
An example of FAO's field work in: the development of forest plantations is the Asia and the Pacific regional project "improved productivity of man-made forests through application of technological advances in tree breeding and propagation (FORTIP)". An important aspect of the project is the establishment of twinning programmes between centres of excellence both within and outside the region.
FAO has helped develop field projects in a number of countries (for example, Turkey and Yemen) to encourage the integration of forestry considerations into urban planning and to promote urban and pert-urban forestry initiatives.
An example of FAO's work in the development of wood energy is the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia, grouping 15 Asian countries. The current phase of the project is promoting improved wood energy systems that could become competitive with alternative energy sources.
The FAO/UNDP/GEF project for Institutional support to East African biological diversity, completed in late 1996, helped strengthen regional institutions active in conservation, developed human resources and fostered regional awareness and cooperation in Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda.
Forestry Field Programme 1996
Facilitating investment in forest development
Through its Investment Centre Division, FAO provides a range of services aimed at assisting interested countries in mobilizing investment in forest development and at enhancing investment performance. Work typically begins with a review of forest sector policy and culminates in project formulation and presentation of project proposals to potential funding sources.
The Investment Centre Division has forestry specialists, natural resource planners an