<title>FOREST HARVESTING IN NATURAL FORESTS OF THE CONGO. Forest harvesting in natural forests of the Republic of the Congo </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
After the UN Conference on the Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, many countries realised the important role of forests for their economic, social and environmental development. The principles for Sustainable Forest Management have been introduced, forest legislation and regulations reformed accordingly, and institutions and forest administrations strengthened, thus allowing the implementation and enforcement of law.
At the same time, the forest products industry received more recognition and responsibility as important partner in the conservation of forest resources through their wise use. Concession holders had to realise that they could not just have the advantages of the forests without also taking care of the long-standing values of this resource. Forest management plans were to be adopted and implemented with the contribution and participation of all stakeholders.
Harvesting for timber is an important step in the management of forests. Through its recently presented Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice, FAO is assisting member countries, institutions and forest companies to improve this activity and lower its impact on soil and the remaining timber stands. In addition, FAO has commissioned case studies to examine at a practical level the effects of the Code. The objective of this particular study was to analyse the various phases of forest operations related to harvesting and to compare the results with the recommendations of the FAO Model Code, testing its applicability and aiming to promote reduced impact forest harvesting systems and techniques.
It was found that harvesting performance can be improved in many respects and, at the same time, harvesting impacts can be reduced. It is hoped that this case study will have a demonstrative effect in the country and in companies interested in introducing sustainable forest management practices.
The collaboration of the Ministry of Water and Forests in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo, together with those responsible in the private company Société Congolaise des Bois (SOCOBOIS) in Dolisie and the staff of the FAO Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch in conducting this case study is highly appreciated.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department, FAO
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is primarily the result of field and office work by Robert Scharpenberg, FAO, Forestry Department. In the Republic of Congo, work was performed jointly with Albert Essereke and Pierre Ekiama, Ministry of Water and Forests. The enterprise "Société Congolaise des Bois" (SOCOBOIS) was instrumental in initiating this co-operative project. Technical editing was by Donald Nearhood. All photographs are by Robert Scharpenberg.
SYMBOLS
cm Centimetre
ha Hectare
km Kilometre
m Metre
m^2 Square metre
m^3 Cubic metre
min Minute
r Wood recovery
V Volume
ABBREVIATIONS
dbh Diameter at Breast Height (1.30 m)
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
SOCOBOIS Société Congolaise des Bois
<section>2</section>
SUMMARY
The report presents findings of a case study on forest harvesting in natural forest of the Congo. It is part of a series of case studies published by FAO in the field of forest harvesting. This study is the first one carried out in collaboration with a private industrial enterprise.
The overall objective of the study is to contribute to the development of sustainable forest management in the tropics through the establishment of credible data on forest harvesting practices and harvesting impacts in tropical high forests.
The study aims at the establishment of reliable data on a ground harvesting system in the tropics, using power saws, crawler tractors and wheeled skidders. The study has been carried out in co-operation with a large private contractor operating a concession in the Republic of Congo. The concession consists of approximately 150,000 hectare of closed-canopy, broad-leaved forest located in the Chaillu Massif in southern Congo, at the border to Gabon. The annually harvested area is approximately 15,000 hectare. Annual rainfalls in the region average approximately 1,800 mm.
The case study consists of a study inventory, a harvesting performance study and a harvesting impact assessment. The size of the study area is 150 ha, subdivided into three harvesting compartments of 50 ha each. The terrain is slightly mountainous, with water courses and seasonal swampy areas between elevations. The average harvesting intensity is only 5-6 m^3 net log volume or approximately one tree per hectare. The main commercial species is Okoumé (Aucoumea klaineana), which is a medium density timber and is used for the production of peeled veneer, mainly for plywood. The low concentration of harvestable trees played an important role in harvesting efficiency and site impact.
The study inventory of all trees revealed an average density of 455 trees per hectare greater than 10 cm dbh, of which 3.3% (15 trees) is Okoumé. The proportion of Okoumé is significantly increasing in higher diameter classes. During harvesting operations, all Okoumé trees above 80 cm dbh and showing adequate stem quality were felled and removed.
The wood volume of 96 Okoumé logs from 93 trees harvested in the study area was computed in order to establish losses during felling and bucking. The average net volume of all 96 logs is 5.8 m^3. The total recovery, expressed as net log volume compared to the standing stem volume (including stump, up to the first branch of the crown) is 70%.
Out of the study area, three well defined stands of 59.5 hectare total were selected for the harvesting impact assessment. The total wood volume felled and removed from this area is 345.6 m^3 net log volume, the average skidding distance is 403 meters. Crawler tractors were used for short hauls and for concentrating logs while wheeled skidders were used for the long haul to the landing.
Damages to the residual stand occur during felling, skidtrail construction and log skidding, and were classified for study as: crown damages, bark damages and uprooted or broken trees. Felling damages were recorded on 30 felling sites. The average damage frequency is 17.7 damaged trees per felled tree. Expressed in terms of damages per recovered log volume, this is approximately 3 damaged trees per cubicmetre removed. Damage to residual Okoumé trees is 3.3% with the majority of damaged stems in the higher dbh classes. The total number of felling damages of all trees is 17.3 per hectare.
Skidding damages occur with an average frequency of 11.5 trees per hectare. The proportion of Okoumé damaged by skidding is 2.8%. On average 212 trees are damaged per kilometre skidtrail, of which 5.9 are Okoumé, again concentrated in the higher dbh classes. 46% of all skidding damaged trees were fully or partly uprooted. The average number of skidding damages per felled tree is 11.8. This equals an average of two damaged trees per cubicmetre removed net log volume.
In total, the number of felling and skidding damages per hectare is 29, the number of damages per felled tree is 30 and the number of damages per cubicmetre net log volume removed is 5. The overall damage frequency for Okoumé in all diameter classes is 7.2%, and of those trees 40-80 cm dbh (immediate future crop trees) is 9%. The damage frequency for all species and size classes is 6.3%.
The soil disturbance survey revealed a total disturbed area of 8.4% of the annual coupe area. Felling sites account for 3.8%, skidtrails for 2.7%, secondary roads for 1.0%, primary roads for 0.7% and landings for estimated 0.2%. Other facilities such as worker's camps, workshops and the private airport are not regarded since they are used as the infrastructure of several annual coupes. A more detailed soil survey on felling sites, skidtrails and landings, using two disturbance classes (depending whether mineral soil is slightly or fully exposed), shows that 0.9% of the annual coupe is seriously disturbed by skidtrails and landings and other 5.8% is slightly disturbed by felling sites and skidtrails.
Under the prevailing conditions, the observed forest operation could be called "low impact" by definition due to the low removal rate of approximately one tree per hectare. However, as with any harvest operation gains are possible toward the objective of sustainable forest practice by placing high priority on harvest planning and assessment.
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION
Purpose
The importance of the private sector for forest sector development is increasingly recognised by governments and international organisations. Industry is more and more involved not only in timber extraction, but also in medium and long term forest planning and management.
Long term sustainable wood production over a number of cutting cycles requires a well-planned venture that includes minimisation of damages to the remaining stand. In the past, the main concern has been with the performance of the harvesting techniques and the equipment. With growing awareness of the limited resources and the fragility of forest systems, it has become obvious that the knowledge of harvesting impacts on forests is very limited.
The FAO Forest Products Division therefore initiated a series of case studies on harvesting techniques and impacts in tropical forests. Field work for the first study was carried out in February and July 1995 in close collaboration with a private forest industry enterprise and the Ministry of Water and Forests of the Republic of Congo. The work was done jointly by Albert Essereke and Pierre Ekiama with the Ministry of Water and Forests in Brazzaville, Congo and by Robert Scharpenberg with the FAO Forest Products Division in Rome, Italy. This report was prepared by Robert Scharpenberg.
Objectives and scope
The overall objective of this case study is to contribute to the development of sustainable forest management in the tropics through the establishment of credible data on forest harvesting practices and harvesting impacts in tropical high forest.
The study consists of three parts: (a) study inventory, (b) harvesting performance study, and (c) harvesting impact assessment. A wood recovery analysis is included in the harvesting performance study. The harvesting impact assessment includes an evaluation of the road and skidtrail network, a harvesting damage survey, and a simple soil disturbance evaluation. A felling time analysis is also presented.
The case study presents a ground harvesting system as currently applied in closed forests of the Congo. The study was conducted on a 150 ha closed broad-leaved forest that is part of a 140,000 ha concession area located in southern Congo.
<section>4</section>
LOCATION OF THE STUDY
The Republic of Congo lies along the equator, stretching from the Atlantic coastline into central Africa. Two and a half million people inhabit 34 million hectares of land. The climate is tropical with an annual rainfall of about 1,800 mm and a relatively dry and cool season from May to September. Rainfall occurs from October to May although there is often a short dry period in January. According to the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 1990, forest cover of the Congo is 58.2% (19.8 million ha). More than 98% of this is closed forest.
Figure 3-1: Location of the case study
The main economic centre and the only seaport of the country is Pointe Noire. The capital Brazzaville is located about 500 km east of Pointe Noire on the Congo River. Most of the population is found in the south, along the railway line from Brazzaville to Pointe Noire.
The production facilities of the forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS (Société Congolaise des Bois) are located in Dolisie in the south of the Republic of Congo, about 400 kilometres west of Brazzaville (Figure 3-1). Dolisie is the third largest town of the Congo and capital of the district Niari. In Dolisie, the railway line Brazzaville-Pointe Noire (Atlantic ocean) meets the national road Gabon-Angola. Dolisie was the centre of commercial wood business from 1930 to the 1970s. Due to the decline of forest resources in the vicinity of the city, most industry enterprises have reduced their activities or moved to new locations. Presently SOCOBOIS is the most important industrial enterprise of the district. It employs a total of about 700 workers.
Wood industry
The forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS (Société Congolaise des Bois) was established in 1964 by a German wood processing company. The main products of SOCOBOIS are peeled and sliced veneer, sawn timber, and plywood. Veneer and sawn timber are produced mainly for European export markets. The total annual roundwood intake is approximately 70,000 m^3, of which an average of 38,000 m^3 is harvested in the concession of the enterprise. The remaining volume is purchased from small forest enterprises.
The production facilities of the enterprise consist of two peeling lines (of which one was replaced in 1995), two slicers, one bandmill, two continuous veneer dryers and various veneer sorting and jointing lines. The factory is directly connected to the railway system.
Production concentrates on peeled veneer for export. Orders are mainly for sized Okoumé veneer. The annual production of SOCOBOIS in export quality is estimated at 2,300 m^3 peeled veneer, 600,000 m^2 sliced veneer, and 350 m^3 sawn timber. Sawn timber and plywood are also produced for the local market. Processing residues are either used in the steam plant or sold to local charcoal producers in the surrounding area.
The most important species for veneer production is Okoumé (Aucoumea klaineana), which is a relatively lightweight, homogenous species highly suitable for peeling. Another species used for veneer production is Limba (Terminalia superba).
Concession
The forest concession of SOCOBOIS is located in the Chaillu massif in the district of Lekoumou/Bambama at the southern border of Gabon (Figure 3-1). The forests are on both sides of the river Ogoué, which is the largest stream in Gabon. The transport distance between the concession area and the factory in Dolisie is approximately 500 km.
The mountains of the Chaillu massif reach elevations of 400-900 m. In the concession the altitude is estimated at 400 m. Because of their limited fertility, soils in the Chaillu mountains are less suitable for permanent agriculture and the land still has a relatively high degree of forest cover.
The current concession consists of 150,000 ha of broad-leaved forest, of which 13,163 ha (9%) grow on permanent or temporary swamps. The concession area is part of the district of Bambama at the southern border of Gabon where approximately 8,000 people live. The majority of the inhabitants depend on non-wood forest products such as game, fish, and edible plants. Small scale trade and new settlements are occurring along the forest roads.
Mainly, because of a lack of appropriate experience, only 14% of the employees of the SOCOBOIS company are residents of the concession area. Other areas of Congo provide the remainder of the workers. Some nearby villages have become suppliers of manioc and other foodstuffs for the company's temporary basecamp. The basecamp consists of a dormitory for the forest workers, a sickroom, a well for drinking water, a workshop, a carpenter shop, a small sawmill, and office buildings.
No previous commercial harves-ting has been done in the concession. The most important species for harvesting is Okoumé. Other potentially commercial species include (trade names): Movingui, Olon, Ayele, Oboto, Moabi, Dibetou, Niove, Padouk, and Douka. The commercial value of a species in this concession is determined by its suitability for veneer or sawn timber production. The quantity of the species mentioned above is too small for a continuous supply to the mill and the quality of the stems is not always suitable.
The reconnaissance report by the Forestry Administration authorises SOCOBOIS to utilise an area of approximately 15,000 ha annually for a period of ten years. This allows the company to harvest up to 45,000 m^3 per year. The current concession will end in 1997.
<section>5</section>
HARVESTING SYSTEM
Harvesting is carried out by chainsaw felling in combination with a ground skidding system and temporary landings. In this chapter, harvesting operations such as planning, road construction, felling, extraction, landing operations, and transportation are introduced.
Planning
Regulations and limitations
Legal guidelines for forest harvesting in the Congo are set in the `Code Forestier' (Law No. 004/74 of 04.01.1974) The code, which deals with administrative, technical, and legal instructions, provides the legal framework for all forest operations and is currently under review. Harvesting in the concession of SOCOBOIS is limited by minimum diameter requirements. The currently applied minimum diameter for Okoumé is 80 cm. After this first harvesting, the concession is to be closed down for a number of years in order to regenerate. Presently, an enterprise does not automatically have the opportunity to re-harvest a concession.
Harvesting is further limited by weather conditions. Although harvesting operations are allowed during all months of the year, production usually declines during the rainy season (October-November and March-April) due to difficult terrain conditions and inaccessibility of parts of the forests. Road construction is normally interrupted during the rainy season.
An economically limiting factor for harvesting is the considerable transport distance of approximately 500 km from the forests to the mill site. The harvest manager has to ensure that only roundwood of suitable quality for the production process is transported to the mill.
Pre-harvest survey
The concession (150,000 ha) is divided into "annual coupes". An annual coupe is the area foreseen for harvesting in a certain year. A pre-harvest survey, called a "prospection" is usually carried out 2 years before harvesting commences. Only harvestable trees (above 80 cm dbh) are counted and the number of harvestable trees per compartment is noted. It is a requirement of the concession license that the results of the prospection must be submitted to the forest authorities, before obtaining a harvest permit.
The case study was carried out in the 1995 coupe "VMA95" (VMA = Volume Maximum Annuel) which consists of 15,550 ha of primary closed forests. The topography of the area is characterised by hills with maximum slopes of 40-50% on short sections. The hills are separated by small creeks and temporary swampy areas (Figure 5-2).
Coupe VMA95 (15,550 ha) is subdivided into 311 harvesting compartments of 50 ha each. The orientation of the grid is south-north and compartments are identified by rows (A-V) and columns (1-117). The boundaries of these compartments are established during the pre-harvest survey by the prospection team. Each compartment is approximately 500 m x 1,000 m. The division into compartments is carried out by a group of 7-8 men with machetes who clear all boundaries of shrubs at the rate of about three km per day.
The most important species being harvested in the concession is Okoumé. Due to their limited occurrence, all other commercial species have relatively little importance. The number of harvestable Okoumé trees in each of the 311 harvesting compartments ranges from less than 10 to more than 100 trees or, from 0.2 to 2.0 harvestable trees per hectare.
According to the pre-harvest survey (prospection), the distribution of harvestable trees in the 1995 coupe is as follows:
Table 4-1: Harvestable trees in annual coupe VMA95 (15,550 ha)
Species
Scientific Name
Total Number of Trees
Trees per ha
Trees per compartment (50 ha)
Okoumé
Movingui
Padouk
Moabi
Dibetou
Douka
Longhi
Niove
Oboto
Bilinga
Bosse
Sapelli
Aucoumea klaineana
Distemonanthus sp.
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Baillonella toxi-sp-erma
Lovoa trichilioi-des
Tieghemella africana
Gambeya africana
Staudtia stipitata
Mammea africana
Nauclea diderric-hii
Guarea sp.
Entandophragma cylindricum
TOTAL
According to this survey, the average density of harvestable trees in coupe VMA95 is less than one tree per hectare.
Maps
The following maps were available for harvest planning and operations:
· the Congolese national geographic map (1:200000);
· the VMA map (1:20000), prepared by the enterprise at the annual coupe level. It shows compartment boundaries, the number of harvestable trees by species and water courses;
· the road planning map (1:50000), prepared by the enterprise at the annual coupe level. It shows the existing and the planned primary and secondary roads, the compartment boundaries, the location of landings, and main water courses.
A major challenge for the enterprise is presented by the lack of topographic maps. Maps at a scale between 1:10000 and 1:50000 showing forest cover, important topographic features, contour lines, stream locations, and protected areas would be of great assistance.
Roads
The objectives of a proper road layout are convenient access to the forest, minimisation of soil erosion, and minimisation of the area required for roads and landings. The basis for the transportation and extraction layout is the VMA map containing the number of harvestable trees in each compartment. An effort to reduce haul distances is made through a road layout oriented toward the compartments with the highest timber density. Since topographic information from public maps is either not available or unreliable, an extensive reconnaissance of the terrain by an experienced forest engineer and an assistant is required. The engineer develops the road layout directly in the forest. The design follows the contour of the land as much as possible and attempts to avoid streams wherever possible. The resulting quality of the road layout is quite good.
Second pre-harvest survey and harvesting plan
Shortly before harvesting commences, a second survey of harvestable trees is done by a second crew consisting of 5-6 men. From this survey the operation plan for the felling crews is developed. The number and location of harvestable trees is reported to the felling operation manager, who decides the deployment of the felling crews.
Road construction
Road planning and construction are done entirely by the enterprise. The machinery available for road construction consists of crawler tractors (Caterpillar D6 and D7), graders (120G/120B), loaders (966C), and trucks (Benz 1113). Road construction is normally accomplished one year in advance of harvesting in order to allow the roads to dry. The following types of facilities exist within the concession area:
· access roads (long term, more than 10 years)
· primary haul roads (long term, during the concession)
· secondary haul roads (short term, up to three years)
· skidding trails (short term, few days up to several months)
· landings (short term, up to several months)
The trees on the road construction site are marked, felled, and deposited alongside the road. Commercial trees are crosscut and integrated into the production process. The bulldozer then starts clearing the site and preparing the roadbed. Simple wooden culverts are constructed for small seasonal water flows crossing the road. They consist of three logs, of which two are the basic layer with the third log on top. Since gravel is not available in the vicinity of the concession, the road base consists of uncompacted natural soil only.
The road carriageway is shaped by graders. The only available surfacing material is laterite. With few exceptions, the maximum road gradient in the concession does not exceed 15%. Although roadside ditches are used on slopes, no cross-drains are applied to the surface to channel water away from the road structure. Surface erosion is a common problem during the rainy season, which results in considerable maintenance effort throughout the year. It is worth mentioning that surface erosion is not limited to steep sections. It also occurs on flat terrain and seems to be related to the absence of a sealed surface rather than to the road gradient. The enterprise also maintains the national road, which is used for long-distance log transport.
The average cleared width for main haul roads in the forest is 40 m, while the carriageway does not exceed 7-10 m. Secondary roads (feeder roads) are cleared to a width of 25 m and the carriageway is not more than 4-7 m. The cleared width for skidtrails usually does not exceed 4 m. This width reflects the minimum space required for skidder and tractor operations.
Harvesting
Felling and topping
Felling is carried out by a felling crew consisting of three persons: chainsaw operator, helper, and guide. The chainsaw operator wears personal safety equipment (safety boots and helmet) to protect himself against falling branches and other hazards. The guide identifies harvestable trees and determines the next felling site. He also provides information on the location and number of felled trees to the skidding crew. Before felling begins, the helper cleans the bark along the sawkerf to remove sand and stony material.
The chainsaw (Stihl 070) is usually equipped with a 75 or 90 cm blade. Felling does not utilise special techniques such as sidenotches, undercuts, or auxiliary equipment such as wedges to determine felling direction. The operator starts in the middle of the stem cutting the entire cross section. He continues with the buttresses, starting with the one in the assumed felling direction. However, due to difficult felling conditions the resulting, actual direction of fall is highly variable. The falling tree, climbers, and re-springing neighbouring trees pulled down by climbers, make felling dangerous and stressful for the crew.
After felling, topping of the crown is done by the helper. Some timber breakage occurs due to inappropriate cutting technique, especially if difficult "hangers" must be cut. For legal reasons and work control, the logs and the stump are numbered and recorded with species and the number of the harvesting compartment.
The average performance of a felling crew is 20 trees per day; the range is from 13 to 30 trees. Normally the enterprise operates three felling crews simultaneously, which amounts to an average of 60 felled trees per day. Under the assumption of an average volume per tree of 6 m^3, this is a total of 360 m^3 prepared per day (net log volume).
Extraction
Skidding is carried out by two Caterpillar D6H tractors and two Caterpillar 528 wheel skidders that are used in various combinations. Usually a crawler tractor works together with a wheel skidder. In this combination, the extraction of the logs is carried out in two phases. The crawler tractor first pulls the logs directly, or by winch, from the felling site to the skidtrail. This produces a concentration of logs at the skidtrail. During the second phase, the wheel skidder is used for long distance skidding; pulling the logs to the landing. All tractors and skidders are equipped with front blades and single cable drums. Only wheel skidders have rear fenders. Cables are used only for short inhaul distances, up to 15 m.
Skidtrail planning is done by a guide during operations. The guide locates felled trees and marks a way for the skidder. The most important criterion for the layout of skidtrails is avoiding water and swampy areas. Wet soil bearing capacity is not sufficient for heavy equipment and negative environmental impacts may occur.
Skidtrails can be established by both the D6H and the 528. The skidders avoid trees above 30-40 cm dbh during skidtrail construction. The skidder usually drives within 5-20 m of the felled tree and pulls the log with the winch. The maximum skidding load is usually two logs (gross volume 12-15 m^3. Logs are skidded either to a road or to a temporary landing.
Landing operations
Landing operations consist of crosscutting, sorting, measuring, and loading logs. Since harvesting in the concession is concentrated mainly on a single species and one product (Okoumé logs in veneer quality), landing operations are rather simple and standardised.
Depending on the distance between the harvesting site and the next road, landings are established either directly alongside the road or at temporary sites in the forest. A secondary road must then connect the temporary landing site with the main road.
The logs are crosscut upon arrival at the landing. Defects at the log-ends that occur due to felling and skidding and possible decay are removed. Then all logs are measured, re-numbered and marked with paint for later recognition. Measurement is carried out by one person using a meter stick and volume tables. Volume calculation is based on the mean log diameter. Spraying of fungicides and insecticides is also done to protect against damage.
Logs are crosscut to a maximum possible transport length of 15 m. Usually the log lengths range from 8 to 15 m. Logs are loaded onto trucks by a wheeled front-end loader. Further log length optimisation takes place after transportation to the log yard of the mill.
Transport
Transportation of logs to the mill in Dolisie is by heavy duty trucks (Benz 1928/2628, payload up to 60 metric tons). A truck-trailer backpack system is used. This allows the truck to carry the trailer while travelling unloaded. The transport distance is approximately 500 km. Approximately 100 km of this distance is tarmac surface and the rest either bare soil or a layer of laterite. The national road used for the long distance transport crosses the Chaillu mountains; gradients of 12-15 % occur on short sections. Due to the relatively long transport distance, difficult road conditions, and the high risk of accidents, the enterprise puts emphasis on proper road maintenance throughout the year. This reduces repair cost for trucks and increases reliability of operations.
<section>6</section>
METHODOLOGY
The case study consists of three major parts: (a) study inventory, (b) harvesting performance study, and (c) harvesting impact assessment. A wood recovery analysis is included in the harvesting performance study. The harvesting impact assessment includes an evaluation of the road and skidtrail network, a harvesting damage survey, and a simple soil disturbance evaluation.
Study area
The study was carried out in annual coupe VMA95, which consists of 15,550 ha of broad-leaved forest. This forest is part of a 150,000 ha concession of the forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS. Out of annual coupe VMA95, a 150 ha study area was selected. The study area consists of three adjacent harvest compartments H108, H109, and H110 (Figure 5-1 Layout). These compartments are located close to the main haul road.
Figure 5-1: Study area layout
For the harvesting impact assessment an additional zoning of the study area was necessary. Three zones were selected with all three clearly delimited by natural terrain features such as creeks or valleys and by the main road. Zone boundaries are at the centre of water courses. The establishment of these limited zones allows clear attribution of harvesting impacts to harvesting performance data. The total area of Zones A, B, and C is 59.5 hectares excluding the main road. All of the area is forested (Figure 5-2).
Figure 5-2: Study area layout and selected Zones A, B, C
Study inventory
The study inventory is required for the assessment of harvesting impacts. The inventory was carried out on a total sample area of 20 ha. Ten rectangular strips (Figure 5-3, Strip A-K) of 1,000 x 20 m each were established from south to north by compass. The demarcation of strips was achieved by clearing corridors of shrubs and setting stakes every 50 m. The width of the strips was then measured every 50 m in order to obtain the true inventory area. All trees equal to or greater than 10 cm dbh were recorded, Okoumé separately from all others. The results were grouped in 10 cm classes. The diameter was determined by measuring the girth at breast height; where buttresses occurred, the girth was taken 20 cm above the buttress.
Figure 5-3: Inventory layout
Since the main road crosses the study area, only 9 of the 10 strips were actually forested. The actually stocked and inventoried area is 17.7 hectares.
Volumes
Volume equations were not available for the forests in the study region. In order to obtain an indicator for the standing volume of Okoumé, an equation found in the literature was used. The total stem volume (including bark) equation that has been developed for Okoumé in Gabon^1 is:
Inventory of ha