<title>Global Agricultural Marketing Management. (Marketing and Agribusiness texts - 3)</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This book, Global agricultural marketing management, was prepared by the project Network and Centre for Agricultural Marketing Training in Eastern and Southern Africa. The project, funded by the Government of Japan and executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, was based in Zimbabwe and ran for five years from May 1990. Its overall objective was to strengthen agricultural marketing training in eastern and southern Africa.
Approach and objectives
This book, is one of a series of texts prepared by the Network and Centre. It is written in a style intended to provide both the theory concepts and practice of global agricultural marketing management, with emphasis on the latter. In particular, it provides:
· the theoretical framework for global agricultural marketing management including definitions of marketing, enumerated analysis, marketing planning, the marketing mix and marketing evaluation and control.
· numerous case studies and examples drawn from Eastern and Southern Africa (reflecting the project bias), but not exclusively so.
· details of the many practical procedures and transactions included in global marketing.
The text is primarily designed as a teaching aid for marketing or agribusiness lecturers or trainers and is suitable for post graduate students studying agricultural marketing, agricultural economics, agribusiness, management or business studies; undergraduates studying for the same and students studying for professional qualifications like the Chartered Institute of Marketing diploma. It can also be used as material for short courses, as a refresher or basic text for post graduates, for in service training of managers and as a self learning aid.
The learning process
The learning process is assisted within the text through the provision of a number of learning aids. These are:
· Chapter objectives; Each chapter has specific objectives which prepare the learner for the chapter material and outline the learning outcomes.
· Figures and tables; Each chapter is illustrated with relevant figures and tables which illustrate, encapsulate or summarize the text.
· Examples; Each chapter contains examples which serve to illustrate the text and reinforce understanding of the principles.
· Exercises; Each chapter contains both worked and unworked exercises intended to ensure the learner's understanding of both the concepts and the use of practical techniques involved in global marketing.
· Key terms; Key terms are included at the end of each chapter and are intended to act as an aide-memoire.
· Index; A subject index is included at the end of the text to assist with quick reference.
Additional texts
The text is complemented by an additional set of learning and teaching aids as follows:
· Global Agricultural Marketing Management - Tutors Manual
This text contains all the exercises referred to in the text together with their solutions.
· Transparency Masters
The Transparency Masters contain a series of overhead transparency masters which include all the subject matter, examples, and their solution in summarised or full format. These can be photocopied and used as additional student notes.
Authors and acknowledgements
Steve Carter was FAO project director, previous to which he taught marketing at universities in the United Kingdom, India and Africa and consulted in many developing countries around the world.
The author, in particular, acknowledges the contribution of those who were directly involved in the production of the texts either in providing subject matter, print production, comments or suggestions. He is indebted to the following colleagues and organisations:
Tapera Baidon, Zimbabwe
Orlean Chimbewa, Zimbabwe
Ellen Simbi, Zimbabwe
Edward Seidler, FAO, Rome
World Bank, Washington, DC, USA
Denise C.B. Cheng, United Kingdom
International Trade Centre UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva, Switzerland
S. Carter
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction To Global Marketing
Chapter Objectives
Structure Of The Chapter
The evolution of global marketing
The international economic system
Impetus to global marketing involvement
Planning to meet the opportunities and challenges of global marketing
Framework for international analysis
Product life/market life cycle
Chapter Summary
Key Terms
Review Questions
Review Question Answers
References
A look at the appropriate figures, (for example The World Development Report by the World Bank) will indicate that the world is becoming increasingly interdependent for its economic progress. In 1954, in the USA, for instance, imports were only one percent of GNP, but in 1984 they had risen to 10%. In food crops, while developing countries trade in coffee, cocoa, cotton and sugar actually declined in value during the 1980s, developing countries as a group experienced annual export growth rates of 4 to 11% in categories like processed fruit and vegetables, fresh processed fish products, feed stuffs and oil seeds. High value food product exports in 1990 totalled approximately $144 billion, the same as crude petroleum, representing 5% of world commodity trade. In 1990, more than twenty Less Developed Countries (LDCs) had exports of high value foods exceeding $500 million including countries like Brazil, China, Thailand, India and Senegal.
Terms such as "global village" and "world economy" have become very fashionable. Marketing goods and services on a global scale can happen in an "engineered" way, but often it is as a result of good and meticulous planning. For example, in order to stave off potential famine, the United Nation's World Food Programme (WFP) may purchase maize from Zimbabwe and distribute it in Tanzania, Malawi and Kenya. This "engineered" international marketing transaction may benefit Zimbabwe, without Zimbabwe having to prospect markets. Most international transactions are not like this. Most are clearly planned, involving meticulous attention to global social and economic differences and/or similarities in product, price, promotion, distribution and socio/economic/legal requirements.
Chapter Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are:
· To provide an understanding of the factors which have led to the growth of internationalism and globalisation
· To produce a description of the major concepts and themes on which the subject of global marketing is based
· To describe what is involved in planning for global marketing.
Structure Of The Chapter
The chapter starts by looking at the evolution of a firm's orientation from primarily a domestic producer to a global player. It then goes on to describe the major factors that have led to global marketing, including both economic and social. Finally the chapter examines the planning mechanism necessary to take account of important differences and/or similarities when marketing goods and services internationally.
The evolution of global marketing
Whether an organisation markets its goods and services domestically or internationally, the definition of marketing still applies. However, the scope of marketing is broadened when the organisation decides to sell across international boundaries, this being primarily due to the numerous other dimensions which the organisation has to account for. For example, the organisation's language of business may be "English", but it may have to do business in the "French language". This not only requires a translation facility, but the French cultural conditions have to be accounted for as well. Doing business "the French way" may be different from doing it "the English way". This is particularly true when doing business with the Japanese.
Let us, firstly define "Marketing" and then see how, by doing marketing across multinational boundaries, differences, where existing, have to be accounted for.
S. Carter defines marketing as:
"The process of building lasting relationships through planning, executing and controlling the conception, pricing, promotion and distribution of ideas, goods and services to create mutual exchange that satisfy individual and organisational needs and objectives".
The long held tenants of marketing are "customer value", "competitive advantage" and "focus". This means that organisations have to study the market, develop products or services that satisfy customer needs and wants, develop the "correct" marketing mix and satisfy its own objectives as well as giving customer satisfaction on a continuing basis. However, it became clear in the 1980s that this definition of marketing was too narrow. Preoccupation with the tactical workings of the marketing mix led to neglect of long term product development, so "Strategic Marketing" was born. The focus was shifted from knowing everything about the customer, to knowing the customer in a context which includes the competition, government policy and regulations, and the broader economic, social and political macro forces that shape the evolution of markets. In global marketing terms this means forging alliances (relationships) or developing networks, working closely with home country government
officials and industry competitors to gain access to a target market. Also the marketing objective has changed from one of satisfying organisational objectives to one of "stakeholder" benefits - including employees, society, government and so on. Profit is still essential but not an end in itself.
Strategic marketing according to Wensley (1982) has been defined as:
"Initiating, negotiating and managing acceptable exchange relationships with key interest groups or constituencies, in the pursuit of sustainable competitive advantage within specific markets, on the basis of long run consumer, channel and other stakeholder franchise".
Whether one takes the definition of "marketing" or "strategic marketing", "marketing" must still be regarded as both a philosophy and a set of functional activities. As a philosophy embracing customer value (or satisfaction), planning and organising activities to meet individual and organisational objectives, marketing must be internalised by all members of an organisation, because without satisfied customers the organisation will eventually die. As a set of operational activities, marketing embraces selling, advertising, transporting, market research and product development activities to name but a few. It is important to note that marketing is not just a philosophy or one or some of the operational activities. It is both. In planning for marketing, the organisation has to basically decide what it is going to sell, to which target market and with what marketing mix (product, place, promotion, price and people). Although these tenents of marketing planning must apply
anywhere, when marketing across national boundaries, the difference between domestic and international marketing lies almost entirely in the differences in national environments within which the global programme is conducted and the differences in the organisation and programmes of a firm operating simultaneously in different national markets.
It is recognised that in the "postmodern" era of marketing, even the assumptions and long standing tenents of marketing like the concepts of "consumer needs", "consumer sovereignty", "target markets" and "product/market processes" are being challenged. The emphasis is towards the emergence of the "customising consumer", that is, the customer who takes elements of the market offerings and moulds a customised consumption experience out of these. Even further, post modernisim, posts that the consumer who is the consumed, the ultimate marketable image, is also becoming liberated from the sole role of a consumer and is becoming a producer. This reveals itself in the desire for the consumer to become part of the marketing process and to experience immersion into "thematic settings" rather than merely to encounter products. So in consuming food products for example, it becomes not just a case of satisfying hunger needs, but also can be rendered as an image - producing act. In the
post modern market place the product does not project images, it fills images. This is true in some foodstuffs. The consumption of "designer water" or "slimming foods" is a statement of a self image, not just a product consuming act.
Acceptance of postmodern marketing affects discussions of products, pricing, advertising, distribution and planning. However, given the fact that this textbook is primarily written with developing economies in mind, where the environmental conditions, consumer sophistication and systems are not such that allow a quantum leap to postmodernism, it is intended to mention the concept in passing. Further discussion on the topic is available in the accompanying list of readings.
When organisations develop into global marketing organisations, they usually evolve into this from a relatively small export base. Some firms never get any further than the exporting stage. Marketing overseas can, therefore, be anywhere on a continuum of "foreign" to "global". It is well to note at this stage that the words "international", "multinational" or "global" are now rather outdated descriptions. In fact "global" has replaced the other terms to all intents and purposes. "Foreign" marketing means marketing in an environment different from the home base, it's basic form being "exporting". Over time, this may evolve into an operating market rather than a foreign market. One such example is the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) in Eastern and Southern Africa where involved countries can trade inter-regionally under certain common modalities. Another example is the Cold Storage Company of Zimbabwe.
Case 1.1 Cold Storage Company Of Zimbabwe
The Cold Storage Company (CSC) of Zimbabwe, evolved in 1995, out of the Cold Storage Commission. The latter, for many years, had been the parastatal (or nationalised company) with the mandate to market meat in Zimbabwe. However, the CSC lost its monopoly under the Zimbabwean Economic Reform Programme of 1990-95, which saw the introduction of many private abattoirs. During its monopoly years the CSC had built five modern abattoirs, a number of which were up to European Union rating. In addition, and as a driving force to the building of EU rated abattoirs, the CSC had obtained a 9000 tonnes beef quota in the EU. Most of the meat went out under the auspices of the Botswana Meat Commission. For many years, the quota had been a source of volume and revenue, a source which is still continuing. In this way, the CSC's exporting of beef to the EU is such that the EU can no longer be considered as " Foreign" but an "Operating" market.
0 In "global marketing" the modus operandi is very different. Organisations begin to develop and run operations in the targeted country or countries outside of the domestic one. In practice, organisations evolve and Table 1.1 outlines a typology of terms which describes the characteristics of companies at different stages in the process of evolving from domestic to global enterprises.
The four stages are as follows:
1. Stage one: domestic in focus, with all activity concentrated in the home market. Whilst many organisations can survive like this, for example raw milk marketing, solely domestically oriented organisations are probably doomed to long term failure.
2. Stage two: home focus, but with exports (ethnocentric). Probably believes only in home values, but creates an export division. Usually ripe for the taking by stage four organisations.
3. Stage three: stage two organisations which realise that they must adapt their marketing mixes to overseas operations. The focus switches to multinational (polycentric) and adaption becomes paramount.
4. Stage four: global organisations which create value by extending products and programmes and focus on serving emerging global markets (geocentric). This involves recognising that markets around the world consist of similarities and differences and that it is possible to develop a global strategy based on similarities to obtain scale economies, but also recognises and responds to cost effective differences. Its strategies are a combination of extension, adaptation and creation. It is unpredictable in behaviour and always alert to opportunities.
There is no time limit on the evolution process. In some industries, like horticulture, the process can be very quick.
Table 1.1 Stages of domestic to global evolution
Management emphasis
Stage one Domestic
Stage two International
Stage three Multinational
Stage four Global
Focus
Domestic
Ethnocentric
Polycentric
Geocentric
Marketing strategy
Domestic
Extension
Adaption
Extension
Structure
Domestic
International
Worldwide area
Adaption creation matrix/mixed
Management style
Domestic
Centralised top down
Decentralised bottom up
Integrated
Manufacturing stance
Mainly domestic
Mainly domestic
Host country
Lowest cost worldwide
Investment policy
Domestic
Domestic used worldwide
Mainly in each host country
Cross subsidization
Performance evaluation
Domestic market share
Against home country market share
Each host country market share
Worldwide
Factors which have led to internationalisation
There have been many underlying forces, concepts and theories which have emerged as giving political explanation to the development of international trade. Remarkably, despite the trend to world interdependency, some countries have been less involved than others. The USA, for example, has a remarkably poor export record. About 2000 US companies only account for more than 70% of US manufacturer's exports. This has been mainly due to its huge statewide domestic market, which is almost tantamount to "international trade", for example, Californian fruit being sold three thousand kilometres away in New Jersey. Japan has risen fast to dominate the export rankings, with countries of Africa struggling to make a significant mark, mainly because of their emphasis on exporting primary products. This section will briefly examine the forces which have been instrumental in the development of world trade.
Theoretical approaches
These include the theory of comparative advantage described in the book Wealth of Nations (Adam Smith) and David Ricardo), the product trade cycle (Raymond Vernon) and The Business Orientation (Howard Perlmutter).
The theory of comparative advantage:
The theory can be relatively complex and difficult to understand but stated simply this theory is a demonstration (under assumptions) that a country can gain from trade even if it has an absolute disadvantage in the production of all goods, or it can gain from trade even if it has an absolute advantage in the production of all goods. Even though a country has an absolute production advantage it may be better to concentrate on its comparative advantage. To calculate the comparative advantage one has to compare the production ratios, and make the assumption that the one country totally specialises in one product. To maximise the wellbeing of both individuals and countries, countries are better off specialising in their area of competitive advantage and then trading and exchanging with others in the market place. Today there are a variety of spreedsheets that one can use to calculate comparative advantage, one such is that of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
Calculation of comparative advantage is as follows:
Example
It may be assumed that Holland is more efficient in the production of flowers than Kenya. Yet Kenya succeeds in exporting thousands of tonnes of flowers to Europe every year. Kenya flower growers Sulmac and Oserian have achieved legendary reputations, in the supply of fresh cut flowers to Europe, How?
Take the simple two country - two product model of comparative advantage. Europe grows apples and South Africa oranges, these are two products, both undifferentiated and produced with production units which are a mixture of land, labour and capital. To use the same production units South Africa can produce 100 apples and no oranges, and Europe can produce 80 apples and no oranges. At the other extreme South Africa can produce no apples and 50 oranges and Europe no apples and 30 oranges. Now if the two countries specialise and trade the position is as follows:
Product
South Africa
Europe
Production
Imports
Consumers
Production
Imports
Consumers
Apples (000's)
Oranges (000's)
The trading price is
30:14 =2.14 apples
= 1 orange
14:30 = 4.67 oranges
= 1 apple
So in apples, South Africa has an advantage of 1.25 (100/80) but in oranges 1.67 (50/30). So South Africa should concentrate on the production of oranges as its comparative advantage is greatest here. Unfortunately the theory assumes that production costs remain relatively static. However, it is a well known fact that increased volumes result, usually, in lower costs. Indeed, the Boston Consulting Group observed this phenomenon, in the so called "experience curve" effect concept. And it is not only "production" related but "all experience" related; including marketing. The Boston Consulting group observed that as an organisation gains experience in production and marketing the greater the reduction in costs. The theory of comparative advantage also ignores product and programme differentiation. Consumers do not buy products based only on the lowest costs of production. Image, quality, reliability of delivery and other tangible and non tangible factors come into play. Kenyans
may well be prepared to pay extra for imported French or South African wines, as the locally produced paw paw wine may be much inferior.
The product trade cycle:
The model describes the relationship between the product life cycle, trade and investment (see figure 1.1) and is attributable to Venon^1 (1966)
The international product trade cycle model suggests that many products go through a cycle during which high-income, mass consumption countries which are initial exporters, lose their export markets and finally become importers of the product. At the same time other countries, particularly less developed but not exclusively so, shift from being importers to exporters. These stages are reflected in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1 International product trade cycle
From a high income country point of view phase 1 involves exporting, based on domestic product strength and surplus-to phase 2, when foreign production begins, to phase 3 when production in the foreign country becomes competitive, to phase 4 when import competition begins. The assumption behind this cycle is that new products are firstly launched in high income markets because a) there is most potential and b) the product can be tested best domestically near its source of production. Thus new products generally emanate from high income countries and, over time, orders begin to be solicited from lower income countries and so a thriving export market develops. High income country entrepreneurs quickly realise that the markets to which they are selling often have lower production costs and so production is initiated abroad for the new products, so starts the second stage.
In the second stage of the cycle, foreign and high income country production begins to supply the same export market. As foreign producers begin to expand and gain more experience, their competition displaces the high income export production source. At this point high income countries often decide to invest in foreign countries to protect their share. As foreign producers expand, their growing economies of scale make them a competitive source for third country markets where they compete with high income exporters. The final phase of the cycle occurs when the foreign producer achieves such a scale and experience that it starts exporting to the original high income producer at a production cost lower than its original high income producer at a production cost lower than its original high income supplier. High income producers, once enjoying a monopoly in their own market, now face competition at home.
The cycle continues as the production capability in the product extends from other advanced countries to less developed countries at home, then in international trade, and finally, in other advanced countries home markets.
Case 1.2 UK Textiles
There are numerous examples of the International product trade cycle in action. Non more than the textiles industry, specially cotton. In the early and mid twentieth century the UK was a major producer of cotton textile materials, primarily based on its access to cheap raw materials from its Commonwealth countries and its relatively cheap labour. However, its former colonies like India, Pakistan and certain African countries, which were sources of cotton in themselves realised that they had the labour and materials on their doorstep conducive to domestic production. They began to do so. Such was their success in supplying their own huge markets that their production costs dropped dramatically with growing economies of scale.
Soon they were able to support cloth and finished good back to the UK, which by now had experienced growing production costs due to rising labour costs and failing market share. Now the UK has little cotton materials production and it served by many countries over the world, including its former colonies and Commonwealth countries.
Whilst the underlying assumption behind the International Product Trade Cycle is that the cycle begins with the export of new product ideas from high income countries to low income importers, then low income countries begin production of the product etc., things do not always turn out as the cycle suggests. Sometimes a high or even low income exporter may put a product into a high/low income country which is simply unable to respond. In this case, the Trade Cycle ceases to be the underpinning concept. This may be due to a number of factors like lack of access to capital to build the facilities to respond to the import, lack of skills or that the costs of local production cannot get down to the level of costs of the imported product. In this case, product substitution between the exporter and importer may also take place. A classic example of this phenomenon is the case of Zimbabwe Sunsplash fruit juice drinks.
Case 1.3 Sunsplash Zimbabwe
Sunsplash, based in Masvingo, Zimbabwe had, since 1984, processed a variety of fruit juices for the Zimbabwean market. When Zimbabwe embarked on its World Bank sponsored structural adjustment programme in 1990, Zimbabwe steadily moved from a command to a market economy, part of which allowed foreign importers.
In a short space of time, market share for Sunsplash fell from 1 million litres annually to a mere 400 000 litres. On this reduced volume, coupled with higher transport costs, the company simply could not compete and closed its doors in January 1995. However reduction in income and transport costs were not the only problems. Expenses like high interest rates were an inhibiting factor. The company needed to make the transition to aseptic packaging which would alleviate the need for chemical preservations and enhance unrefrigerated shelf life. The new packaging would have greatly enhanced the product and generated export potential. However, cashflow constraints within the holding company, (AFDIS), coupled with high interest rates made the $5,8 million investment unviable.
Orientation of management:
Perlmutter^1 (1967) identified distinctive "orientations" of management of international organisations. His "EPRG" scheme identified four types of attitudes or orientations associated with successive stages in the evolution of international operations.
· Ethnocentrism - home country orientation - exporting surplus.
· Polycentrism - host country orientation - subsidiary operation.
· Regiocentrism - regional orientation - world market strategies.
· Geocentrism - world orientation - world market strategies.
The latter two are based on similarities and differences in markets, capitalising on similarities to obtain cost benefits, but recognising differences.
Market forces and development
Over the last few decades internationalism has grown because of a number of market factors which have been driving development forward, over and above those factors which have been attempting to restrain it. These include market and marketing related variables.
Many global opportunities have arisen because of the clustering of market opportunities worldwide. Organisations have found that similar basic segments exist worldwide and, therefore, can be met with a global orientation. Cotton, as an ingredient in shirtings, suitings, and curtain material can be globally marketed as natural and fashionable. One can see in the streets of New York, London, Kuala Lumpar or Harare, youth with the same style and brand of basketball shirts or American Football shorts. Coca Cola can be universally advertised as "Adds Life" or appeal to a basic instinct " You can't beat the Feeling" or "Come alive" as with the case of Pepsi. One can question "what feeling?", but that is not the point. The more culturally unbounded the product is, the more a global clustering can take place and the more a standardised approach can be made in the design of marketing programmes.
This standardised approach can be aided and abetted with technology. Technology has been one of the single most powerful driving forces to internationalism. Rarely is technology culturally bound. A new pesticide is available almost globally to any agricultural organisation as long as it has the means to buy it. Computers in agriculture and other applications are used universally with IBM and Macintosh becoming household names. The need to recoup large costs of research and development in new products may force organisations to look at global markets to recoup their investment. This is certainly true of many veterinary products. Global volumes allow continuing investment in R & D, thus helping firms to improve quality. Farm machinery, for example, requires volume to generate profits for the development of new products.
Communications and transport are shrinking the global market place. Value added manufacturers like Cadbury, Nestlè, Kelloggs, Beyer, Norsk Hydro, Massey Ferguson and ICI find themselves "under pressure" from the market place and distributors alike to position their brands globally. In many cases this may mean an adaption in advertising appeals or messages as well as packaging and instructions. Nestle will not be in a hurry to repeat its disastrous experience of the "Infant formula" saga, whereby it failed to realise that the ability to find, boiled water for its preparations, coupled with the literacy level to read the instructions properly, were not universal phenomenon.
Marketing globally also provides the marketer with five types of "leverage" or "advantages", those of experience, scale, resource utilisation and global strategy. A multi-product global giant like Nestle', with over £10 billion turnover annually, operates in so many markets, buys so much raw material from a variety of outgrowers of different sizes, that its international leverage is huge. If it consumes a third of the world's cocoa output annually, then it is in a position to dominate terms. This also has its dangers.
The greatest lift to producers of raw agricultural products has been the almost universal necessity to consume their produce. If one considers the whole range of materials from their raw to value added state there is hardly a market segment which cannot be tapped globally. Take, for example, oranges. Not only are Brazilian, Israeli, South African and Spanish oranges in demand in their raw state worldwide, but their downstream developments are equally in demand. Orange juice, concentrates, segments and orange pigments are globally demanded. In addition the ancillary products and services required to make the orange industry work, find themselves equally in global demand. So insecticides, chemicals, machinery, transport services, financial institutions, warehousing, packaging and a whole range of other production and marketing services are in demand, many provided by global organisations like Beyer, British Airways and Barclays Bank. Of course, many raw materials are at the
mercy of world prices, and so many developing countries find themselves at the mercy of supply and demand fluctuations. But this highlights one important global lesson - the need to study markets carefully. Tobacco producing countries of the world are finding this out. With a growing trend away from tobacco products in the west, new markets or increasing volumes into consuming markets ha