<title>Thirty-Eighth Session: Proceedings of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, 38th Session, Proceedings</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The Forestry Department of FAO, through its Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper, has been receiving valuable, practical advice on issues related to pulp and paper and also on other economic and social aspects of forestry since 1960. FAO has benefited from this advice in the collection, analysis and validation of statistical information and also in the preparation of outlook studies.
The 111th Session of the FAO Council broadened the mandate of the Committee and renamed it the "Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP)" in order to reflect the emerging trends in world forestry and to cover other sectors of the primary industry, such as sawmilling and wood-based panel manufacturing.
The enlarged Committee met, for the first time, at the 38th Session of this important advisory body, which took place in Rome from 23 to 25 April 1997 and which brought together 15 members and 35 advisers from 27 developing and developed countries, as well as countries with economies in transition. The attendance of observers from various international institutions and organizations, such as ATIBT, CEPI, UN-ECE, European Commission, European Investment Bank, International Finance Corporation, UNIDO and the Unión de Selvicultores del Sur de Europa, demonstrated the interest in the event. Together with industry representatives, they provided a balanced and diversified group of participants.
The Committee continues to serve as a global policy and technical forum for the forest industry and as an advisory body for the work of FAO related to forest and forest products development.
These proceedings, prepared by the Secretariat for the first time, consist of a summary of the conclusions and recommendations that emerged from the discussions, as well as the most important documents presented at the meeting. This document is particularly important to members and observers who were unable to attend the meeting, and it should also encourage participants to continuously provide professional advice to FAO.
The ACPWP Chairman, Mr M'hammed Mezzour, and the Secretariat wish to thank all the participants for attending and actively participating in the meeting and for offering their valuable experience that contributed to the success of the presentations and discussions.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
KEYNOTE ADDRESS
David A. Harcharik
Forestry Department, FAO, Rome
Let me first welcome you on behalf of our Director-General, but also on behalf of everyone in the Forestry Department. We are very pleased that you are able to participate in this first Session of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. You represent a good cross-section of the private industry community, with backgrounds in pulp and paper, sawmilling, and wood-based panels, and coming from forest industries associations, landowners associations, governments and international organizations from all over the world.
This Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products builds on the successful "Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper", which had been meeting annually since 1960. This particular meeting is special as it is the first with the Committee having a broadened mandate, comprising all sectors of the forest industry.
I would like to express my own view of what I think the Advisory Committee's role is. First, I think it is very important that there be some high-level policy forum for forest industry at the global level which can address emerging issues, such as certification and labelling, development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level and at the forest management unit level, and the very concept of sustainable forest management itself. These are important policy and technical issues that affect private industry. Other important issues for private industry and private land-owners are the merits of a legally-binding convention on forests at the global level, trends in supply and demand for forest products, the forest resource situation and economic development in general. FAO provides a policy forum on these subjects where industry leaders can exchange views and identify programmes and solutions to problems that you yourself can implement.
I note that other global forestry fora are not always as effective as they might be because they seldom have good participation from the private sector - for example, the Commission on Sustainable Development, which is meeting in New York right now, and the ad hoc Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests that was created by the CSD. I could also mention our own COFO (the Committee on Forestry), the Inter-Governmental Committee that advises FAO on our forestry programme that was held just a month ago, where there were few individuals with private industry background and private sector experience. In these global international fora, the voice of private industry is muted.
I hope that you will take advantage of this Committee to discuss some of these global issues that impact on private forest management and to become individually active by speaking out and following up on these global issues. You may also wish to share your views with governments, as many of the final decisions on negotiated events will be taken by governments. It is important that government representatives to international meetings have the benefit of your points of view.
A second important role of this Advisory Committee is to advise FAO, and in particular our Forestry Department. This Committee offers an opportunity to us to pick the brains of the private industry and the private sector at large and to benefit from your advice on our programmes. The type of advice that we get from the private sector is sometimes different than what we get from governments. Your advice is often much more practical, straightforward, and down-to-earth - it comes from the real world, and we need it.
We will be asking for your advice, in particular, on the Global Fibre Supply Study, in which we are actively involved right now. Recall that the Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper identified this important issue and asked FAO to undertake the study. I hope that you will discuss the progress that we are making and advise us on how we can move forward faster and better.
A number of our other products have already benefited from your advice, for example, the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practices. This has become a very important and useful document. In fact, Southeast Asian countries are trying to use it as a model for developing more specific codes of practices for their region. Also, our work on statistics and outlook studies, supply and demand for wood products and non-wood forest products, are important to the industry and benefit substantially from your advice.
Chairman, I would like to mention a few other things that we are trying to do in the Forestry Department. Last year, for example, we began a strategic planning process. We went back to our roots in 1945 to understand clearly why we were created. Then we reviewed the many global issues and the increasing number of organizations that are addressing them. In order to understand clearly where we fit in and what our priorities are, we needed to think through in a very deliberate way, what the problems and issues are, what are the opportunities, and what institutions are addressing them. We needed to identify what FAO's niche is, to avoid duplicating the work of others, and to know what our comparative advantages are and how we can add to the work that is being done in a cost-effective way.
When we look at our own roots and strengths, it is very illuminating. There are some unique strengths of this Organization that do not appear in other organizations. For example, we are indeed global, there is no other international organization that addresses the forestry issues on a truly global basis like FAO. We are interdisciplinary. Being part of FAO, we have opportunities to link with agriculture, fisheries, statistics and sustainable development. Our staff are not only foresters; we also have people with backgrounds in public administration, watershed management, wildlife, anthropology, economics, etc. This gives us an opportunity to address some of the world's most important forestry issues on an interdisciplinary basis. Our staff is large or small, depending on your point of view. It is small if you think of all the issues that we would like to address, but it is large when you compare us to the other organizations. We have 75 professionals working full-time in the
forestry programme, here in Rome, in our Regional Offices and our Sub-Regional Offices, as well as up to 200 contractors per year. That is far more talent than exists anywhere else. We also have a regional and global structure that I think is a real asset of FAO. We have a global committee, the Committee on Forestry, that is a primary, senior-level, policy advisory body on forestry. We also have this Committee on Paper and Wood Products that advises us specifically on global matters affecting the private sector. In addition, FAO has six regional forestry commissions (Europe, Africa, Near East, Asia, Latin America and North America) that offer an opportunity to discuss issues that are important regionally. Another asset of FAO is that we undertake both conceptual, or normative work - statistics, outlook studies, forest resources assessment, methodologies on better practices, etc., - in addition to operational work. We provide direct assistance to many countries to help put in
place practices that will help those countries better manage their forests.
Next, we developed a very specific mission statement and clear objectives, and subsequently a framework for implementation. One can ask "Since FAO does not own any land, does not manage any forest, does not sell any timber, what is its role?" In forestry, we have three primary roles. The first, is to serve as a neutral policy forum to identify issues and seek solutions. The second, is to serve as a source of information on forests and the forestry sector globally and on forest methodologies and practices. I call your attention to the 1997 State of the World's Forests, one of our most recent products. Our third main role is to provide direct assistance to countries.
In addition, we have identified priorities for our programme of work, giving increased emphasis to global forest resource assessment, strategic sector and outlook studies, capacity building, assisting countries with national plans and programmes, community forestry and development of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management.
Finally, I would mention that a very important part of implementing our work is the development and the maintenance of very strong partnerships. It is absolutely vital for FAO as an intergovernmental organization to have a very close dialogue with its member governments. We are governmental, first and foremost. Thus, we are trying to ensure that we have an open, transparent and constructive dialogue with our member governments, but also with other international organizations, with the environmental community and with the private sector.
When I travel, one of the questions I am frequently asked is "Is there any progress being made? We read the newspapers and we hear about deforestation and excessive logging, climate change and other problems. We hear about the CSD and the possibility of a forest convention. Is it all talk, or is any real progress being made?" Personally, I think that there is a lot of progress being made, especially in the Nordic countries, in North America and in some tropical countries like Indonesia, where you can see better forestry being practised on the ground. If you look at the reason for that, it is usually because of strong partnerships between the government, land-owners, the private industry and the environmental community. Partnerships are extremely vital today and I think some of the best forestry success stories stem very directly from good partnerships. Thus, one of the things that we are trying to do in FAO is to stimulate better partnerships between ourselves, governments,
NGOs, international organizations and industries and that is why I think this meeting is so important to us.
I thank you again for coming, and I encourage you to stay involved in the issues, provide some very direct and frank advice to us, and help us find more success stories.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS^1
^1 The entire proceedings are also available in the electronic form on the Web at: «HTTP://WWW.FAO.ORG/WAICENT/faoinfo/forestry/ACPWP/ACPWPhom.htm»
The 38th Session of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP) was held in Rome, from 23 to 25 April 1997. This was the first meeting since the Committee's mandate had been broadened to include all segments of primary forest industries. The main role of the Committee is to serve as a forum for the paper and wood products industry, in matters related to the international forestry debate, and to give advice on the current and future activities of the FAO Forestry Department.
Mr M'hammed Mezzour opened the meeting as the ACPWP Chairman, followed by the keynote address presented by Mr David A. Harcharik, Assistant Director-General of the FAO Forestry Department.
The main topics for discussion and presentations were the socio-economic role of the forest industry and sustainable forest management issues with examples given from developing and developed countries. Additional presentations described the state of the forest products industry in Brazil, Finland, New Zealand and Poland. Finally, FAO staff provided a progress report on the Global Fibre Supply Study, an activity initiated on the recommendation of the ACPWP.
The following recommendations emerged from the different discussions.
FAO should:
· validate data in the Global Fibre Supply Study in regional workshops, particularly in areas where the information is either very poor or controversial;
· make efforts to continuously involve the ACPWP in the implementation of the FAO Global and Regional Forestry Sector Outlook Studies;
· continue publishing "Projected Pulp and Paper Mills in the World" and "Recovered Paper Data";
· promote forest inventory projects in countries such as Brazil and the Congo;
· assist developing countries in forest plantation establishment and in improved wood utilization;
· promote sustainable (responsible) forest management practices;
· further investigate the social and economic costs of sustainable forest management;
· provide a forum for discussions on a baseline to protect the environment, such as the issue on sustainable forest management and certification;
· make special efforts for the training of marketing and trade experts in tropical countries.
In addition, it was recommended that the ACPWP should act as a facilitator to the forest industry, to enable the sector to take a more visible part in the international forestry debate.
The FAO Forestry Department highly values the inputs provided by this important forum of forest industry executives and, subject to the availability of funds from its regular programme, activities will be initiated to implement the recommendations.
<section>4</section>
Brazil
Gabriel Gasparetto
Association of Lumber/Plywood Exporters from Pará, Belém
Introduction
AIMEX is the Association of the Timber Industries Exporters in the State of Pará, in Brazil, concentrating, mostly, producers of plywood and sawn lumber.
The State of Pará represents about 30 percent of the Brazilian timber products exports, and 70 percent of the exports from the Amazon region, which comprises nine States.
Due to the complexity of a huge country as Brazil, considering that AIMEX is a regional Association, and also the limitation of the size for the presentation of this paper, we will give an overview of some aspects, and focus on issues related to the native Brazilian tropical forest. Naturally, none of these issues will be analysed in depth.
In July 1994 a new Economic Plan, named Real, the same as the country's currency, was launched in Brazil. Since then, for the first time in more than 15 years, an acceptable stability in the inflation rate has been achieved, which stayed at a level of 10 percent in 1996.
However, this stability was conquered sacrificing some sectors of the economy, especially the export one, and also generating a concerning level of unemployment.
Special attention has to be given to the main anchor of this Plan, which is the exchange rate of the US Dollar vis-à-vis the Brazilian Real.
The evaluation of the Brazilian Foreign Trade Association (AEB) is that the appreciation of the Real facing the Dollar could have reached around 50 percent.
Estimates from other institutions, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund vary from 19 percent to 30 percent.
The fact is that there is indeed an artificial appreciation of our currency, that stimulates imports and makes export products less competitive, which was also responsible for the negative value in our trade balance in 1996 being around US$ 5.5 billions.
Measures taken by the government to present do not seem to be sufficient. A great amount of time was lost in 1996 trying to change the Constitution in order to allow the inclusion of right for re-election of the President, that was finally approved by the Congress last January in the first voting of four.
The following issues have yet to be implemented by the government:
· reformulation of the social security system;
· reformulation of the taxes system to simplify it and reduce duties, as the existence of more than 50 different types of taxation lead to a high level of illegal withholdment and increased the informal economy estimated at 50 percent of the GNP;
· privatization of State companies;
· reduction of the so-called "Cost Brazil", to diminish the bureaucracy, the insane complexity of many procedures, the recomposition of infrastructure (roads, ports, communications) and so on;
· reformulation of the government administration, related to the public employees;
· unemployment.
Perspectives as a whole are very good, but the task to overcome the above issues is very difficult.
Performance of the forest industry
More than 60 percent of the Brazilian territory is covered by forests, representing around 400 million ha. Natural tropical rain forest in the Amazon is the most important forest formation, but there are also temperate softwood species in the south and large plantations spread all over the country.
In spite of the fact that the participation of Brazil in the international trade of forest is relatively small, the country is the largest producer and exporter of wood products in Latin America. Having a population of almost 150 million inhabitants, Brazil is also the largest market for wood products of the region. In fact, for at least one product Brazil is the largest world consumer - the domestic consumption of tropical sawn lumber is around 16 million m^3 per year.
Extensive resources, large and growing domestic market, as well as favourable macro-economic conditions, make Brazil an excellent alternative for investments in the forest industry.
Composed by the sectors of sawn lumber, veneer, plywood, fibre boards, particleboards and pulp and paper, the forest industry in Brazil intends to invest around US$ 10 billions till the year 2000.
Up to the end of the 1960s, the sector was not expressive within the Brazilian economy. Regular plantations covered no more than 30 000 ha; wood exports, mainly sawn lumber from the State of Paraná, did not reach US$ 70 million.
In recent years, the picture has been changing. Plantations now cover an area of about 6 million ha. The contribution of the forest industry represents more than 2.5 percent of the GNP; employment, direct and indirect represents 3.5 percent of the economically active population in rural areas, and the activity generates an annual income of US$ 11 billion, being US$ 2.3 billion in exports.
These figures do not include furniture plants, and several other segments which use wood in some form, such as charcoal and chemical products, nor machinery and equipment manufacturers.
A profile of the forest production could be designed as follows:
Products
Production (m^3)
Income (US$)
Sawn Lumber
Veneer
Plywood
Fibreboards
Particleboard
Pulp and Paper
Others
Total
Source: ABIMCI.
Brazilian production of wood panels in 1995 achieved approximately 3.1 million m^3, representing 2.2 percent of the world production, being plywood 1.6 million m^3.
Plywood
In 1996 plywood production reached 1.7 million m^3.
Brazilian plywood production (thousand m^3)
Year
Installed capacity
Production
Unused
Source: ABIMCI.
Evolution of the Brazilian plywood exports
US$ 8 971 000
US$ 48 410 000
US$ 274 122 000
US$ 259 992 728
US$ 247 669 877
Source: DECEX-Brazilian Department of Foreign Trade.
Sawn lumber
Brazilian sawn lumber exports
US$ 379 816 218
US$ 344 745 905
Source: DECEX-Brazilian Company Department of Foreign Trade.
It is interesting to note the efforts being made to increase new species in the international market. In the State of Pará, where precise figures for exports are available, while in 1973 only ten species were exported, in 1996 around 70 species have been exported, with about 50 percent in volumes above 1 000 m^3. However, a higher concentration is observed in about 15 species (see attached table).
Another significant point is that, individually speaking, mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) that was the most exported species in Pará till 1993, fell to the third place in 1994, being surpassed by Tauari (Couratari spp.) and Jatoba (Hymenaea courbaril) (see attached table).
Consumption
Historic series of consumption of logs from native forests in Brazil (thousand m^3)
Year
Sawn lumber
Plywood and veneer
Charcoal
Industrial firewood
Total
Source: IBAMA, FUNATURA, ITTO.
Investments
In any country, in any language, money is a must, and actual possibilities, many times, a mystery!
Due to the complexity of this matter, especially when related to the native tropical forest, we do not dare deal with this item under such a small space.
However, the figures presented by the Brazilian Government, during the Council Session of the International Tropical Timber Organization, held in Yokohama in November of 1995, just to reach the so called Target 2000: US$ 7 billions.
In addition, it is important to notice that there are absolutely no lines of credit available for plantations or sustainable forest management in Brazil, compatible with the time requirements of the growing of tropical species, which can vary from 10-15 to 50-80 years.
Issues of particular interest
Sustainable forest management (SFM)
Difficulties to prepare and implement SFM in Brazil:
· Lack of a forest policy considering the several regional characteristics of the Amazon Forest.
· Inadequate land policy and high taxation.
· Non-existence of credit lines.
· Heterogeneity of the forest:
The SFM facing the great amount of species in the Amazon (more than 3 000 types of trees, while, at most, around 80 are presently commercially traded) leads to the huge extensions of land. As an example, a plywood mill that consumes yearly 120 000 m^3 of soft logs (low density), and located in an area where the forest produces an average of 20 m^3/ha of suitable species. There will be a need of exploring 6 000 ha per year. The present accepted rotation cycle by IBAMA (Portaria 48/95) is 30 years requiring therefore a total area of 180 000 ha.
To the ones that are not aware, there are social problems generated by the land issue in Brazil, especially with the invasions promoted by the Landless Movement, who simply will not tolerate the possession of such huge areas. So, it is easy to imagine the pressure the timber industry will suffer, and in fact is already suffering, from the society.
On the other hand, SFM areas are difficult to reach (mostly in the Amazon region) due to lack of roads, or bad conserved ones, and costs will, therefore, skyrocket, making the utilization of the less valuable species not feasible.
· Lack of sufficient research.
A positive point is the implementation of the AIMEX Laboratory of Seeds and Seedlings, being built in Belém in an area of 21 ha, the first private initiative in the region, which will be ready by July 1997. It is expected to produce high quality seeds and seedlings, to allow good reforestation programmes.
AIMEX believes that the solution comprises two basic points:
· The SFM rules should be simplified, accepting for instance just low impact logging techniques as enough to fulfil its requirements, and the ones under implementation by the Tropical Forest Foundation in the State of Pará seem very encouraging; and
· Plantations should be given the same level of importance to reach sustainability, basically for low-density species, and naturally, not destroying the natural forest, but recuperating in particular the already degraded areas.
Certification
Certification is an extremely polemic issue as regards trade. It is rather seen as a non-tariff barrier to be imposed on tropical forest products, and also a new industry to be created, generating jobs to hundreds of people, rather than an actual and sincere concern for the environment.
It is obvious that if the market wishes any kind of certification, it will have to pay for it, and costs will have to be added to the price. When consulted, importing countries generally inform they are willing to pay an extra price to receive certified products. However, there is a big distance between willing to pay and actually paying, and also paying the full cost of such certification.
Even so, CERFLOR, a joint system conducted by the SBS, Brazilian Silviculture Society, and ABNT, Brazilian Association of Technical Rules, is having its Technical Committee established on 17 March. This system is almost ready to certify timber from plantations, but nothing yet has been discussed, in terms of principles and criteria, for the native Brazilian tropical forest.
Public forest concessions
The Brazilian Government, through the Ministry of Environment and IBAMA, is intensifying the studies to simplify and extend the access to the public forest concessions, which could be an interesting alternative to the private forests, presently the only feasible possibility.
IBAMA's absurd increases on taxes
We would like to give some special attention to this issue, due to its important impact on the costs of trade.
IBAMA is the Brazilian Department of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources, responsible for the legislation of several activities, including the timber industry, as regards the conservation and (management) operation of forests.
In September 1996, the President of IBAMA, Dr Eduardo Martins, requested, through a direct phone call to the President of AIMEX, Mr Danilo Remor, to start conversations and jointly search for mechanisms to overcome the existing problems resulting in proposing a policy on the tropical forest, as well as evaluating the present level of taxes being charged by IBAMA.
Four meetings were held, two in Belém, one in Brasilia and one in Manaus. During the last meeting, we were surprised by the publication of Portaria Nr. 89/96, on 25 October, which increased all taxes of IBAMA, some of them up to 2 841 percent (two thousand, eight hundred and forty-one percent) and the creation of others which did not exist before, such as the imposition of a tax of R$ 100.00 (roughly US$ 100) per each cubic metre of mahogany, virola, Paraná pine and imbuia exported.
Considering a market price of US$ 200/m^3 for virola the tax in this case would represent about 50 percent of the sale. Simply a nonsense!
Due to the political pressure from all timber associations in Brazil, among them AIMEX, IBAMA issued a new Portaria Nr. 118/96 on 27 December, reducing some taxes, but not yet to reasonable levels, and reducing the R$ 100/m^3 tax to R$ 6/m^3, but now including all species of wood in Brazil, and also from plantations!
The pressure was then made by the pulp and paper industry, and on 8 January Portaria No. 118/96 was issued again, excluding plantations, but maintaining all species if thickness was above 4 inches.
To better understand these acts of pure madness, it is important to observe that the accumulated inflation since July 1994 is of the order of 50 percent and that government is creating mechanisms to stimulate exports and is pressing any economy sector that increases prices beyond 10-20 percent, and not accepting even automatic transfer of inflation, as it was common in the past. So, how can IBAMA allow itself to make such tax increases going against a national government policy?
In fact, IBAMA does not consider sufficient its budget and therefore is trying to impose higher taxes to compensate for that, acting against the legislation, which requires a law to permit a tax increase or duties on export products, and not only an internal Portaria.
Not accepting this procedure, 30 timber associations from all over Brazil have taken out a court injunction against Portaria Nos. 89 and 118/96, for which a decision is awaited.
After sending five faxes to the President of IBAMA, without any response, AIMEX sent a letter to the Governor of Pará, signed also by seven Unions of Timber Workers, protesting and requesting the Governor's help, who immediately phoned the President of IBAMA, who finally decided to come to Belém, on 20 February to talk with us.
As a result of this meeting, IBAMA decided to:
· Immediately suspend the taxation of R$ 6/m^3 on exports;
· Immediately reduce the cost of each ATPF (authorization to transport logs) to R$ 5.00/each, what previously was R$ 0.34/each, and was increased to R$ 10.00/each (2 841 percent) (please, note that some companies use up to 1 000 ATPFs per month);
· Proposed a creation of a Working Group with eight members, four from IBAMA, and four from the trade, of which, one from AIMEX, to re-evaluate all taxes.
Though this seems a progress, and in fact it is, we are still concerned with the lack of criteria that IBAMA used to create and modify all these Portarias.
III International Congress on Plywood and Tropical Timber
II Machinery and Wood Products Fair
The above issues will be discussed during the III International Congress on Plywood and Tropical Timber, which will be held in Belém, State of Pará, Brazil, from 4 to 9 November 1997, in a joint venture of AIMEX and ABIMCI (Brazilian Plywood Association). We would be pleased to count on your participation!
Bibliography
· AIMEX statistics and documents
· The Socio-Economic Importance of the Forest Industry - ABIMCI
· Wood-Based Panels in Brazil - STCP/Dr Ivan Tomaselli
· Partnership Program Forest Industry x Ministry of Environment - SBS-Brazilian Silviculture Society
Evolution of total timber products exports from the State of Pará (1992-1996)
Others
Total
Total
Harmonized System
Sawn lumber
Reference (NBM/SH)
Veneer
Position 44.00 = Timber
Wood flooring/panel
Plywood
Others
44.01; 44.02; 44.03; 44.04; 44.05; 44.06; 44.10; 44.11; 44.13; 44.14; 44.15; 44.16; 44.17; 44.18; 44.19; 44.20 E 44.21
Source:
DECEX - Department of Foreign Trade Operations
Prepared by:
AIMEX / SINDIMAD
Forester:
GUILHERME DOS SANTOS CARVALHO
Comparison of mahogany actually exported with the quota allowances, from 1990 (year when quota system began) to 1996
Volumes (m^3)
Quota allowance
Actually exported
Balance
Total
Source: Department of Foreign Trade Operations - DECEX
Prepared by: AIMEX
Forester: GUILHERME DOS SANTOS CARVALHO
NOTE:
* Higher exported volumes in 1993 and 1994 are due to the old system of exports control of SISCOMEX permitting valid date of the issuance of authorization for 60 days from the date of its liberation. Thus, authorisations issued for exports by SISCOMEX in December were valid until February of the next year. If exports authorized in December for any reason were not placed on board, they were transferred for shipping the next year.
** It is important to also note additional liberation of the volume of permitted technical reserve in the quota system decree.
MAHOGANY EXPORTS
Brazilian timber exports: Chapter 44 of Harmonized System (NBM/SH), 1996 (Jan.-Dec.) - Amazon region comparison (US$ FOB)
States
Others
Total
% Amazonia
% Brazil
A
M
A
Z
N
I
A
ACRE
Amapá
Amazonas
Maranhão
Ma