<title>Women's participation in national forest programmes</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
National forest programmes provide a global framework for addressing forestry issues within the context of sustainable development. This concept of sustainability, one of the major challenges for the future of humanity, has been widely discussed during recent United Nations international conferences (UNCED, Rio 1992; Nutrition, Rome 1992; Population, Cairo 1993; Social Development, Copenhagen 1994; Women, Beijing 1995; Food Security, Rome 1996) and in other international and national fora. Regarding forests, sustainability is closely related to a rational, efficient and fair exploitation of natural resources, for the benefit of present and future generations.
In order to meet the imperatives of sustainability, efficiency and equality activities related to forests, particularly those carried out in the framework of national forest programmes, have increasingly put the accent on a series of principles guiding the planning, development and implementation of forest programmes and plans. Among these, partnership between all interest groups and the participation of all actors in forestry processes occupy a leading position.
It has been shown that the success of national forest programmes is heavily dependent on the creation of a context that favours the involvement of all parties, actors and partners concerned to ensure participatory planning and decision-making. In fact, by creating real participation of the range of actors concerned, all groups and individuals will be able to offer a direct or indirect contribution to programmes and their efficiency will improve.
Nevertheless, the widening of participation to all stakeholders - rural men and women, NGOs, local organisations, women's groups, the private sector, government, university circles - calls for certain mechanisms and conditions. It can only come about if there is a free exchange of information, open dialogue and the possibility for debate.
In this context, a fundamental characteristic of the participatory process is the availability of the most detailed information possible. This is the base element for the forest planning process. One can see the importance of calling on participatory planning tools capable of revealing various types of information (social, technical, economic and environmental), and this draws attention to another basic principle of forest programmes: multi-disciplinarity.
The reference document entitled 'Basic Principles and Operational Guidelines for National Forest Programmes' (FAO, 1996) stresses that in many cases particular attention should be given to the participation of local and regional level organisations, women and local communities and populations. Further, this document notes that:
"Women play a vital role in many aspects of forestry development. Gender issues should be given due consideration throughout the process and specific actions should be identified to facilitate the participation of women as fully integrated partners in all phases (planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation) of the process."
Other important social characteristics which need to be taken into account during planning and development include ethnicity, caste, socio-economic level, age and occupation. However, gender deserves special attention since it cuts across all sectors and organisational levels of society, from micro to macro level. Regardless of class or race, women and men have roles, responsibilities, resources, constraints and opportunities which differ according to gender.
It is therefore important for the planner to raise a series of questions such as:
o What development objectives will address the needs and priorities of the women and men concerned?
o Who will be directly involved in the planning and implementation of each activity women, men, or both?
o What resources do the women and men involved need to have to contribute to development activities?
o What constraints block the participation of women, of men?
Answers to such questions help improve planning because facts concerning the participants are available: who they are; what they do; where or how they live; how they perceive their needs, their constraints and their possibilities.
This Technical Note aims to present a concrete and systematic mechanism through which gender considerations can be taken fully into account during the planning, implementation and review of national forest programmes. It highlights the importance of taking the female dimension into account in such programmes in order to strengthen the success of forest planning and development activities. The approach recommended for this integration in planning is firmly centred on participation.
The first section of this document provides a rapid overview of "gender specificities", of the roles, responsibilities, needs, constraints and opportunities which can be specific to men and to women, in particular in forestry. Also outlined are the reasons explaining why these gender considerations should be taken into account in programmes and projects.
The second section is a step-by-step review of the different phases of the formulation of national forest programmes, as described in the reference document: 'National Forest Programmes. Basic Principles and Operational Guidelines' (FAO, 1996). This section should be read in the light of integrating gender in processes and programmes. Also briefly outlined are the participatory tools which can be used in each phase of the various processes to build up an appropriate data base on what men and women do and why.
As with other technical notes published by FAO (for example, on watershed management, nutrition or ecoturism-tourism), this document is intended to help planners and decision-makers improve planning in the forest and forestry sectors, by integrating considerations based on gender. It is also meant to enable anyone interested to better understand the multi-disciplinary aspects of forest planning.
<section>2</section>
Men and women in forest activities: Differences and complementarities
Natural resources
Work
Credit and technology
Education, training and extension
Knowledge and conservation of the environment
Contribution to food security
Legislation
Representation and decision-making
Today, the international forestry community fully recognises that women and men play different roles in forestry and forestry-related activities. Case studies conducted in all parts of the world confirm that rural women and men fulfil significant, but distinct, functions in natural resource use and management. The tasks they perform, the way they earn a living and allocate their time, the way they use forest and tree resources, the control they have over resources are among the factors that can vary enormously.
These differences can also be found at the level of constraints, barriers and opportunities. Further, these variations exist not only between cultures, but also within cultures, communities and families. As male migration and female poverty increase, these differences will have an ever-growing impact.
Migration and Poverty
The important phenomenon of the rural exodus of men in search of paid employment means that households are increasingly headed by women. They struggle with difficulties that only serve to further accentuate their poverty, and they find themselves forced to make choices in the absence of male labour.
Today, of the estimated 1.3 billion people living in poverty, more than 70% are women. The number of rural women living in absolute poverty has risen by almost 50% over the past two decades. Increasingly, poverty has a woman's face (2).
The following sections look at the differences, points in common and complementarities that can often be found between men and women in the forest sector. Far from being exhaustive, this list is intended solely as a rapid overview of the differences and complementarities between men and women in the various spheres of the forest sector, differences that cannot be ignored in planning.
Natural resources
The document entitled 'Integrating Gender Considerations into FAO Forestry Projects' (FAO, 1993) outlines the basic differences between men and women concerning activities connected with trees and forests:
o land tenure laws, both customary and statutory, may be different for men and women;
o some women may retain exclusive rights to certain parts of a tree (leaves, branches, fruit), while the tree itself may be "owned" by a man;
o women may choose one crop over another to avoid the need for male labour during land clearing;
o men and women may make different decisions about the use and sale of forest products;
o women and men may prefer different tree species based on the tasks they fulfil.
It is important to recognise that, even though women are often at a disadvantage to men when it comes to access to natural resources, this access varies enormously from context to context and it is impossible to generalise.
On the other hand, it is clear that deforestation affects women in particular since they are primarily responsible for collecting firewood, water and numerous forest products. Having to travel longer distances for gathering and employing more time and energy to find water and fetch wood has a negative impact on other activities they could undertake to earn income or simply have free time.
Work
The work of men and women in society often has three dimensions:
1) in relation to reproduction, above all child-bearing, the education of children, household tasks (including fetching water and firewood), as well as tasks related to the maintenance and sustainability of the work force. This aspect generally concerns women, even if men participate to a much lesser extent;
2) in relation to production in exchange for monetary or in-kind retribution; this aspect falls within the competence of both men and women;
3) in relation to community, voluntary and unpaid activities that contribute to social cohesion (holidays, traditions, etc.). This aspect is primarily the responsibility of women.
With regard to productive labour in developing countries, women constitute an important segment of the work-force in forest and forest-related activities: they work in tree nurseries, plantations, harvesting, processing, sale of wood, etc. What differentiates men and women above all is the fact that much of women's work "remains unrecognised and unvalued. This has an impact on the status of women in society, their opportunities in public life and the gender-blindness of development policy. (...) Women's work is greatly undervalued in economic terms". (2)
Credit and technology
As emphasised in the Third Progress Report on the Programme of Action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (Rome, 1991), "programmes for granting credit and guaranteeing loans benefit male farmers, while women, who have no land or guarantee, are excluded from these, although it is recognised that they are less likely to default on payments...". Men dominate assets and means of production such as land and technology. Subsequently, the enormous potential contribution of women remains underused. (2)
Education, training and extension
Education increases the ability to participate in society and to improve the quality of life and the standard of living. The school enrolment gap between men and women is still very wide.
Extension programmes for women are also limited. As stressed in the UNDP Human Development Report 1995 (2), almost all extension workers are men, even if women constitute the majority of farmers. "In the late 1980s, only 13% of agricultural field agents in the developing world were women - only 7% in Africa and 0,5% in India. Most Indian states do not include female farmers among extension beneficiaries - even though 48% of India's self-employed cultivators in 1983 were women. In Africa, only 69% of female farmers received extension visits, compared with 97% of male farmers."
The same inequality of access exists in training programmes (technical, management, etc.).
Knowledge and conservation of the environment
Even though women are largely excluded from training and extension programmes, it should be noted that they possess a wide range of knowledge about the use and conservation of natural resources. For example, in Sierra Leone, women could name 31 different uses for trees while men could name only eight (4). Men and women possess different knowledge about natural resources and forest genetics. Drawing on the knowledge of one and the other can only enrich programmes.
Men and women often have very different skills and knowledge, which together create a knowledge system specific to local conditions, needs and priorities.
There are basically four elements to gender differences in knowledge systems^1:
o women and men have knowledge about different things;
o men and women have different knowledge about the same things;
o women and men may organise their knowledge in different ways;
o men and women may receive and transmit their knowledge through different means.
^1 Huisinga Norem, Rosalie, Rhonda Yoder and Yolanda Martin, "Indigenous Agricultural Knowledge and Gender Issues in Third World Agricultural Development" in Warren, et al. Indigenous Knowledge Systems: Implications for Agricultural and International Development. Studies in Technologies and Social Change Series, no. 11., Iowa State University. 1993.
Contribution to food security^2
^2 Refer to "Considering Nutrition in National Forestry Programmes" (FAO, 1996) for more details on the benefits from trees and forests regarding food security.
Forest and tree products can make direct contributions to household food security and health, mainly for the poorest families and in times of natural disaster or "lean season". Further, the income obtained though the sale of certain products (fuelwood, medicines) can then be used to purchase food. It is worth noting that men and women usually spend their incomes differently. For example, a study conducted in Burkina Faso indicated that men spend 33% of their income on food and family needs while women spend 84% of their income on the family (Commission of the European Communities, 1991; quoted in (3)).
Legislation
Legal parameters such as land and tree property rights can vary enormously, but usually to the detriment of women. At the same time, family and community norms, traditions and religious beliefs are other factors that often have a discriminatory impact on women's access to and control of resources and benefits.
"In many parts of the developing world, women do not have legal control over the land they farm. (...) In Africa, where women constitute 80% of food producers, past policies have undermined their traditional land rights" (2).
In 'Development Policy and Strategy for the Benefit of Rural Women' (5), it is noted that at the juridical level, the most crucial element "concerns land, its ownership, access and use. Rural women are often excluded from owning this primary production factor through either inheritance systems or land tenure regulations. (...) The criterion for being awarded land (...) is status as family head. Although rural women often fulfil. this function in the absence of men (through migration, death or divorce), they are still not eligible to hold land since the law does not recognise their status as family head."
The lack of land tenure security has important repercussions on productivity (why invest if there is no guarantee of use?), on sustainability (why use techniques that favour the sustainability of resources?) and on access to certain services (such as credit).
Representation and decision-making
In most cultures, women are excluded from leadership and decision-making roles which determine development activities. Women do not share fully in decision-making processes at household, village or national levels. Their representation in political parties, public institutions and people's organisations has not been sufficient to ensure they benefit fully from the development of their communities and nations. Some progress has been made through access to local groups and organisations, but a wider acceptance of their capabilities is required at all levels of policy-making (12).
Being less represented than men in associations and other organised groups, women have less opportunities to speak out. This is important because organised groups increase the visibility and the involvement of persons in the decision-making processes regarding the actions affecting them. "Organised groups also help women to overcome their reluctance to speak out, act or intervene on their own. This factor is particularly significant when it comes to obtaining credit, machinery, tools, land and access to services. Groups are also excellent structures for all types of training..." (5).
This rapid overview of the differences and complementarities between men and women in the rural and forest sector demonstrates the existence of clear disparities in roles, responsibilities, possibilities and constraints between the female and male population, often to the detriment of women.
In fact, the differences and contrasts to be found in everyday life are the fruit of an historical imbalance which was reflected in many years of development projects. It was not recognised until the 1970s, thanks to the work of Ester Boserup ('Women's Role in Economic Development'), that development has different repercussions on men and women.
It was then that the idea that development could not be considered a neutral process regarding gender equality began gaining ground. But Boserup's work went even further: of all development projects, many not only did not take into account women but even reduced their autonomy and their opportunities in the economic sector.
This calls into question the traditional model of development. Today, it is accepted that individuals - men and women - should be at the centre of all development processes. In this sense, the development paradigm based on the individual would have little sense if the question of gender equality was not taken into serious consideration.
The forest sector is not excluded from this necessity, and planners and those responsible for designing policies cannot ignore this aspect of planning. The success of sustainable development and the achievement of greater equality necessarily depends on taking into account actors ignored in the past and ensuring their participation, whether they be women or marginalised sectors (ethnic or poor groups, etc.).
It is now recognised that planning is doomed to failure if it does not consider the needs, priorities and constraints of the target population. As a result, it is essential to look at the specificities of men and women, and to collect gender-specific data that can add to the development planning process.
<section>3</section>
Men and women in national forest programmes
Approach, goal and objectives, principles of the national forest programmes
This second section is designed as a "re-reading" of the reference document for national forest programmes, entitled 'Basic Principles and Operational Guidelines' in the context of understanding the implications of the involvement and participation of women and men in forest development activities.
Approach, goal and objectives, principles of the national forest programmes
Approach
"National forest programmes follow a participatory planning and implementation approach that encourages the involvement of all forest-dependent actors..." (8; p.13)
which implies that actors should not be considered "asexual", but comprise both women and men.
"National forest programmes provide a environment for the concerted and co-ordinated implementation of programmes and activities by all stakeholders..." (8; p. 13)
which implies that the stakes and interests of actors or groups in question be seen, understood and analysed in the context of the differences and complementarities between men and women. This is the only way that programmes and activities can take place on the basis of a real consensus between institutions and populations, men and women.
Goal and Objectives
"The goal of national forest programmes is to promote the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources to meet local, national and global needs, through fostering national and international partnerships to manage, protect and restore forest resources and land, for the benefit of present and future generations.
The main objectives are to:
o introduce inter-sectoral planning approaches involving all relevant partners;
o raise awareness and mobilise commitments at all levels in order to address the issues related to sustainable forestry development;
o increase the efficiency and effectiveness of both public and private actions for sustainable forestry development;
o foster local, national, regional and international partnerships;
o mobilise and organise national and (if necessary) international resources and catalyse action to implement programmes/plans in a co-ordinated manner;
o plan and implement how forests and the forestry sector could contribute to national and global initiatives." (8; p.14)
Close attention to gender issues permits one to understand that anything to do with the process of national forest programmes must reflect the needs and capacities of men and women. Forest development activities must therefore be tailored to the perceived needs of the different groups involved, men and women. Further, all potential partners representing either the interests of women or men should be informed of the opportunities related to forest development and conservation of the environment.
Principles
The basic principles of national forest programmes involve all actors in a process of partnership and participation, as well as in an inter-sectoral and iterative global process. The stress is also placed on development and support for the ability of human resources so that institutions and the mechanisms of which they are carriers, as well as their strategies, guarantee coherence between goals, programmes and national planning.
Respect for these principles assumes that particular attention be given:
o to the methodological level in order that the dynamics of partnership and participation involve all the actors concerned in the conservation and development of forest resources. These actors may be institutions and (public or private) bodies responsible for forest affairs, but also social and economic issues; specialists of either sex who are competent in the forest sector, but also sensitive to the human dimension of the question; men and women directly involved day-to-day in the use, management and conservation of natural resources.
o to the human level in order to reinforce capacities aimed at, on the one hand the technical and the human dimension of forest development, on the other facilitating the access of women as well as men to education and training for the promotion of an increased accountability of all actors.
o to the institutional level in order that the sectors responsible for national forest programmes benefit from an organisation that permits them to develop mechanisms for implementation and follow-up/evaluation, as well as parallel measures (reform, legislation) that reflect the view that sustainable forest development also depends on taking into account the day-today realities of men and women.
<section>4</section>
How to consider gender in national forest programmes^3
Phase 1: Organization of the process
Phase 2: Strategic planning
Phase 3: Implementation
Phase 4: Revision and updating
^3 The phases suggested correspond to the ones described de distintas in the reference document "Basic Principles and Operational Guidelines. Formulation, Implementation and Revision of the National Forest Programmes" (FAO, 1996).
This section provides a broad overview of the different stages of planning, implementation and review of national forest programmes. For each phase, it offers guidelines for ways of integrating gender considerations in all activities. It also recommends tools which will facilitate the gathering of social, technical, economic and environmental information to be used in planning and in each phase of the process. Tables giving an overview of what can be done and how it can be done are included for each phase.
This technical note should be used together with the publication 'Enhancing People's Participation in National Forest Programmes' (11). It provides valuable guidelines for facilitating participation and stimulating the participatory collection and analysis of information.
The process followed by national forest programmes can be broken down into four main phases:
Phase 1: Organization of the Process
Phase 2: Strategic Planning
Phase 3: Implementation
Phase 4: Revision and Updating
Phase 1: Organization of the process
This logistical phase comprises three steps:
1) Identification of Partners
"Women play a vital role in many aspects of forestry activities. Collectively they are one of the main actors on the forestry scene. Their participation in the process should thus be fully recognised and facilitated" (drawn from National Forest Programmes. Basic Principles and Operational Guidelines, FAO, 1996, page 30, point on identification of partners).
It might be noted that the low participation of women as partners in the planning process is often due to the ignorance of planners concerning the gender issue. It is absolutely necessary that in the identification of partners consideration be given to bringing together networks and organisations that have an understanding of gender issues. The course of action could be the following:
o identification of competent partners, i.e. networks and organisations whose functions, responsibilities and activities are oriented toward taking into account gender-related considerations;
o making contact at the local level with women's groups and organisations, as well as with NGOs and/or organisations representing women's interests, and
o making contact at the institutional level with national structures, both public and private, responsible for issues related to the integration of women (ministries, special offices, etc.).
Another important aspect to bear in mind in identifying partners is the establishment of technical, social and economic criteria, which must make explicit reference to the need to be representative of society, which is made up of men and women.
2) Organization of National Coordination Mechanisms
In order that due consideration is given to gender issues, two aspects are fundamental: i) the composition of the authorities; ii) their mandates.
i) Representatives sensitive to gender issues must work together with the coordination authorities. These could be individuals, groups (NGOs, associations) or institutions (women's or other ministries). In this context, the way in which partners have been identified (giving full priority to the importance of partners who are competent in the integration of women) is crucial, given that society still relegates women to a marginal position in terms of representation, participation and decision-making.
ii) It is also necessary to pay major attention (in the case of the National Coordination Unit) to the mandate given to the structures responsible for coordination, management and monitoring of the planning process. This mandate must explicitly refer to recognition of gender issues. Further, the national coordinator chosen must be sensitive to male and female roles and, if possible, have received training in this sector.
These examples illustrate the type of recommendations to include in the mandates of such organisms. The operational guidelines for national forest programmes describe how the role of the National Forest Consultative Group is, above all, to "promote consensus on critical issues related to forest development and conservation". One might add that this group should be vigilant to the point that the opinions of women, and not only of men, be included in the search for this consensus. Another task of the group is to "periodically review the progress of related policy and institutional reforms". One could finish the phrase, saying that policy analysis must foresee the study of the impact of current and reformed policies on men and on women.
3) Development of a Communication Strategy
The communication strategy to choose is dependent on different interest groups, their motivations, their capacity of access to information and the means of communication used.
From the very outset, the content must reflect information related to gender issues, and means of communication must be used that reach women as well as men (for example, taking into account radio listening times, day and hour of meetings, use of images rather than words).
Gender Considerations in the Organization of the Process
Phase
Guidelines
Identification of partners
o identify organisations and networks that are competent in gender issues; contact women's groups and/or associations that represent women's interests; at the institutional level, contact national structures responsible for the integration of women.
o establish selection criteria (technical, social and economic) that integrate the concept of gender.
Organisation of national coordination mechanisms
o composition and mandate of coordination mechanisms/hat respect the need to take into account gender issues.
Design of a communication strategy
o content reflecting gender issues
o means of communication designed for the target audience.
<section>5</section>
Phase 2: Strategic planning
This phase gives a better understanding of the main forestry issues by locating them in the context of national development.
It includes different activities:
1) preliminary analysis (review of the current situation, identification of major problems, immediate actions);
2) in-depth sector analysis (specific studies, options);
3) strategic analysis (development and analysis of scenarios, selecting a scenario), and
4) formulation of the sustainable forestry development programme.
To ensure the success of this fundamental phase, precise terms of reference must be drawn up for all partners involved. The mandate should stress the prime importance of role differences between men and women. It should envisage the participation of individuals and interest groups, as well as experts and consultants, drawn from different backgrounds to guarantee that all social, political, economic and environmental aspects are effectively covered.
The persons responsible for the structures chosen to guide and co-ordinate the planning process must be sensitive to the gender issues (for example, through training in gender analysis) and convinced of the absolute priority of integrating the female dimension in forest programmes. The other partners must also be aware of the importance of these issues (for example, through workshops, see box below).
To encourage the participation of all the partners identified, use should be made of a wide range of participatory methods and techniques (for example, the Participatory Rural Appraisal - PRA, the Rapid Rural Appraisal - PRA, etc.), as well as the Socioeconomic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA). Thanks to such techniques, it is possible to systematically identify and analyse all issues taking into account the gender dimension and involving institutions, organisations and individuals. It is important to take advantage of local technical know-how, identify available resources and collect all types of gender-differentiated information.
Many documents have been written on gender issues in development in general and in forestry in particular. Reading these documents could be extremely useful. The box below contains a non-exhaustive list of international organisations concerned specifically with the integration of women,
Workshop on the female dimension in the Central American Forest Programme
In 1992 the Consejo Consultativo Mujer y Desarrollo (Consultative Council on Women and Development), in collaboration with the regional Central American Forest Programme and the Nicaragua Forest Programme, and with the assistance of several international donor agencies, organised the first regional workshop on 'Gender Considerations in Forestry Development Projects'. The workshop brought together representatives from NGOs, governments, donors and the Sub-Regional Steering Committee of the Central American Forest Programme. The workshop led to a series of resolutions which include:
o provision of training for forestry planners in the imp