<title>Developing national emergency prevention systems for transboundary animal diseases (FAO animal production and health paper - 137)</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
1.1. Introduction
1.2. Opening address
1.1. Introduction
The Emergency Prevention System (EMPRES) for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases is a concept, first raised at an FAO Council in 1994, which addresses pests and diseases with serious impact on food security. This concept was endorsed by the World Food Summit in 1996, through Commitment 3 of the Rome Declaration on World Food Security-The World Food Summit Plan of Action.
Objective 3.1. of the Plan of Action states that
"governments, in partnership with all actors of civil society, and with the support of international institutions, will, as appropriate seek to ensure effective prevention and progressive control of plant and animal diseases, including especially those which are of transboundary nature, such as rinderpest... ".
This Commitment was in response to the awareness by the Heads of State and Government of the actual and potential impact of these diseases upon livestock. The diseases which are transboundary in nature are the principle concern of FAO and are the target of its current strategy for assuring food security. The mandate is to establish emergency prevention systems for transboundary animal and plant pests and diseases. The animal disease component is designed to; "promote the effective containment and control of the most serious epidemic livestock diseases as well as emerging diseases, by progressive elimination on a regional and global basis, through international co-operation involving early warning, rapid reaction, enabling research and co-ordination".
The first EMPRES Expert Consultation, held in 1996, identified the target diseases as those of strategic importance, those requiring tactical attention and those evolving or emerging diseases. Of the first group, rinderpest was considered to be the most important. The principal thrust for EMPRES since its inception has been to promote the global eradication of rinderpest. EMPRES has played a major role in defining the plans and strategies by which this may be achieved and developed a 'Blueprint' for its final eradication by the year 2010.
The Expert Consultation which took place 14-16 July, 1997 addressed the following issues;
· the implications of the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action,
· the development of national and regional capacity to implement the EMPRES principles for the eradication of rinderpest and control of other transboundary diseases,
· the progress of the GREP in Asia and Africa,
· guidelines on cessation of vaccination and the achievement of sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest,
· review of the OIE Pathway and chapter on rinderpest in the OIE International Animal Health Code.
1.2. Opening address
The Expert Consultation was officially opened by Dr A. Sawadogo, FAO Assistant Director-General, Agriculture Department. The welcoming address was given by Dr T Fujita, FAO Director of the Animal Production and Health Division, the text of which was as follows;
Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to be with you this morning in opening this second EMPRES-Livestock Expert Consultation. Welcome to FAO headquarters and thank you for taking time from your busy schedules and travelling here to attend this important session.
Last year's Technical and Expert Consultations focused on a terrible plague of cattle in the developing world, rinderpest. These consultations entitled "The World Without Rinderpest", yielded a blueprint for global eradication of this disease by 2010. Many of you participated and helped us to define better the concept for EMPRES and the strategy for defining transboundary animal diseases of concern to EMPRES. You wished that the issues of transboundary animal diseases in general and rinderpest eradication in particular be given the necessary political support through the World Food Summit.
I am pleased to note that The World Food Summit held here at FAO headquarters in November of 1996 did fulfil this recommendation. The Summit crystallised FAO's commitment and focus to securing food for all. Epidemics of rinderpest threaten stable food production in developing areas of the world. The FAO has maintained the primary role of co-ordinating the global eradication of this dreaded disease.
After the Summit, the Director-General has instructed all Technical Divisions, including AGA, to examine their activities in the light of the World Food Summit Plan of Action. He has further singled out the Special Programme on Food Security and EMPRES as issues which should have overriding importance in the FAO global programme. To reflect this desire, FAO's Livestock Programme has been restructured for the coming 1998/99 biennium. This Programme, which is to be implemented through two Services - the Animal Health and Animal Production Services - now has four main domains. The first domain deals with livestock policies including veterinary services. The second deals with livestock production systems including animal health in three farming systems: mixed, peri-urban, and pastoral. The farming systems approach should make our sub-programmes relevant to the Special Programme on Food Security. This Special Programme has a livestock component which lays particular emphasis on
the role of the short-cycle livestock, like small ruminants, pigs and poultry. The third domain deals with the animal genetic resources. The fourth domain deals with Transboundary Animal Diseases, the subject of this Expert Consultation.
I look forward to your deliberations and recommendations on how EMPRES activities can enhance the implementation of the Commitments of the World Food Summit.
This year, two major themes for the Expert Consultation are planned. The themes follow the intent of last year's technical and expert consultation, namely, to eradicate rinderpest from the world. Your chairman and the secretariat have selected the theme for rinderpest which is entitled "management of the transition from vaccination to a sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest". I believe that this will enable you to discuss one of the concerns of the Summit, namely the effective prevention and progressive control of transboundary animal diseases. Member Countries that are involved in the GREP and regional organisations, such as the OAU/IBAR, that are involved in co-ordinating regional programmes, like PARC, look to the guidelines to be provided through this Expert Consultation. They seek to know how to consolidate gains achieved in rinderpest control, without significant reversal of such gains, until the objective of global eradication is attained by the year
The second theme notes the need for emergency preparedness and watchfulness at the farm and national levels for rinderpest and other epidemic diseases.. This theme is entitled "Developing EMPRES-Livestock at the national level". As a former Chief Veterinary Officer for my country, Japan, I am well aware of the difficulties in convincing the national treasury to finance a veterinary 'standing army' in the absence of epidemic diseases. I am also aware how much more difficult it must be for national veterinary services of developing countries to convince their national authorities to finance the effective prevention and progressive control of epidemic disease, which may be relatively rare, against the background of immediate needs of visible deficiencies in social and agricultural systems.
Yet we all know that sustained livestock production and trade in livestock and livestock products are practically impossible in the presence of epidemic diseases. These diseases contribute to banishing many areas of the world to subsistence livestock farming and thus to poverty. We in FAO look forward to your deep analysis of the impact of transboundary animal diseases and your recommendations to Member Countries and to FAO on how to promote the EMPRES concepts at national, regional and global level in a way that will lead to sustained economic livestock production, reduction in hunger and poverty.
Ladies and gentlemen, the task before you is important yet complex and difficult, especially given the short time you have for deliberations. I wish you well in the consultation. FAO looks forward to working with you at this Expert Consultation and in the future.
<section>2</section>
2. Summary
2.1. Developing national EMPRES
2.2. Review of the GREP activities in Africa
2.3. Review of the GREP activities in Asia
2.4. Managing the transition from vaccination to sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest
2.1. Developing national EMPRES
EMPRES activities during the year have continued to focus on the co-ordination and strategic planning of GREP. The molecular analysis of the virus strains active in the rinderpest epidemics has given a greater understanding of the evolution of outbreaks and has assisted in the planning of the control activities. EMPRES has assisted in many emergency situations resulting from epidemics of transboundary disease. This assistance has been given through Regular Programmes and Trust Fund Technical Co-operation Projects (TCP) to address issues of emergency preparedness in the affected country and the regional significance of the epidemic.
A clear need has been recognised to extend the principles of EMPRES in dealing with the epidemic diseases to regional and national levels. This will be achieved initially by creating clusters of countries in regions where, because of foci of rinderpest, GREP is most active. The national authorities will be approached at ministerial level to introduce the EMPRES approach. A regional EMPRES presence is required to develop, train and co-ordinate the cluster of national units. Priority should be given to improving communications systems by e-mail, both within and without the country. The training will concentrate on establishing the principles and systems required for effective early warning, early reaction and emergency preparedness capacity. The expert consultation emphasised the urgent need for countries to improve their capability in these areas especially as they cease vaccination. It also endorsed the view that a regional EMPRES presence was essential to facilitate this.
World trade in livestock now demands that countries establish effective early warning systems and emergency contingency plans to protect the continuity of their trade and gain a premium for both them and their trading partners.
2.2. Review of the GREP activities in Africa
Six (6) countries in Africa have made an official declaration to OIE of provisional freedom from disease. Four (4) other countries have either stopped vaccination or have indicated that they will do so and make provisional declarations to the OIE soon. However;
· thirteen (13) countries have fallen at least 6 months behind the Blueprint schedule,
· twelve (12) of these countries have not yet made provisional declarations of freedom from disease, and
· Tanzania became infected
It is clear that in some countries where rinderpest is present or suspected, civil war is still a major impediment to vaccination and disease surveillance.
Countries are expected to implement active clinical disease searching and epidemiological surveillance before or at the time of stopping vaccination. However, not all of the countries that have stopped vaccination have implemented such surveillance.
2.3. Review of the GREP activities in Asia
Progress towards internationally recognised freedom from rinderpest has been slower than was anticipated a year ago. This is largely due to the lack of internationally co-ordinated regional programmes for south Asia, west Asia and the Arabian Peninsula and the fact that large areas of Asia remain effectively outside of the GREP. A concerted effort by the EMPRES Unit is essential to increase awareness of the GREP and promote adoption of its principles. Ultimately, progress towards recognised and sustained freedom from rinderpest for the Arabian Peninsula will require eradication of the disease from Africa and Asia and regional co-ordination of national programmes.
In the SAREC region, India and Bhutan remain on schedule, according to the Blueprint, on the OIE Pathway. Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh did not make declarations of provisional freedom at the end of 1996, and are now behind schedule. Pakistan remains endemically infected with rinderpest, and so is Afghanistan. Progress is expected to accelerate in the next year with full implementation of EC-funded country and regional projects under the SAREC umbrella.
The situation in the Near and Middle East has improved marginally with all countries free of clinical disease except for some countries of the Arabian Peninsula. Rinderpest infection is persisting in Saudi Arabia and the Yemen. However, of the twelve (12) countries expected to make declarations of provisional freedom from disease none have yet done so, and vulnerability to reintroduction of infection is increasing.
The former Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Mongolia and China appear to be free from rinderpest but have not made the scheduled declarations of provisional freedom. Effectively they remain outside of the GREP.
2.4. Managing the transition from vaccination to sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest
The main points in the papers 'Managing the transition from vaccination to sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest' and 'Guidelines on emergency preparedness and contingency planning', to be published as separate documents, were accepted. The following were identified as key considerations in making the decision to cease vaccination;
· the expectation that rinderpest virus is no longer present in the population,
· the existence of a disease reporting system that would quickly detect rinderpest if it was introduced into the population,
· effective border controls which would prevent reintroduction of rinderpest,
· preparedness to implement rinderpest surveillance procedures in accordance with the published OIE standards and FAO/IAEA guidelines,
· preparedness to invoke emergency actions to deal with any rinderpest outbreaks.
A proposed reduction in the period of surveillance required to qualify for freedom from infection-either by commencing sero-surveillance one year following the cessation of vaccination, or by sampling larger numbers of herds-was discussed. However, the Expert Consultation concluded that any reduction in the minimum time to qualify for a declaration of freedom from infection would increase the risk of not detecting residual foci of disease and increase overall costs. This suggestion was therefore rejected.
<section>3</section>
3. Recommendations
3.1. EMPRES thematic issues
3.2. Disease information systems for EMPRES
3.3. Progress towards rinderpest eradication in Africa
3.4. Progress towards rinderpest eradication in Asia
3.5. Managing the transition from vaccination to sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest
3.6. Performance indicators
3.7. Rinderpest diagnosis, vaccines and surveillance
3.8. EMPRES resource needs
3.9. EMPRES Expert Consultation of 1998
3.1. EMPRES thematic issues
Transboundary livestock diseases have serious consequences for food security as well as international trade for affected countries. Recent epidemic disease outbreaks have occurred in Taiwan (FMD), The Netherlands (CSF), Botswana (CBPP) and Tanzania (CBPP, rinderpest). These outbreaks have cost billions of dollars in direct and indirect losses to the livestock industries. The losses would have been minimised by earlier detection resulting from implementation of the principles of early warning, early reaction, and emergency preparedness.
The FAO Conference and the World Food Summit have strongly supported the EMPRES mandate to promote the effective containment and control of the most serious epidemic livestock diseases. Therefore, it was recommended that FAO assist Member Countries to enhance their preparedness to counter these serious livestock diseases. Specifically in respect to these thematic issues concerning EMPRES, the Expert Consultation recommended that;
3.1.1. In respect of emergency preparedness
Member Countries include animal health emergencies (such as rinderpest epidemics) as a component of their national Natural Disaster Plan. This will allow essential government services to be more quickly called upon to support veterinary services in the emergency disease control campaign.
3.1.2. In respect of planning for emergencies
Member Countries appoint a high level National Animal Disease Emergency Committee (including representatives from all relevant ministries and stake-holders) to co-ordinate national preparedness and national eradication programmes for serious epidemic livestock diseases.
3.1.3. In respect of national veterinary services
Member Countries establish strong central veterinary authorities with clear lines of authority in order to deal effectively with transboundary diseases.
3.1.4. In respect of a national EMPRES unit
Member Countries establish an EMPRES unit led by a senior veterinary officer within the national veterinary service headquarters as the co-ordinating group for implementation of policies and programmes formulated by the National Animal Diseases Emergencies Committee.
3.1.5. In respect of contingency plans
Member Countries prepare documented contingency plans for rinderpest and other important transboundary diseases which they perceive to be of highest threat. Veterinary officers involved in preparation and implementation of these plans will need to receive comprehensive training.
3.1.6. In respect of regional co-operation
FAO act as a catalyst in the adoption of EMPRES at the national level by assisting the development of 'clusters' of countries within a region and with similar disease problems to co-operate closely in their disease prevention and control programmes.
3.1.7. In respect of the formation of 'clusters ' of countries
FAO promote the formation of country 'clusters' though ministerial meetings and existing regional organisations such as OAU, SAARC, and ASEAN.
3.1.8. In respect of a pilot programme of 'clusters' of countries
FAO identify, as a pilot programme, several small 'clusters' of countries using the following criteria (see Table 1. and Table 2. in Appendix 6.);
· the role of the livestock production systems in the agricultural economy and food security,
· the interest among local, national and regional stake-holders to combat and prevent epidemic diseases,
· the socio-economic impact of transboundary diseases,
· the epidemiological situation in adjacent countries based upon epidemic risk and ecosystem,
· the technical feasibility to reduce and contain the disease problem,
· the existence of regional organisations able to facilitate implementation.
3.1.9. In respect of the adoption of EMPRES
FAO form 'clusters' of countries in key regions to support the GREP as the first phase in the adoption of EMPRES at the national level, and that development of 'clusters' for other EMPRES diseases be considered in the second phase of development (see Table 1 in Appendix 6.).
3.1.10. In respect of regional EMPRES personnel
FAO progressively appoint at least three (3) regional EMPRES co-ordinating officers-one each in Africa, the Middle East, and south Asia. These appointments, together with adequate operating funds, are considered critical to the success of national EMPRES programs within the pilot 'clusters'.
3.1.11. In respect of national veterinary services
FAO facilitate within national veterinary services, rapid global communication on animal transboundary diseases through electronic communication systems (e-mail connections, audio-visual training aids).
3.1.12. In respect of a media strategy for EMPRES
FAO develop and implement a media strategy for the national and international promotion of EMPRES principles.
3.1.13. In respect of contingency funding
Member Countries seek contingency funding for the effective implementation of emergency prevention systems including the operations of the national livestock EMPRES. The expert consultation suggested that such resources could be acquired by inclusion as a component of debt relief. It was recommended that FAO assist Member Countries in bringing this concept to the attention of appropriate organisations such as the World Bank, IFAD and the IMF.
3.1.14. In respect of non-government organisations
FAO seek NGO financial support for regional and national EMPRES activities and in particular inform and seek their participation in the GREP.
3.2. Disease information systems for EMPRES
The development of the transboundary animal disease information system was discussed and the Expert Consultation recommended that;
3.2.1. In respect of the roles within the information system
FAO EMPRES define its role relative to that of the OIE, regional organisations and Member Countries within the information system and that this role include;
· verifying and validating information generated at the country level and assisting countries to identify and investigate rumours and suspect cases,
· identifying spatial and temporal disease patterns of significance,
· warning countries of, and facilitating rapid co-ordinated response to, potential adverse developments which present a significant risk of spread of priority diseases,
· supporting and developing innovative approaches to surveillance and information systems from the village level up,
· presenting the global picture of the actual and potential spread of priority diseases following collation, analysis and presentation of data collected at the national and regional levels.
3.2.2. In respect of support for regional organisations
FAO, in developing the EMPRES information system, supports regional organisations and, through them, countries in the activities listed in section 3.2.1.
3.2.3. In respect of planning of the system
FAO, in planning the EMPRES disease information system, clearly defines the objectives of the system, the data needed and its purpose. It was recommended that the system be developed with an initial focus on GREP or, in those countries where rinderpest does not present a risk, on one of the priority diseases identified by the country.
3.2.4. In respect of the phases of development of the system
FAO consider short, medium and long term phases in the development of the information system over a 4-6 year time scale including time for planning and skills development. These phases would involve;
- in the short term,
· verification and validation of data and surveillance systems,
· assist countries in the assessment of their surveillance and information systems system and in improving performance and usefulness in supporting decision making.
- in the long term,
· using Geographical Information Systems (GIS) to look at spatial and temporal patterns of disease, animal and human movement and changes in the production and marketing systems as they relate to the occurrence of priority and emerging diseases.
3.3. Progress towards rinderpest eradication in Africa
The progress made by countries and the regional organisation in the eradication of rinderpest and the performance of countries in adhering to the time-table for declaring freedom from disease was reviewed and the Expert Consultation recommended that;
3.3.1. In respect of awareness of the Blueprint timetable
FAO ensure that countries are fully aware of the Blueprint timetable and the progress made on it by themselves and their neighbours. This could be facilitated by FAO and by OAU/IBAR PARC through routine publication in their bulletins and on the Internet.
3.3.2. In respect of countries that are behind schedule
Member Countries which have fallen behind the Blueprint schedule are encouraged, through GREP and PARC, to re-establish their position on the OIE Pathway. Where appropriate, countries are strongly encouraged to make provisional declarations of freedom from disease to the OIE and their neighbours.
3.3.3. In respect of national surveillance systems
Member Countries which do not have a national surveillance system in place are encouraged, as a matter of urgency, to do so.
3.3.4. In respect of the sanitary cordon
PARC re-evaluate and strengthen the existing sanitary cordon in Central Africa. The possibility of establishing a new sanitary cordon further east towards the source of infection in Sudan is encouraged. It was recommended that the sanitary cordon be comprised of two (2) zones;
· a buffer zone of well vaccinated cattle within which there is active surveillance for disease and cattle movement, and
· on the disease-free side of this zone, a separate zone of intensive surveillance for presence of clinical signs of disease and within which vaccination is not carried out.
3.3.5. In respect of areas affected by civil war
FAO, PARC and other organisations involved in the GREP find new approaches towards rinderpest eradication in those infected areas afflicted by civil war and, where possible, implement and assess the effectiveness of these approaches.
3.3.6. In respect of 'clusters' of countries
Member Countries support the concept of improving progress along the OIE Pathway by forming 'clusters' of countries with similar epidemiological profiles.
3.3.7. In respect of re-infection from Asia
Co-ordinating organisations in the GREP take active steps to reduce the possibility of re- infecting Africa from Asia, including closer co-operation between east African countries and known infected countries such as Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
3.3.8. In respect of the review of progress
Co-ordinating organisations in the GREP review and report on the progress of countries along the OIE Pathway and in relation to the Blueprint timetable, every 6 months.
3.4. Progress towards rinderpest eradication in Asia
The progress made by countries in the eradication of rinderpest and the performance of countries in adhering to the time-table for declaring freedom from disease was reviewed and the Expert Consultation recommended that;
3.4.1. In respect of awareness of the GREP
FAO enhance the awareness of the GREP in many parts of Asia and bring countries into active participation. The need for this is especially urgent for the southern, former CIS countries which are at significant risk of rinderpest invasion through livestock trade.
3.4.2. In respect of the situation in Pakistan
FAO request the anticipated international assistance for rinderpest eradication in Pakistan be implemented without delay as the continuing persistence of rinderpest in this country remains a cause of grave concern for neighbouring countries and trading partners.
3.4.3. In respect of the situation in west Asia and the Arabian Peninsula
FAO urgently establish international co-ordination for the regions of West Asia and the Arabian Peninsula to protect against reintroduction of rinderpest.
3.4.4. In respect of the situation in Yemen
FAO must identify external assistance to resolve the situation in Yemen as persisting rinderpest infection is of major concern.
3.4.5. In respect of the situation in Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia enhance its surveillance capability and implement an effective eradication programme.
3.5. Managing the transition from vaccination to sustainable and verifiable freedom from rinderpest
The increased risks to countries ceasing vaccination and the minimum length of time from ceasing vaccination to freedom from infection was discussed by the Expert Consultation which recommended that;
3.5.1. In respect of the risk of reintroduction of infection
Countries considering stopping vaccination, but which are unable to reduce the risk of re- introduction of rinderpest from neighbouring countries to an acceptable level, only proceed along the OIE Pathway as part of a regionally co-ordinated programme.
3.5.2. In respect of resources for surveillance and emergency action
Countries ceasing vaccination make available resources for surveillance and emergency action to control the risk of either possible residual disease foci or re-introduction of disease. Making these resources available is justified as the costs of proceeding on the OIE Pathway to freedom from rinderpest are lower than the costs of continuing vaccination indefinitely.
3.5.3. In respect of guidance to countries declaring provisional freedom
The OIE issue guidance to countries declaring provisional freedom from disease as to the critical importance of having an effective surveillance system and prepared contingency plans in case of the reintroduction of rinderpest disease.
3.6. Performance indicators
Performance indicators are an invaluable tool in the assessment of the effectiveness of all disease control programmes. The Expert Consultation recommended that;
3.6.1. In respect of the development of performance indicators
The Joint FAO/IAEA Division prepare and publish a set of performance indicators for rinderpest surveillance in countries ceasing vaccination and proceeding down the OIE Pathway. It was recommended that these indicators be field tested and validated in each of the key regions of the GREP.
3.6.2. In respect of the polio vaccination programme
The Joint FAO/IAEA Division make use of the experience gained by the World Health Organisation (WHO) Expanded Programme on Immunisation (EPI) to develop appropriate performance indicators for rinderpest surveillance.
3.6.3. In respect of rinderpest surveillance procedures
Co-ordinating organisations in the GREP use performance indicators for all GREP activities, but, in particular, for the assessment of effectiveness of surveillance for rinderpest.
3.7. Rinderpest diagnosis, vaccines and surveillance
The Expert Consultation discussed research priorities of the GREP and recommended that;
3.7.1. In respect of rinderpest diagnosis
· the sensitivity of pen-side tests be increased and include a differential diagnosis capability for the rinderpest-like diseases,
· the competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test satisfy performance requirements for sero-surveillance,
· additional monoclonal antibodies be produced against rinderpest and Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) viruses to establish monoclonal antibody panels for epidemiological investigations, and
· the antigen detection ELISA be further developed and standardised.
3.7.2. In respect of rinderpest vaccines
· complete the evaluation of the PPR strain vaccine for control of rinderpest,
· validate assays to discriminate animals vaccinated with PPR vaccine from those infected with rinderpest,
· develop recombinant vaccines for protection against rinderpest, and
· develop markers in rinderpest and PPR vaccines.
3.7.3. In respect of rinderpest diagnosis
· investigate the possibility that rinderpest vaccine RNA can be detected by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method in eye swab samples taken at different times after vaccination.
3.7.4. In respect of pathogenicity and epidemiology of rinderpest virus
· investigate if mild strains of rinderpest virus become virulent during serial passage by contact in cattle,
· investigate if rinderpest virus is maintained by small ruminants and/or transmitted from small ruminants to cattle and vice versa, and
· investigate if there is a wildlife reservoir for mild strains of rinderpest virus when concerns arise about its existence.
3.7.5. In respect of funds for research
· the FAO Rinderpest World Reference Laboratory-Pirbright (WRL) and Centre de Cooperation Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Development (CIRAD-EMVT) requires additional financial support for research,
· donor financial support be sought for essential research, and
· the need for additional funds for research be brought to the attention of the EC and the Assistant Director General of the FAO.
3.7.6. In respect of surveillance for rinderpest
· the surveillance of wildlife for evidence of rinderpest infection be a continuing activity,
· a greater number of samples be collected from suspect cases of rinderpest for submission to national laboratories and the WRL. Every effort be made to collect and transport samples in such a manner that if infectious virus is present it is protected against inactivation during transport to the laboratory, and
· The WRL should provide the CIRAD-EMVT, Montpellier with representative samples of rinderpest virus.
3.8. EMPRES resource needs
EMPRES has a critical role in supporting the GREP. Resources available to meet the tasks and objectives are inadequate both in man