<title>General Requirements (Food Hygiene). Codex Alimentarius (Supplement to Volume 1B)</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
STATUTES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FOOD STANDARDS PROGRAMME BY THE COMMISSION
The Codex Alimentarius Commission was established to implement the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the purpose of which is, as set down in the Statutes of the Commission, to protect the health of consumers and to ensure fair practices in the food trade; to promote coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations; to determine priorities and initiate and guide the preparation of draft standards through and with the aid of appropriate organizations; to finalize standards, and, after acceptance by governments, publish them in a Codex Alimentarius either as regional or world-wide standards ^1.
1 The Codex Alimentarius Commission decided, at its 14th Session in July 1981, that its standards, which are sent to all Member States and Associate Members of FAO and/or WHO for acceptance, together with details of notifications received from governments with respect to the acceptance or otherwise of the standards and other relevant information, constitute the Codex Alimentarius.
The Statutes of the Codex Alimentarius Commission have been approved by the Governing bodies of the FAO and WHO. The Statutes and Rules of the Commission are to be found in the Procedural Manual of the Commission.
PURPOSE
The Codex Alimentarius (Latin, meaning Food Law or Code) is a collection of internationally adopted food standards presented in a uniform manner. The Codex Alimentarius also includes provisions of an advisory nature in the form of codes of practice, guidelines and other recommended measures to assist in achieving the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius. The publication of the Codex Alimentarius is intended to guide and promote the elaboration and establishment of definitions and requirements for foods, to assist in their harmonization and, in doing so, to facilitate international trade.
SCOPE
The Codex Alimentarius includes standards for all the principal foods, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, for distribution to the consumer. Materials for further processing into foods are included to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes of the Codex Alimentarius as defined. The Codex Alimentarius includes provisions in respect of the hygienic and nutritional quality of food, including microbiological norms, provisions for food additives, pesticide residues, contaminants, labelling and presentation, and methods of analysis and sampling. It also includes provisions of an advisory nature in the form of codes of practice, guidelines and other recommended measures. Codex standards contain requirements for food aimed at ensuring for the consumer a sound, wholesome food product free from adulteration, correctly labelled and presented.
ACCEPTANCE
The standards and maximum residue limits adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission are intended for formal acceptance by governments in accordance with its General Principles.
The standards and maximum limits for residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs in foods and feeds, accompanied by an appropriate communication, are sent for action to Ministries of Agriculture or Ministries of Foreign Affairs, as appropriate, of Member Nations of FAO and to Ministries of Health of Member States of WHO. The standards and maximum limits for pesticide residues and veterinary drugs, accompanied by the communication referred to, are also sent to national Codex Contact Points, FAO and WHO Regional Offices, FAO Representatives, Embassies in Rome and Permanent Missions to the UN in Geneva.
The standards and maximum limits for residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs in foods and feeds, which have taken a number of years to develop, are the product of a wide measure of international agreement and cooperation. They are compatible with the norms considered by FAO and WHO as best guaranteeing the protection of the health of consumers and the facilitation of international trade in food.
<section>2</section>
PUBLICATION HISTORY
This is the second publication of the Codex Alimentarius. The first publication was in 1981. Prior to 1981 standards adopted by the Codex Alimentarius were published individually as Recommended Standards (CAC/RS series). The Second Edition of the Codex Alimentarius is now being revised and updated to take into account decisions made by the 22nd Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, June 1997.
Volume One, General Requirements, of the Codex Alimentarius contains those standards, codes and other texts which are generally applicable to all food commodities, or at least a wide range of them. It consists of two Parts, the first part (Volume 1A) dealing with all matters except food hygiene, the second part (Volume 1B) containing general food hygiene texts. It is the basic reference document for all other volumes in the Codex Alimentarius. This volume is a Supplement to Volume 1B and contains texts adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission at its 22nd Session, June 1997. Previous versions of these texts are superceded.
The Recommended International Code of Practice on General Principles of Food Hygiene was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission at its 6th Session, 1969 and subsequently revised by the 13th Session (1979), 16th Session (1985) and 22nd Session (1997). It has been sent to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO and WHO as an advisory text, and it is for individual governments to decide what use they wish to make of the Code. The Commission has expressed the view that codes of practice might provide useful checklists of requirements for national food control or enforcement authorities.
Document
References
Recommended International Code of Practice -General Principles of Food Hygiene:
CAC/RCP-1 (1969)
· Revision 1
CAC/RCP-1 (1969), Rev. l (1979)
· Revision 2
CAC/RCP-1 (1969), Rev. 2 (1985)
· Revision 3 (Current)
CAC/RCP-1 (1969), Rev. 3 (1997)
· Draft adopted by the 22nd Session of the Commission
ALINORM 97/13, Appendix II
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application
CAC/GL 18-1993
· Revision 1 (Current)
Annex to CAC/RCP-1 (1969), Rev. 3 (1997)
· Prior draft
ALINORM 93/13A, Appendix II
· Draft adopted by the 22nd Session of the Commission
ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix II
Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods
Published in the Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, Sixth to Ninth Editions (1986-1995)
· Revision 1 (Current)
CAC/RCP-22 (1997)
· Draft adopted by the 22nd Session of the Commission
ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix III
Guidelines For The Design Of Control Measures For Street-Vended Foods In Africa
CAC/RCP XX (1997)
· Draft adopted by the 22nd Session of the Commission
ALINORM 97/28, Appendix II
<section>3</section>
RECOMMENDED INTERNATIONAL CODE OF PRACTICE. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE
INTRODUCTION
SECTION I - OBJECTIVES
SECTION II - SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION
SECTION III - PRIMARY PRODUCTION
SECTION IV - ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES
SECTION V - CONTROL OF OPERATION
SECTION VI - ESTABLISHMENT: MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION
SECTION VII - ESTABLISHMENT: PERSONAL HYGIENE
SECTION VIII - TRANSPORTATION
SECTION IX - PRODUCT INFORMATION AND CONSUMER AWARENESS
SECTION X - TRAINING
ANNEX: HAZARD ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL CONTROL POINT (HACCP) SYSTEM AND GUIDELINES FOR ITS APPLICATION
INTRODUCTION
People have the right to expect the food they eat to be safe and suitable for consumption. Foodborne illness and foodborne injury are at best unpleasant; at worst, they can be fatal. But there are also other consequences. Outbreaks of foodborne illness can damage trade and tourism, and lead to loss of earnings, unemployment and litigation. Food spoilage is wasteful, costly and can adversely affect trade and consumer confidence.
International food trade, and foreign travel, are increasing, bringing important social and economic benefits. But this also makes the spread of illness around the world easier. Eating habits too, have undergone major change in many countries over the last two decades and new food production, preparation and distribution techniques have developed to reflect this. Effective hygiene control, therefore, is vital to avoid the adverse human health and economic consequences of foodborne illness, foodborne injury, and food spoilage. Everyone, including farmers and growers, manufacturers and processors, food handlers and consumers, has a responsibility to assure that food is safe and suitable for consumption.
These General Principles lay a firm foundation for ensuring food hygiene and should be used in conjunction with each specific code of hygienic practice, where appropriate, and the guidelines on microbiological criteria. The document follows the food chain from primary production through to final consumption, highlighting the key hygiene controls at each stage. It recommends a HACCP-based approach wherever possible to enhance food safety as described in Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (Annex).
The controls described in this General Principles document are internationally recognized as essential to ensure the safety and suitability of food for consumption. The General Principles are commended to Governments, industry (including individual primary producers, manufacturers, processors, food service operators and retailers) and consumers alike.
SECTION I - OBJECTIVES
THE CODEX GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE:
THE CODEX GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE:
- identify the essential principles of food hygiene applicable throughout the food chain (including primary production through to the final consumer), to achieve the goal of ensuring that food is safe and suitable for human consumption;
- recommend a HACCP-based approach as a means to enhance food safety;
- indicate how to implement those principles; and
- provide a guidance for specific codes which may be needed for - sectors of the food chain; processes; or commodities; to amplify the hygiene requirements specific to those areas.
SECTION II - SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION
2.1 SCOPE
2.2 USE
2.3 DEFINITIONS
2.1 SCOPE
2.1.1 THE FOOD CHAIN
This document follows the food chain from primary production to the final consumer, setting out the necessary hygiene conditions for producing food which is safe and suitable for consumption. The document provides a base-line structure for other, more specific, codes applicable to particular sectors. Such specific codes and guidelines should be read in conjunction with this document and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (Annex).
2.1.2 ROLES OF GOVERNMENTS, INDUSTRY, AND CONSUMERS
Governments can consider the contents of this document and decide how best they should encourage the implementation of these general principles to:
- protect consumers adequately from illness or injury caused by food; policies need to consider the vulnerability of the population, or of different groups within the population;
- provide assurance that food is suitable for human consumption;
- maintain confidence in internationally traded food; and
- provide health education programmes which effectively communicate the principles of food hygiene to industry and consumers.
Industry should apply the hygienic practices set out in this document to:
- provide food which is safe and suitable for consumption;
- ensure that consumers have clear and easily-understood information, by way of labelling and other appropriate means, to enable them to protect their food from contamination and growth/survival of foodborne pathogens by storing, handling and preparing it correctly; and
- maintain confidence in internationally traded food.
Consumers should recognize their role by following relevant instructions and applying appropriate food hygiene measures.
2.2 USE
Each section in this document states both the objectives to be achieved and the rationale behind those objectives in terms of the safety and suitability of food.
Section III covers primary production and associated procedures. Although hygiene practices may differ considerably for the various food commodities and specific codes should be applied where appropriate, some general guidance is given in this section. Sections IV to X set down the general hygiene principles which apply throughout the food chain to the point of sale. Section IX also covers consumer information, recognizing the important role played by consumers in maintaining the safety and suitability of food.
There will inevitably be situations where some of the specific requirements contained in this document are not applicable. The fundamental question in every case is "what is necessary and appropriate on the grounds of the safety and suitability of food for consumption?"
The text indicates where such questions are likely to arise by using the phrases "where necessary" and "where appropriate". In practice, this means that, although the requirement is generally appropriate and reasonable, there will nevertheless be some situations where it is neither necessary nor appropriate on the grounds of food safety and suitability. In deciding whether a requirement is necessary or appropriate, an assessment of the risk should be made, preferably within the framework of the HACCP approach. This approach allows the requirements in this document to be flexibly and sensibly applied with a proper regard for the overall objectives of producing food which is safe and suitable for consumption. In so doing it takes into account the wide diversity of activities and varying degrees of risk involved in producing food. Additional guidance is available in specific food codes.
2.3 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Code, the following expressions have the meaning stated:
Cleaning - the removal of soil, food residue, dirt, grease or other objectionable matter.
Contaminant - any biological or chemical agent, foreign matter, or other substances not intentionally added to food which may compromise food safety or suitability.
Contamination - the introduction or occurrence of a contaminant in food or food environment.
Disinfection - the reduction, by means of chemical agents and/or physical methods, of the number of microorganisms in the environment, to a level that does not compromise food safety or suitability.
Establishment - any building or area in which food is handled and the surroundings under the control of the same management.
Food hygiene - all conditions and measures necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food at all stages of the food chain.
Hazard - a biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect.
HACCP - a system which identifies, evaluates, and controls hazards which are significant for food safety.
Food handler - any person who directly handles packaged or unpackaged food, food equipment and utensils, or food contact surfaces and is therefore expected to comply with food hygiene requirements
Food safety - assurance that food will not cause harm to the consumer when it is prepared and/or eaten according to its intended use.
Food suitability - assurance that food is acceptable for human consumption according to its intended use.
Primary production - those steps in the food chain up to and including, for example, harvesting, slaughter, milking, fishing.
SECTION III - PRIMARY PRODUCTION
3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL HYGIENE
3.2 HYGIENIC PRODUCTION OF FOOD SOURCES
3.3 HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORT
3.4 CLEANING, MAINTENANCE AND PERSONNEL HYGIENE AT PRIMARY PRODUCTION
OBJECTIVES:
Primary production should be managed in a way that ensures that food is safe and suitable for its intended use. Where necessary, this will include:
- avoiding the use of areas where the environment poses a threat to the safety of food;
- controlling contaminants, pests and diseases of animals and plants in such a way as not to pose a threat to food safety;
- adopting practices and measures to ensure food is produced under appropriately hygienic conditions.
RATIONALE:
To reduce the likelihood of introducing a hazard which may adversely affect the safety of food, or its suitability for consumption, at later stages of the food chain.
3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL HYGIENE
Potential sources of contamination from the environment should be considered. In particular, primary food production should not be carried on in areas where the presence of potentially harmful substances would lead to an unacceptable level of such substances in food.
3.2 HYGIENIC PRODUCTION OF FOOD SOURCES
The potential effects of primary production activities on the safety and suitability of food should be considered at all times. In particular, this includes identifying any specific points in such activities where a high probability of contamination may exist and taking specific measures to minimize that probability. The HACCP-based approach may assist in the taking of such measures - see Hazard Analysis and Critical Control (HACCP) Point System and Guidelines for its Application (Annex, page 19).
Producers should as far as practicable implement measures to:
- control contamination from air, soil, water, feedstuffs, fertilizers (including natural fertilizers), pesticides, veterinary drugs or any other agent used in primary production;
- control plant and animal health so that it does not pose a threat to human health through food consumption, or adversely affect the suitability of the product; and
- protect food sources from faecal and other contamination.
In particular, care should be taken to manage wastes, and store harmful substances appropriately. On-farm programmes which achieve specific food safety goals are becoming an important part of primary production and should be encouraged.
3.3 HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORT
Procedures should be in place to:
- sort food and food ingredients to segregate material which is evidently unfit for human consumption;
- dispose of any rejected material in a hygienic manner; and
- Protect food and food ingredients from contamination by pests, or by chemical, physical or microbiological contaminants or other objectionable substances during handling, storage and transport.
Care should be taken to prevent, so far as reasonably practicable, deterioration and spoilage through appropriate measures which may include controlling temperature, humidity, and/or other controls.
3.4 CLEANING, MAINTENANCE AND PERSONNEL HYGIENE AT PRIMARY PRODUCTION
Appropriate facilities and procedures should be in place to ensure that:
- any necessary cleaning and maintenance is carried out effectively; and
- an appropriate degree of personal hygiene is maintained.
SECTION IV - ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES
4.1 LOCATION
4.2 PREMISES AND ROOMS
4.3 EQUIPMENT
4.4 FACILITIES
OBJECTIVES:
Depending on the nature of the operations, and the risks associated with them, premises, equipment and facilities should be located, designed and constructed to ensure that:
- contamination is minimized;
- design and layout permit appropriate maintenance, cleaning and disinfections and minimize air-borne contamination;
- surfaces and materials, in particular those in contact with food, are non-toxic in intended use and, where necessary, suitably durable, and easy to maintain and clean;
- where appropriate, suitable facilities are available for temperature, humidity and other controls; and
- there is effective protection against pest access and harbourage.
RATIONALE:
Attention to good hygienic design and construction, appropriate location, and the provision of adequate facilities, is necessary to enable hazards to be effectively controlled.
4.1 LOCATION
4.1.1 ESTABLISHMENTS
Potential sources of contamination need to be considered when deciding where to locate food establishments, as well as the effectiveness of any reasonable measures that might be taken to protect food. Establishments should not be located anywhere where, after considering such protective measures, it is clear that there will remain a threat to food safety or suitability. In particular, establishments should normally be located away from:
- environmentally polluted areas and industrial activities which pose a serious threat of contaminating food;
- areas subject to flooding unless sufficient safeguards are provided;
- areas prone to infestations of pests;
- areas where wastes, either solid or liquid, cannot be removed effectively.
4.1.2 EQUIPMENT
Equipment should be located so that it:
- permits adequate maintenance and cleaning;
- functions in accordance with its intended use; and
- facilitates good hygiene practices, including monitoring.
4.2 PREMISES AND ROOMS
4.2.1 DESIGN AND LAYOUT
Where appropriate, the internal design and layout of food establishments should permit good food hygiene practices, including protection against cross-contamination between and during operations by foodstuffs.
4.2.2 INTERNAL STRUCTURES AND FITTINGS
Structures within food establishments should be soundly built of durable materials and be easy to maintain, clean and where appropriate, able to be disinfected. In particular the following specific conditions should be satisfied where necessary to protect the safety and suitability of food:
- the surfaces of walls, partitions and floors should be made of impervious materials with no toxic effect in intended use;
- walls and partitions should have a smooth surface up to a height appropriate to the operation;
- floors should be constructed to allow adequate drainage and cleaning;
- ceilings and overhead fixtures should be constructed and finished to minimize the build up of dirt and condensation, and the shedding of particles;
- windows should be easy to clean, be constructed to minimize the build up of dirt and where necessary, be fitted with removable and cleanable insect-proof screens. Where necessary, windows should be fixed;
- doors should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces, and be easy to clean and, where necessary, disinfect;
- working surfaces that come into direct contact with food should be in sound condition, durable and easy to clean, maintain and disinfect. They should be made of smooth, non-absorbent materials, and inert to the food, to detergents and disinfectants under normal operating conditions.
4.2.3 TEMPORARY/MOBILE PREMISES AND VENDING MACHINES
Premises and structures covered here include market stalls, mobile sales and street vending vehicles, temporary premises in which food is handled such as tents and marquees.
Such premises and structures should be sited, designed and constructed to avoid, as far as reasonably practicable, contaminating food and harbouring pests.
In applying these specific conditions and requirements, any food hygiene hazards associated with such facilities should be adequately controlled to ensure the safety and suitability of food.
4.3 EQUIPMENT
4.3.1 GENERAL
Equipment and containers (other than once-only use containers and packaging) coming into contact with food, should be designed and constructed to ensure that, where necessary, they can be adequately cleaned, disinfected and maintained to avoid the contamination of food. Equipment and containers should be made of materials with no toxic effect in intended use. Where necessary, equipment should be durable and movable or capable of being disassembled to allow for maintenance, cleaning, disinfection, monitoring and, for example, to facilitate inspection for pests.
4.3.2 FOOD CONTROL AND MONITORING EQUIPMENT
In addition to the general requirements in paragraph 4.3.1, equipment used to cook, heat treat, cool, store or freeze food should be designed to achieve the required food temperatures as rapidly as necessary in the interests of food safety and suitability, and maintain them effectively. Such equipment should also be designed to allow temperatures to be monitored and controlled. Where necessary, such equipment should have effective means of controlling and monitoring humidity, air-flow and any other characteristic likely to have a detrimental effect on the safety or suitability of food. These requirements are intended to ensure that:
- harmful or undesirable micro-organisms or their toxins are eliminated or reduced to safe levels or their survival and growth are effectively controlled;
- where appropriate, critical limits established in HACCP-based plans can be monitored; and
- temperatures and other conditions necessary to food safety and suitability can be rapidly achieved and maintained.
4.3.3 CONTAINERS FOR WASTE AND INEDIBLE SUBSTANCES
Containers for waste, by-products and inedible or dangerous substances, should be specifically identifiable, suitably constructed and, where appropriate, made of impervious material. Containers used to hold dangerous substances should be identified and, where appropriate, be lockable to prevent malicious or accidental contamination of food.
4.4 FACILITIES
4.4.1 WATER SUPPLY
An adequate supply of potable water with appropriate facilities for its storage, distribution and temperature control, should be available whenever necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food.
Potable water should be as specified in the latest edition of WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, or water of a higher standard. Non-potable water (for use in, for example, fire control, steam production, refrigeration and other similar purposes where it would not contaminate food), shall have a separate system. Non-potable water systems shall be identified and shall not connect with, or allow reflux into, potable water systems.
4.4.2 DRAINAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL
Adequate drainage and waste disposal systems and facilities should be provided. They should be designed and constructed so that the risk of contaminating food or the potable water supply is avoided.
4.4.3 CLEANING
Adequate facilities, suitably designated, should be provided for cleaning food, utensils and equipment. Such facilities should have an adequate supply of hot and cold potable water where appropriate.
4.4.4 PERSONNEL HYGIENE FACILITIES AND TOILETS
Personnel hygiene facilities should be available to ensure that an appropriate degree of personal hygiene can be maintained and to avoid contaminating food. Where appropriate, facilities should include:
- adequate means of hygienically washing and drying hands, including wash basins and a supply of hot and cold (or suitably temperature controlled) water;
- lavatories of appropriate hygienic design; and
- adequate changing facilities for personnel.
Such facilities should be suitably located and designated.
4.4.5 TEMPERATURE CONTROL
Depending on the nature of the food operations undertaken, adequate facilities should be available for heating, cooling, cooking, refrigerating and freezing food, for storing refrigerated or frozen foods, monitoring food temperatures, and when necessary, controlling ambient temperatures to ensure the safety and suitability of food.
4.4.6 AIR QUALITY AND VENTILATION
Adequate means of natural or mechanical ventilation should be provided, in particular to:
- minimize air-borne contamination of food, for example, from aerosols and condensation droplets;
- control ambient temperatures;
- control odours which might affect the suitability of food; and
- control humidity, where necessary, to ensure the safety and suitability of food.
Ventilation systems should be designed and constructed so that air does not flow from contaminated areas to clean areas and, where necessary, they can be adequately maintained and cleaned.
4.4.7 LIGHTING
Adequate natural or artificial lighting should be provided to enable the undertaking to operate in a hygienic manner. Where necessary, lighting should not be such that the resulting colour is misleading. The intensity should be adequate to the nature of the operation. Lighting fixtures should, where appropriate, be protected to ensure that food is not contaminated by breakages.
4.4.8 STORAGE
Where necessary, adequate facilities for the storage of food, ingredients and non-food chemicals (e.g. cleaning materials, lubricants, fuels) should be provided.
Where appropriate, food storage facilities should be designed and constructed to:
- permit adequate maintenance and cleaning;
- avoid pest access and harbourage;
- enable food to be effectively protected from contamination during storage; and
- where necessary, provide an environment which minimizes the deterioration of food (e.g. by temperature and humidity control).
The type of storage facilities required will depend on the nature of the food. Where necessary, separate, secure storage facilities for cleaning materials and hazardous substances should be provided.
SECTION V - CONTROL OF OPERATION
5.1 CONTROL OF FOOD HAZARDS
5.2 KEY ASPECTS OF HYGIENE CONTROL SYSTEMS
5.3 INCOMING MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
5.4 PACKAGING
5.5 WATER
5.6 MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION
5.7 DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDS
5.8 RECALL PROCEDURES
OBJECTIVE:
To produce food which is safe and suitable for human consumption by:
- formulating design requirements with respect to raw materials, composition, processing, distribution, and consumer use to be met in the manufacture and handling of specific food items; and
- designing, implementing, monitoring and reviewing effective control systems.
RATIONALE:
To reduce the risk of unsafe food by taking preventive measures to assure the safety and suitability of food at an appropriate stage in the operation by controlling food hazards.
5.1 CONTROL OF FOOD HAZARDS
Food business operators should control food hazards through the use of systems such as HACCP. They should:
- identify any steps in their operations which are critical to the safety of food;
- implement effective control procedures at those steps;
- monitor control procedures to ensure their continuing effectiveness; and
- review control procedures periodically, and whenever the operations change.
These systems should be applied throughout the food chain to control food hygiene throughout the shelf-life of the product through proper product and process design.
Control procedures may be simple, such as checking stock rotation calibrating equipment, or correctly loading refrigerated display units. In some cases a system based on expert advice, and involving documentation, may be appropriate. A model of such a food safety system is described in Hazard Analysis and Critical Control (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (Annex).
5.2 KEY ASPECTS OF HYGIENE CONTROL SYSTEMS
5.2.1 TIME AND TEMPERATURE CONTROL
Inadequate food temperature control is one of the most common causes of foodborne illness or food spoilage. Such controls include time and temperature of cooking, cooling, processing and storage. Systems should be in place to ensure that temperature is controlled effectively where it is critical to the safety and suitability of food.
Temperature control systems should take into account:
- the nature of the food, e.g. its water activity, pH, and likely initial level and types of micro-organisms;
- the intended shelf-life of the product;
- the method of packaging and processing; and
- how the product is intended to be used, e.g. further cooking/processing or ready-to-eat.
Such systems should also specify tolerable limits for time and temperature variations. Temperature recording devices should be checked at regular intervals and tested for accuracy.
5.2.2 SPECIFIC PROCESS STEPS
Other steps which contribute to food hygiene may include, for example:
- chilling
- thermal processing
- irradiation
- drying
- chemical preservation
- vacuum or modified atmospheric packaging
5.2.3 MICROBIOLOGICAL AND OTHER SPECIFICATIONS
Management systems described in paragraph 5.1 offer an effective way of ensuring the safety and suitability of food. Where microbiological, chemical or physical specifications are used in any food control system, such specifications should be based on sound scientific principles and state, where appropriate, monitoring procedures, analytical methods and action limits.
5.2.4 MICROBIOLOGICAL CROSS-CONTAMINATION
Pathogens can be transferred from one food to another, either by direct contact or by food handlers, contact surfaces or the air. Raw, unprocessed food should be effectively separated, either physically or by time, from ready-to-eat foods, with effective intermediate cleaning and where appropriate disinfection.
Access to processing areas may need to be restricted or controlled. Where risks are particularly