<title>Wildlife and protected area management: A compendium of FAO implemented projects and related bibliography, 1975-1996</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
FAO is very active in conservation, management and sustainable use of wildlife resources, although the public, a number of development organizations and scientific institutions are not always fully aware of its involvement in the sector. Today, increased importance is given to the urgency for conservation of biological diversity. Documentation is being increasingly requested to record the importance of wildlife as a sustainable source for food security, especially for rural societies and indigenous people. Also, the opportunities provided by protected areas for income generation and improvement of living standards are being noted.
This document aims at giving information on the activities of the Organization in these fields. Such activities are integrated in rural or forestry development projects either as components of larger programmes or as specific initiatives aiming at conservation and management of protected areas, or the development of wildlife resources. They have been funded through three major sources including the Technical Cooperation Programme of the FAO Regular Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, including the GEF (Global Environmental Facility) and Trust Fund projects. Some regional activities were developed in cooperation with UNEP, especially in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean.
It is hoped that this information will generate more interest in FAO initiatives among national and international partners, as well as promote further involvement of the Organization in wildlife, protected area management and the conservation of biological diversity.
The compendium entries and bibliography reflect a cooperative collaboration among many units and support services within FAO. All have helped pave the way for renewed cooperation and better sharing of the valuable human resources of the Organization.
Sincere thanks to all colleagues who contributed in the Agriculture, Fishery, Technical Cooperation and in particular the Forestry Operations Service, Sustainable Development and General Affairs and Information Departments. Under the supervision of Mr. El-Hadji Sène Chief, Forest Conservation, Research and Education Service and the guidance of Mr. Christian de Greling then Forestry Officer (Wildlife and Protected Area Management), Ms. Marcia Botelho, consultant to the Forest Conservation, Research and Education Service, has worked hard on this document to extract the dispersed information within the house; the practical advice and contribution of MM. Mauro Paolozzi (Forestry Planning and Statistics Branch), M.L Mechitarian (FAO Investment Centre), Gabriel Stergiou (WAI-CENT/FAOINFO Dissemination Management Unit), Ms. Edith Corossacz, Patricia Merrikin, Stefanie Ayazi of the FAO Documentation Group, Ms. Franca Monti and Annalisa Casponi of the Forestry Branch library are much
appreciated.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The following bibliographical references consist of reports of projects carried out by the Food and Agriculture Organization as a contribution to the efforts for the management of wildlife and national parks, as well as other protected areas and the conservation of the biological diversity they contain, during the period of 1975 to 1996.
The bibliography is arranged by accession numbers and the references are accompanied by key words for a speedy examination of the contents. Indexes of author, project, subject and geographic terms are given at the end of the bibliography to facilitate the consultation.
Most of the references have been extracted from the FAO Documentation Database and are available for consultation in FAO's Library, but those from FAO's Investment Centre are listed separately due to their more confidential nature and thus limited availability for the public.
<section>3</section>
FAO's technical assistance on wildlife and protected area management
FAO provides technical assistance on wildlife and protected area management within the framework of its regular and field programmes. Through the regular programme, financed by the Organization, FAO acts both as a centre for the collection and analysis of information and as an international forum and source of policy advice. The technical assistance is provided mainly through the field programmes, with three sources of funds, which are the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Trust Fund Programme. The TCP is funded from the Organization's regular programme, which was established to assist government urgent requests by providing small and rapid projects. Many of these projects were of a preparatory nature, to enable governments to receive pre-investment assistance, as well as training or emergency help. A number of TCP projects have contributed efficiently to promote sustainable development through the conservation and
management of wildlife and protected areas. UNDP is the central source for technical assistance funding, having financed for many years regional and country projects executed by FAO and recipient governments. The Trust Fund Programme is multi-bilateral. One country supports another, with a multinational agency as an intermediate. In this case, FAO provides expertise to execute the project. Trust Funds are presently contributing with more than half of the Organization's Field Programme within the framework of the Government Cooperative Programme (GCP). Under the GCP, donor governments supply funds in trust to FAO to execute projects in countries or regions of their special interest and in subjects selected by priority.
During the period extending from 1975 to date, FAO assisted 84 member countries on wildlife and protected area management, supporting local governments in the identification, formulation, evaluation, selection, promotion and implementation of projects. The Organization helped to foster medium and long-term development planning, resource management and use, technology-development training and research, including resource assessment and monitoring, in wildlife and protected areas. FAO provided advice and information on the development of protected area systems by building up capabilities at regional or national levels in planning and management of wildlands.
Workshops, seminars and training
The project FAO/UNEP on Wildlands, Protected Areas and Wildlife Management in Latin America and the Caribbean, still in operation, aims at strengthening the professional and technical capabilities of the field personnel for managing wildlands, protected areas and wildlife. It was designed to encourage the utilization of the full potential of wild plants and animal resources on a sustainable basis for enhanced economic and social development of the region. Among other objectives of this project it can be highlighted the integration of planning and management of wildlands, protected areas and wildlife into the national conservation strategies and national development plans by the governments involved. In order to promote the exchange of scientific and technical information in the region a number of workshops and seminars were organized. Some examples are:
· Workshop on Wildlife Management for Rural Development - Peru, 1985
· Workshop on Protected Wildlands Planning - Venezuela, 1986
· Workshop on In Situ Conservation of Genetic Resources - Peru, 1987
· International Workshop on the Strategies for the Management and Rational Utilization of "Guanaco" - Argentina, 1989
· Protected Wildlands and Local Communities in Latin America - Costa Rica, 1989
· Workshop on Project Development for National Parks and Protected Areas -Dominica, 1989
· International Workshop on Protected Areas in Amazonís Basin - Peru, 1990
· Management of Biosphere Reserves in Latin America - Mexico, 1991
· International Workshop on the Management and Utilization of the Green Iguana -Nicaragua, 1992.
· International Workshop on Tourism Policies in National Parks and other Protected Areas - Venezuela, 1992
· Workshop on the Integrated Management of Protected Wildlands in Chile - Chile, 1992
· International Workshop on Protected Area Policies towards the Conservation and Rational Utilization of Biodiversity in Latin America - Argentina, 1994
FAO support to wildlife training was mainly funded by the Technical Cooperative Programme and conducted in many different regions. In Kenya, the project "Training in Wildlife Management and Fisheries" proposed a revision of the curriculum for wildlife and fisheries management training and developed a draft curriculum for a B.Sc. Fisheries Management Course at Moi University. Another example in Africa was the Seminar on Integrated Wildlife Resource Use, undertaken by the SADCC - Southern Africa Development Coordination Conference - member states Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The seminar emphasized community's participation in wildlife management and utilization for rural development, by analyzing case studies of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
A project with similar objectives was designed for Thailand - Demonstration and Training in Wildlife Farming for Rural Development - through which a wildlife farming programme was initiated to increase food supply for rural population. The rational utilization of wildlife resources also contributed to boost family income.
The project Training of Conservation Personnel, in Mongolia, assisted national staff in preparing and carrying out field training courses for forest and wildlife rangers, enabling the government to implement its policy for the development of the Gobi region's forest and wildlife resources.
In Paraguay, through the project Training for Investments Promotion in the Forestry Sector, FAO helped prepare practical guides for the game wardens' work in the national parks system. There were also made some recommendations for the establishment of national parks.
A UNDP-funded project was carried out in Nigeria, in two phases, to plan and to construct the Federal School of Wildlife Management, conceiving the curriculum, initiating courses at technician level and ensuring counter-part training abroad.
Establishment and Management of Protected Areas
FAO provided advice for many countries and regions in the development of a system of parks, reserves and sanctuaries in representative ecological zones as an attempt to assure the conservation of ecosystems, the protection of endangered species and an effective management of wildlife resources. The projects, mostly funded by UN DP, assisted in the preparation of national management plans, identifying priority areas for environmental conservation. Moreover, they conducted multidisciplinary studies, oriented towards the implementation of protected area networks and promoted integrated management of protected areas and buffer zones. Some of the countries assisted were Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Bhutan, Cameroon, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Thailand, Sri Lanka and Sudan.
Legislation
The projects concerning legislation were formulated and implemented in close cooperation with FAO's Legal Office. The main source of funding was the Technical Cooperative Programme, except for the project Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy and Legislation, MontSerrat, financed by UNDP.
At regional level the project Forestry Legislation and Policy, for Latin America and the Caribbean, provided assistance to the participating countries in upgrading their forestry policies and national legislation, and in implementing regulations to forests, wildlife and national parks. A separate review of forestry, wildlife and national parks legislation was prepared for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Under the two-phase-project Elaboration of Legislation for Protection of Flora and Fauna, the government of Angola was assisted through the preparation of a comprehensive set of laws for wildlife management and protection, based on previous studies of the situation.
Particular attention was given to the hunting regulations and wildlife protection in Guinea. A report to the government, containing an analysis of the existent fauna legislation and subsequent proposals for an effective enforcement of the law.
A very recent project in Tanzania aims at assisting the government in undertaking a comprehensive review of the legal framework for national parks management. In addition, it will be prepared a draft legislation, along with other legal documents and strategies to better implement the country's national parks policies. Other projects regarding forest and environmental legislation were executed in Zanzibar, with a special assistance in marine areas. For those areas, it was proposed specific legislation for marine parks and reserves, for better management of the resources.
Wildlife Utilization and Management
The majority of the projects to support the development of wildlife management was financed either by TCP or UNDP, most of them concentrated in Africa. Mozambique, for instance, received support to the development of community forestry and wildlife management throughout pilot experiences, training, technology development, research and education. Another project carried out in the country sought to improve the wildlife meat supply to Beira and Marromeu by rationalizing the utilization of wildlife resources, thus generating income and improving the protein nutrition of rural communities.
Projects in Zimbabwe, Burkina Faso and Somalia enabled the respective governments to initiate the implementation of utilization and management programmes for wildlife resources. Within those programmes it was emphasized the evaluation of institutional arrangements regarding the distribution of benefits and revenues to local people. Zimbabwe was supported by a GCP project to assess the promotion of production, processing and marketing of handicrafts from wildlife trophies, stones and wood by local people in communal lands. FAO also provided advice to the establishment of small-scale industries for the production and marketing of those handicrafts.
There were four projects in the Central African Republic to develop a wildlife management programme. They contributed to improve the quality of life of the local population through the utilization of wildlife resources.
In Malawi a wildlife management project increased farm productivity by reducing crop damage and pre-harvest losses caused by wild animals.
In Kenya the projects contributed to the sustained development of wildlife resources by assisting the government to conduct studies in order to develop and demonstrate the economic returns from wildlife utilization and management.
FAO cooperated in carrying out ecological studies in Tanzania with special reference to wildlife utilization.
Some of the projects were carried out in other regions. In Mongolia the Organization demonstrated ways of increasing the profitability of wildlife management as well as protecting endangered animal species.
The government of Dominica was assisted in the conservation of the environment by ensuring the effective management of the island's fauna.
In Indonesia there was a project for nature conservation and wildlife management through which an effective system of national parks and reserves was developed. This was an important measure to safeguard viable and representative samples of the Indonesian flora and fauna, and to develop the economic potential of such areas through tourism where appropriated.
Iran was supported in wildlife conservation and management through the development of a viable parks and wildlife research and management programme in the Nature Conservation Office. FAO also helped in the development of a sound conservation education programme and legislation for this country.
In relation to hunting management the Organization formulated a project to reorganize hunting for subsistence in Burkina Faso and conducted feasibility studies on game reserves and management of the Bili-Uere hunting reserve in Zaire. Other feasibility studies took place in Croatia to incentive hunting development and tourism. In Mauritania there was a need to organize controlled hunting of birds that were destructive to crops. The government of Botswana was provided with a computerized system for collection of updated information to enable more effective control of both hunting licensing and administration.
Wildlife Production
A TCP project on ostrich production and marketing was developed in Namibia to advise the government on economic ostrich farming, identifying the potentials and constraints regarding the domestic and the export market, for ostrich products and byproducts.
FAO assisted the government of Papua New Guinea to establish a deer farm through a UNDP-funded project. Studies of Rusa deer were undertaken in support of the development of a deer industry at local and large commercial levels.
A significant contribution was made to crocodile management, breeding, farming or industry. TCP was the main source of funding for generic crocodile management projects. In Botswana, Ethiopia and Myanmar those projects prepared and implemented guidelines for the development of crocodile management for rural people, together with specialized training and establishment of crocodile conservation programmes. There are on-going projects in Chad and Mali that are assisting the governments of these countries to conduct inventories of monitor lizard populations of economic importance and to monitor the conservation status of the species according to CITES criteria.
Crocodile breeding projects were carried out in Bhutan and India, financed by UNDP. Studies on the possibility and potential for rehabilitation of crocodiles in the wild were made in Bhutan, followed by an analysis of the possibility and prospects of crocodile farming for commercial purposes. In India, the Crocodile Breeding and Management project contributed to the strengthening of the Central Crocodile Breeding and Management Training Institute in Hyderabad, having trained personnel at professional level in crocodile husbandry and sanctuary management.
TCP and UNDP projects on potential and/or practice of crocodile ranching and farming took place in Cameroon, Ethiopia, India, Madagascar and Solomon Islands. The advisory assistance to those countries consisted basically of the following activities: inventories of crocodile populations; feasibility studies for farming, accessing the potential of increased utilization of crocodile resources; establishment and management of crocodile hatchery and rearing stations; and investigation of the possibilities and perspectives of crocodile farming in captivity, either for conservation or commercial purposes.
An important GCP project was developed and implemented in Indonesia for the development of crocodile industry on a sustained yield basis. It attempted to reduce pressure on wild stocks by bringing the trade under control. The main strategy was to add legal protection to the crocodile species and to enforce regulation through the utilization of permits to control each stage of the industry. Other projects on crocodile skin industry, funded by UNDP, were developed in Ethiopia, Myanmar and Papua New Guinea to establish commercially viable crocodile skin export industry in order to increase foreign exchange earnings. The projects were complemented by the introduction of monitoring systems, training in the techniques of husbandry and marketing, and cooperation with CITES.
Institutional Strengthening
Most of the projects on institutional building were financed through UNDP and the GEF. FAO assisted to develop the potential of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation in Nepal, enabling the country to manage natural parks and the protected area system in a more effective way. A three-phase-project in Myanmar established a Forest Institute in Yezin and elaborated research programmes in wildlife management. In Afghanistan and in Ecuador the support to the capacity building of their forest departments improved the planning, development and management of national parks. The strengthening of the Somali Institute of Forestry and Wildlife helped improve both the national training programme and the forest management planning. Building up the IZCN (Wildlife and National Parks) in Zaire was a good mechanism for the implementation of a reorganized policy for wildlife and national parks.
A very important sub-regional project for Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda was funded through GEF (the Global Environmental Facility) to provide institutional support for the Conservation of East African Biological Diversity. A similar support through GEF was also provided to Sri Lanka.
Technical Assistance
AFGHANISTAN
ALGERIA
ANGOLA
ARGENTINA
BANGLADESH
BELIZE
BENIN
BHUTAN
BOLIVIA
BOTSWANA
BRAZIL
BURKINA FASO
CAMBODIA
CAMEROON
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
CHAD
CHILE
COMOROS ISLANDS
COSTA RICA
CROATIA
CUBA
CYPRUS
DJIBOUTI
DOMINICA
ECUADOR
EL SALVADOR
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
ETHIOPIA
FIJI
GRENADA
GUATEMALA
GUINEA
INDIA
INDONESIA
IRAN
KENYA
LESOTHO
MADAGASCAR
MALAWI
MALAYSIA
MALI
MAURITANIA
MAURITIUS
MONGOLIA
MONTSERRAT
MOROCCO
MOZAMBIQUE
MYANMAR
NAMIBIA
NEPAL
NIGERIA
PANAMA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PARAGUAY
PERU
PHILIPPINES
RWANDA
SAUDI ARABIA
SENEGAL
SOLOMON ISLANDS
SOMALIA
SRI LANKA
ST. VINCENT
SUDAN
SYRIA
TANZANIA
THAILAND
TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
UGANDA
URUGUAY
VANUATU
VIETNAM
YEMEN
ZAIRE
ZIMBABWE
Categories
1. PROTECTED AREA PLANNING
2. PROTECTED AREA ESTABLISHMENT
3. PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT
4. WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
5. WILDLIFE STUDIES, SURVEYS, RESEARCH AND MONITORING
6. WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
7. WILDLIFE AND PROTECTED AREA TRAINING PROGRAMMES
8. WILDLIFE AND PROTECTED AREA LEGISLATION
9. WILDLIFE CONTROL
10. WILDLIFE UTILIZATION
11. ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION
12. GAME FARMING
13. CROCODILE FARMING
14. CROCODILE BREEDING
15. RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND BUFFER ZONE MANAGEMENT
16. ECOSYSTEM CONSERVATION
17. INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING
<section>4</section>
FAO projects on wildlife and protected area management
REGIONAL PROJECTS
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
Africa
FO-DP/RAF/74/056
Regional Assistance to Training, Wildlife and Protected Area Management
Train wildlife management personnel formally at technical levels; develop regional approaches to wildlife and protected area management in Africa, under maximum application of TCDC.
FO-DP/RAF/87/075
Watershed Management and Restoration of the Highlands of Fouta Djallon
Promotion of regional economic integration of countries concerned in the Fouta Djallon watersheds; conservation of natural resources; to review gains obtained by project RAF/81/060.
FO-UNO/RAF/006/GEF
Institutional Support for Protection of East African Biodiversity
To support government and NGOs with conservation and management of natural resources; to enhance capacity to deal with the new theme of biodiversity conservation.
AG-GCP/RAF/191/ITA
Sub-regional Development Support Unit of the African Animal Trypanosomiasis Control Programme and Development of Related Areas
Ensure sub-regional coordination of activities under the FAO programme for the control of African animal trypanosomiasis and related development; compile the data necessary for integrated rural development; encourage and help training national staff of the countries involved in the project with agricultural development and training.
FO-TCP/RAF/8962
Training Seminar on Integrated Wildlife Resource Use
To conduct group training in the integrated use of wildlife by rural communities in the Sahel region.
FO-TCP/RAF/8968(A)
Regional Survey of Wildlife Utilization
Develop controlled and sustainable forms of use of wildlife resources for rural development.
UNO/RAF/006/GEF
Institutional Support for the Conservation of East African Biodiversity
Develop institutional capacity and human resources, collect information on natural resources and protected areas, forestry/strategy development.
ASIA AND PACIFIC
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
FO-DP/RAS/72/029
Regional Wildlife and National Parks Management Adviser for the Far East
Assist regional governments in the identification, formulation, evaluation, selection, promotion and implementation of wildlife and national parks projects; promote medium and long-term development planning, training and research in wildlife and national parks management.
FI-GCP/RAS/118/MUL
Small-Scale Fisherfolk Communities in the Bay of Bengal
Socio-economic improvement of small-scale fisherfolk in fishing communities of the Bay of Bengal Region; rural development of coastal areas; environmental assessment; studies on dolphin fisheries and protection; studies on coral reef fish resources and coral reef protection.
LATIN AMERICA
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
FO-DP/RLA/72/028
Wildland Management and Environmental Conservation
Develop a strong regional capability to advise the countries of the region in planning and management of wildlands and marginal areas, based on a methodology which would integrate social, economic, ecological and policy criteria.
FO-DP/RLA/75
Wildland Management and Environmental Conservation
Establish a framework for the application of management techniques for wildlands, wildlife and marginal lands based on planning and management methodology aimed to fulfil specific objectives for the area.
FO-TCP/RLA/0051
Asesoría técnica a la Secretaria Tratado de Cooperación Amazónica (Phase 11)
Apoyo técnico a ejecución/coordinación de planes de trabajo de la Secretaria Pro-Tempore aprobados en cuarta reunión del Consejo de Cooperación Amazónica; completar formulación de programas/proyectos regionales en campos prioritarios; promover preparación de propuestas programas/proyectos complementarios en areas prioritarias de comisión especial de ciencia y tecnología.
FO-GCP/RLA/118/NET
Apoyo al Fortalecimiento de la Secretaria Pro-Tempore del Tratado de Cooperación Amazónica
Impulsar el establecimiento y aplicación a nivel regional de las políticas de los países de la cuenca y de aquellos que tienen jurisdicción sobre la misma, dentro de las líneas de acción trazadas a nivel de presidentes de los países miembros delTCA, esto es, el desarrollo sustentable con el mínimo de impactos sobre el medio ambiente.
FO-TCP/RLA/0160F
Formulacion Proyectos Prioritarios, Tratado de Cooperación Amazónica
Apoyar técnicamente a las partes contratantes del Tratado de Cooperación Amazónica y la Secretaria Pro-Tempore en: Formulacion de proyectos regionales amazónicos en campos prioritarios; formulacion de un proyecto de asistencia técnica a mediano plazo para el fortalecimiento técnico-institucional de la Secretaria Pro-Tempore.
LEG-TCP/RLA/6661(A)
Forestry Legislation and Policy, Latin America and the Caribbean
Provide assistance to the participating countries in the upgrading of their forest policies and national legislation and implementing regulations to forests, wildlife and national parks.
FO-TCP/RLA/8967
Asesoria a la Secretaria Pro-Tempore del Consejo de Cooperación Amazonica.
Contactar la Secretaria Pro-Tempore para definir el apoyo requerido y las acciones imediatas a desarrollar; contactar instituciones nacionales relacionadas con el sector forestal y con la conservación del medio ambiente y desarrollo de los recursos naturales, con el fin de conocer las actividades previstas en la Secretaria Pro-Tempore; colaborar en la preparación de perfiles de algunos proyectos específicos para proponerlos a los países signatarios del Tratado de Cooperación Amazónica.
EP/RLA/001/UEP
Wildlands, Protected Areas and Wildlife Management in Latin America and the Caribbean
Strengthen the professional and technical capabilities of field personnel managing wildlands, protected areas and wildlife. Utilizing the full potential of wild plants and animal resources on a sustainable basis for enhanced economic and social development of the region; facilitate coordination of activities and the exchange of scientific and technical information on wildlands, protected areas and wildlife in the region; integrate planning and management of wildlands, protected areas and wildlife into the national conservation strategies and national development plans by governments of the region.
EP/RLA/008/UEP
Conservation of Biological Diversity in Wildlands and Protected Areas in Latin America and the Caribbean
Preparation of workshops and technical documents on policy framework, strategies and action plan for the conservation of biological diversity in the region; establishment of national networks in the countries of the region.
RLAC-93/06-FOR-43
Planificación y Manejo de Areas Protegidas de la Cuenca Amazónica
Fortalecer el desarrollo integral y sustentable de los recursos naturales de Amazonia, asegurando la conservación de la biodiversidad y el equilibrio ambiental y proteger el patrimonio natural y cultural, lo que a su vez permitirá mejorar las condiciones socio-económicas de todos los habitantes de los países amazónicos.
COUNTRY PROJECTS
AFGHANISTAN
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
FO-DP/AFG/72/005
National Parks and Utilization of Wildlife Resources (Phase 1)
Assure the conservation and effective management of the country's wildlife and scenic resources by development of a system of parks, reserves and sanctuaries in representative ecological zones for controlled utilization, such as hunting, game viewing and other forms of touristic activity.
FO-DP/AFG/74/016
National Parks and Utilization of Wildlife Resources (Phase 11)
Assure the conservation and effective management of the country's wildlife and scenic resources by development of a system of parks, reserves and sanctuaries in representative ecological zones for controlled utilization, such as hunting, game viewing and other forms of touristic activity.
FO-DP/AFG/78/007
National Parks and Wildlife Management
Preparation and implementation of management plans for conservation areas. Preparation of national conservation plan.
FO-DP/AFG/82/003
Strengthening of Forestry Department
Assistance to forestry planning and development; implementation of a training programme; management of national parks.
FO-DP/AFG/82/008
Ecological and Vegetational Mapping
To support forestry and rangeland surveys, conservation and development planning, to prepare maps and train local personnel,
ALGERIA
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
FO-TCP/ALG/6703
Aménagement de l'Environnement Rural, Notamment des Pares Nationaux
Conseiller le Ministère de I'Hydraulique de la mise en valeur des terres et de l'environnement sur la solution des problèmes lies a la protection de I'environnement rural, en particulier sur I'établissement et I'aménagement des pares nationaux et élaborer avec les responsables nationaux les programmes à mettre en oeuvre dans ce but.
FO-UTF/ALG/004/ALG
Aménagement des Pares Nationaux/Faune Sauvage/Zones Protégées
Identification projet d'aménagement et développement de la faune sauvage.
FO-TCP/ALG/2254
Renforcement des Capacités de Gestion pour Développement Forestier
Identification projet d'aménagement et développement de la faune sauvage; contribution au renforcement des capacités techniques pour une meilleure conduite du programme de développement forestier et d'aménagement des bassins versants.
FO-TCP/ALG/0156
Assistance Technique au Projet Pilote de Développement Forestier
Renforcer les capacités techniques et humaines de I'Agence Nationale des Forêts dans le domaines de la gestion rationnelle des ressources forestières, de la recherche forestière et de la protection de la nature.
ANGOLA
PROJECT NUMBER
DATE AND PROJECT TITLE
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
FO-TCP/ANG/ 0104(MA)
Elaboration of Legislation for Protection of Flora and Fauna in Angola
Assist the government by studying the actual situation and from there prepare a comprehensive code of laws for wildlife management and protection.
LEG-TCP/ANG/2307
Elaboration of Legislation for Protection of Flora and Fauna in Angola
Assist the government by studying the actual situation and from there prepare a comprehensive code of laws for wildlife management and protection.
FO-DP/ANG/80/041
Improvement of Cangandala National Park
Improvement of the Cangandala National Park; species reconnaissance; participation in the formulation of laws and regulations for the protection and utilization of wildlife; on-the-job staff training; programme devel