<title>A Study of the Options for Utilization of Bycatch and Discards from marine </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Fish capture is imperfect. In the course of trying to harvest fish from the sea for which there is sufficient demand to make the effort worthwhile, fish are also caught which either are not in demand on the markets or should not be caught because their capture is against the goals of the administration responsible for management of the fish stocks. Much of this fish is discarded at sea. Efforts have and are being made to reduce the capture of this fish in the first place, through technical changes to fishing operations and through management measures to make their capture less likely. However, it is recognised that these measures are unlikely to ever eliminate discarding at sea altogether and another line of attack is to look at utilisation of these discards; in the words of the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries -
11.1.8.b) improve the use of by-catch to the extent that this is consistent with responsible fisheries management practices;
This paper firstly looks at what causes discards, their impacts at various levels and quantities and types of discards which have been documented. It then looks at measures that have and are being taken to use presently discarded fish with a view to assisting in identifying options for better use of fish resources throughout the world.
It became obvious, whilst reading and extracting information from the numerous reference materials consulted, that the way in which estimates of bycatch and discards has been conducted in many instances make it virtually impossible to draw firm conclusions that x tonnes of y species are caught as bycatch, discarded or utilised in a particular fishery or from a particular stock. The references generally either estimate the amount of bycatch caught in a particular fishery without endeavouring to quantify the amounts of various species in the bycatch or list the various species in the bycatch without estimating with any precision the amount of each species encountered. In most cases the species composition of the bycatch is merely quantified by referring to some species as dominant or most important rather than giving actual figures. Although there are some studies cited in this paper that endeavour to qualify AND quantify the occurrence of bycatch which is discarded and that
which is retained for use, this information is such that, other than extract the raw data from the original source and present it here, no attempt is made to analyse the data further. The need for standardised methods for estimating bycatch and discards has been highlighted in a number of fora and until this is done information will generally remain fragmented and non comparable between fishing activities and make the estimation of bycatch in both terms of quantity and species extremely difficult and unreliable.
The study concludes that solutions are being found for the problems of discarding fish at sea and that in shrimp trawl fisheries in tropical regions particularly there are definite trends towards greater utilisation. The way and speed with which this evolution occurs depends very much on local conditions but can be stimulated by new utilisation opportunities identified through research and development in the areas of fish technology, market intelligence and exchange of information between different groups and regions.
In other fisheries where there is pressure on resources and threats to sustainable fishing activities the main thrust of development must continue to be the reduction of capture of potential discards.
Introduction
The fact that fishing activities can lead to the capture of unsellable, unwanted and inedible products which are subsequently discarded dead or debilitated and not used for any useful purpose by man, has been long established. This can, not only constitute a loss of valuable food, but also have consequences for the environment, biodiversity and the living resources of the world's seas. The capture of dolphin in tuna nets and turtles in shrimp trawls brought the problem to the foreground of public debate in the early years of this decade, but fisheries scientists, technologists and managers have been aware of problems in various forms and been looking at potential solutions for very much longer.
The main debate, however, over the security of food supplies and the sustainability of the world fishing operations is concerned, not with the capture of endangered species or those that capture the public imagination, but with the capture and discarding of species which could be used to feed people. This is linked to the biological effects that this fishing mortality might have on the sustainability of fish supplies from capture fisheries.
In 1994 FAO published Fisheries Technical Paper No 339 "A Global Assessment of Fisheries Bycatch and Discards" (Alverson et al 1994). The authors attempted to bring together the wealth of information from around the world on the magnitude of bycatch and discards, referring to over 800 papers containing quantitative and qualitative information on bycatch and discards in trying to characterise the nature and scope of the problem on a global and regional basis.
This technical paper and a number of international agreements recognise that there is a large amount of fish wasted for a number of reasons and call on those who exploit and manage marine fish resources to take a responsible attitude towards alleviating the problems that seem to be apparent.
1.1 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries
The FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (FAO 1995) encourages nations to "establish principles and criteria for the elaboration and implementation of national policies for responsible conservation of fisheries resources and fisheries management and development".
In even clearer terms the Code of Conduct states the following:
8.4.5 States, with relevant groups from industry, should encourage the development and implementation of technologies and operational methods that reduce discards. The use of fishing gear and practices that lead to the discarding of catch should be discouraged and the use of fishing gear and practices that increase survival rates of escaping fish should be promoted.
8.4.6 States should co-operate to develop and apply technologies, materials and operational methods that minimise the loss of fishing gear and the ghost fishing effects of lost and abandoned fishing gear.
8.4.8 Research on the environmental and social impacts of fishing gear and, in particular, on the impact of such gear on biodiversity and coastal fishing communities should be promoted.
11.1.8 States should encourage those involved in fish processing, distribution and marketing to:
a) reduce post-harvest losses and waste;
b) improve the use of by-catch to the extent that this is consistent with responsible fisheries management practices;
12.4 States should collect reliable and accurate data which are required to assess the status of fisheries and ecosystems, including data on bycatch, discards and waste. Where appropriate, this data should be provided, at an appropriate time and level of aggregation, to relevant States and sub-regional, regional and global fisheries organisations.
12.10 States should carry out studies on selectivity of fishing gear, the environmental impact of fishing gear on target species and on the behaviour of target and non-target species in relation to such fishing gear as an aid for management decisions and with a view to minimising non-utilised catches as well as safeguarding the biodiversity of ecosystems and the aquatic habitat.
1.2. The Kyoto Declaration and Plan of Action
The 95 states that met in Kyoto for the International Conference on the Sustainable Contribution of Fisheries to Food Security in December 1995 (Japanese Fisheries Agency 1995) endorsed the provisions of the FAO Code of Conduct and in Declaration 15 stated that, inter alia, they would "Promote fisheries through research and development aiming at : ........(iii) reduction of discard mortality; (iv) development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear and techniques;" This resulted in the following being included in the plan of action agreed at the Kyoto conference:
7. To increase efforts to estimate the quantity of fish, marine mammals, sea birds, sea turtles and other sea life which are incidentally caught and discarded in fishing operations; assess the effect on the populations or species; take action to minimise waste and discards through measures including, to the extent practicable, the development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear and techniques; and exchange information on methods and technologies to minimise waste and discards.
These documents reinforce the need to make sustainable and optimal use of the marine fish resources and agree that there are a number of lines of attack which are appropriate if the world is to continue to harvest and benefit from fish in the diet of human beings.
The expert consultations leading up to the adoption of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and as recognised in the final document and the Kyoto Declaration, gave definite priority status to the avoidance of fish that might be subsequently discarded and only as a last resort to marketing and utilisation issues. The rationale behind this was that very often little is known about the effects of removal of the discards on the ecosystem and if a market for presently discarded fish is generated it is going to be difficult to reverse the situation.
<section>2</section>
2. Utilisation of bycatch as an option
As has been mentioned above the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries suggests that states should improve the use of bycatch as long as doing so is consistent with responsible fisheries management and this is considered as an option in many deliberations concerning policy on fisheries management and mitigation of the discards problem.
For instance, the paper produced by the Australian Government for the OECD on Policy Options for Fisheries Bycatch (Truelove 1997) states that "where bycatch has immediate or potential commercial value, is unavoidable in the course of fishing and does not include marine wildlife species subject of separate nature conservation legislation, or utilisation does not undermine broader management arrangements, it should be fully utilised."
The re-formulated Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (USA 1996) which governs the management of fisheries activities in the United States of America has the following clauses which include the option of unavoidable bycatch utilisation:
"BYCATCH REDUCTION PROGRAM- Not later than 12 months after the enactment of the Sustainable fisheries Act, the Secretary shall, ........complete a program to--
(1) develop technological devises and other changes in fishing operations necessary and appropriate to minimise the incidental mortality of bycatch in the course of shrimp trawl activity to the extent practical.....
(2) evaluate the ecological impacts and the benefits and costs of such devices and changes in fishing operations; and
(3) assess whether it is practical to utilise bycatch which is not avoidable."
In other contexts there may be very positive reasons for looking at bycatch use as an option. Where, for instance, fish is incidentally caught in waters adjacent to countries which are short of fish for feeding their people, as is often the case with tropical shrimp fisheries, the use of that fish to assist in alleviating hunger may be a high priority.
It is widely assumed that measures to eliminate the capture of fish which will subsequently be discarded will never be perfect and that some considerable quantity of fish will always be discarded and with more appropriate marketing that fish could be used for human consumption. It is this portion of the presently wasted fish catch with which this paper is concerned. Although it is recognised that the incidental capture of marine mammals, reptiles and seabirds, for instance, may have important implications for their respective populations and also in the public conception of fishing as a "clean" and environmentally responsible activity, these aspects of the problem will not be covered in any depth here, the primary purpose being to assist in the identification of presently wasted resources which could be used for food and increase food security.
<section>3</section>
3. Some definitions
The subject of wastage in fisheries has generated a whole host of words that have different meanings in different contexts and in different parts of the world. One word that is used extensively and causes most confusion is bycatch. As Alverson et al (1994) point out there are at least three accepted definitions of the word. In some circles bycatch is used to refer to catch which is retained and sold but which is not the target species for the fishery. In others (particularly the Northeast and Western Pacific and in American legislation) bycatch means species/sizes/sexes of fish which are discarded (Hall 1996) and in other circles bycatch is used to mean all non-target fish whether retained and sold or discarded. The OECD (1997a) define bycatch as "Total fishing mortality excluding that accounted directly by the retained catch of target species". This definition thus includes fish which die as a result of interaction with the fishing gear, even if they do not leave the water
and could include fish which die as a result of "ghost fishing" - capture of fish in the water by lost or abandoned fishing gear.
This confusion can lead to misinterpretation of information provided in scientific and management discussions and can lead to difficulties of interpretation of what is wasted and what is not wasted in the world fisheries scene. These definitions can also rely on the ability to identify what is meant by a target species or group of species. Identification of a target species may be relatively simple in a single or few species fishery with a static marketing base, but in a multi-species fishery and/or when market forces play a significant part in commercial decisions there may be many species in the target and/or the target may change form day to day or even during a fishing operation in a volatile market situation. One day's waste and nuisance catch can be tomorrow's target. Changes and differences in consumer tastes and marketing opportunities can also influence what is deemed to be waste and what is desirable over a longer time frame and from region to region. For instance
the multi-million dollar tropical prawn capture fisheries and the specialised fisheries for Nephrops norvegicus are based on species which were once considered worthless; tropical Penaeid prawns were once thrown over the side by small scale fishermen in many less developed countries, they now form the basis of large industries; monkfish, once considered a nuisance fish is now a sought after and marketable commodity; megrim, witch and dabs, once caught as bycatch in the Icelandic Nephrops fishery are now the subject of target fisheries in Iceland.
The meeting held in Tokyo in October/November 1996 on the reduction of wastage in Fisheries (FAO 1996) concluded that bycatch can best be used as a generic term, applying to that part of the catch made up of non-target species or species assemblages but, when dealing with a specific portion of the catch, in fisheries management terms, it is better to give a more precise definition. The TOTAL CATCH is that quantity taken by the fishing gear and which reaches the deck of the fishing vessel. DISCARDS is that portion thrown away at sea (for one reason or another). The remainder is the LANDED CATCH or RETAINED CATCH (i.e. that which is brought ashore) which can be further sub-divided into TARGET CATCH and INCIDENTAL CATCH, bearing in mind the volume, value, the incidence of species caught and the nature of the fishing operations. The same species can move from one category to another depending on size, market demand, season or other criteria; at the same time other species may be
undesirable or of limited value.
In the context of this paper bycatch will be used to refer to that part of the catch which is not the primary target of the fishing effort. It consists of both fish which is retained and marketed (incidental catch) and that which is discarded or released.
In the context of international fisheries statistics it should be noted that while the sum of target and incidental catches (landed or retained catch) are recorded, discards and other fishing induced fishing mortalities, are not. This can be illustrated by reference to the diagram in figure 1 which is taken from the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics Volume 78 (FAO 1996b). Although the terms used in the figure are not precisely the same as those referred to above, the ambiguous term "bycatch" is not used and the definition of discards/discarded catch is the same. It can be seen that
the diagram also divides discarded catch into live and dead. It is the dead discarded catch which is the subject for analysis in this report. There are other sources of unrecorded catch identified in the figure such as that consumed by the crew and fish sold through a black market. These types of lost data do not necessarily, however, imply a loss of fish protein into the human food chain. There may of course be financial losses to a fishing enterprise or loss of the accuracy of data for assessing sound fisheries management strategies through these practices.
However it must be remembered that discarding unwanted fish at sea is not the only cause of non-utilised biomass harvested from the sea. Queirolo et al (1995) suggest, for instance, that offal produced from the processing at sea of ground fish in the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands groundfish fishery weighs more than four times the weight of whole fish discarded from the fishery.
There are also of course many instances where fish are marketed but at less than optimal efficiency. For instance where fish at less than the size suitable for the human consumption market is caught, it may be thrown away and constitute part of the discards but, alternatively it may be converted into fish meal. From a utilisation point of view this is a potential under-use of the resource, because of the loss of nutritional value to the intended end user (man) of passing the fish protein it represents through a longer food chain. If the alternative would have been to discard the fish DEAD into the sea then the argument would be that it is better to use the already dead fish for feeding livestock to feed humans than to feed other sea life, however if the fish could have been released ALIVE back into the sea then perhaps allowing it to be harvested later directly as a human food would be better. The interactions between bycatch/discards and arguments for and against reduction
are dealt with in some detail by Hall 1996. Fish may also of course be used for the making products outside the human food chain such as pet foods, fertilisers and numerous speciality products which may use part of the fish. There are also of course large quantities of fish wasted because of inadequate post-harvest infrastructure to ensure that is gets to market in edible condition having spoilt before they do so.
<section>4</section>
4. Why discard ?
Before trying to analyse what marine products are discarded it is important to try to understand the reasons why discarding occurs. What drives the discard process ?
Fish are wasted or discarded for a number of reasons, (Clucas 1996). These may include the following:
Fish of wrong species.
(Not of the target species for the particular operator).
Fish are of the wrong size
. (Command too low a price on the market to be worth landing or outside the limits imposed by management for capture or landing of that particular species).
Fish are of the wrong sex
(Usually where gender is important from the processing and marketing point of view).
Fish are damaged
(Caused by gear or predation in nets or mis-handling etc.).
Fish are incompatible with rest of catch
(Slime or abrasion could cause damage to target species).
Fish are poisonous
or otherwise considered inedible.
Fish spoil rapidly
(Causing problems with the rest of the catch).
Lack of space on board (Where fishing operations are successful and target species take precedence over lower value or non-target species).
High Grading
(Certain attributes of a fish make it more marketable and therefore more valuable than another and the less valuable is discarded - this is often related to size).
Quotas reached
(This may involve discarding of small specimens of the target species to make way for more valuable specimens of the same species for instance - which is often a reason given for high grading).
Prohibited Species
(Where quotas are species-based fish may be discarded from one vessel although another vessel with a quota related to the errant species may have been able to land that same fish legally).
Prohibited Season
(Where time bound constraints are made on catching particular species, specimens may be discarded if caught in the wrong season).
Prohibited Gear
(A quota may be given for capture of a particular species by a particular type of gear - if the wrong gear catches the wrong fish then fish may be discarded).
Prohibited fishing grounds
(Fishing ground may be closed for capture of one species but open for others - if the wrong type is caught it can be discarded).
The driving forces behind the practices of discarding can be divided into a number of categories. Crean and Symes (1994) define three main classes as follows:
a) marine biomass caught incidentally while targeting other species and discarded as sea (by-catch discards)
b) quota discards, where part of the catch is returned to the sea to comply with legal requirements relating to permitted quota entitlements of minimum landing sizes
c) pre-market selection, for example high grading, discarding of damaged fish etc.
Discards can be made because of commercial and market considerations by the operator of the fishing business - it is a business decision to discard. Within this category however there are two distinctly different types. Bycatch from shrimp trawling operations which is discarded is an example of the first type. This fish that is almost invariably of lower value than the target and the in investment in sorting preservation and processing may not be rewarded by high enough returns in the market place. Typically, if the bycatch from shrimp trawling has any value at all, it can be twenty or thirty times less valuable than the shrimp.
The other example of market considerations leading to discarding is where fish is discarded which are less valuable than others of the same species because of their size, sex or physical condition. This may be done for instance where there is anticipation of catching fish of higher value later in the fishing voyage or fishing season and in quota fisheries is referred to as `high grading'.
Often legislation forbids or restricts the landing of the fish and makes it more advantageous for the fishermen to discard fish in anticipation of more valuable fish being caught later against a quota system - this is a legislation reinforced `high grading' scenario. Where a fishing unit is allocated a quota there is an incentive to maximise the return on that quota and thus an incentive to land the higher quality and more valued fish caught resulting in the discarding of the less valuable or poorer quality specimens. Legislative discarding also occurs in multi or mixed species fisheries where quotas or total allowable catches are given which do not match the actual composition of the catch. This means that a vessel or fleet of vessels may reach the target quota or total allowable catch for one particular species in a mixed catch whilst there is still unfulfilled quota of other species. Rather than forgo the, as yet un-caught, quota the individual or fleet will continue
fishing but discard fish for which the quota has been filled. Alternatively the over quota fish may be landed and enter the black market or where a ban on discarding exists it may enter the market through a formalised system specifically designed to accept "illegal fish".
Where discard and waste are associated with the capture of fish prohibited by law this may well lead to the under recording of catches and therefore difficulties with management of the fisheries concerned.
Discards occur because fishing methods and gears are not perfectly selective or because there is pressure on fishermen to catch more of the target species than they can market. Avoiding catching these unwanted individuals at an acceptable cost (be it economic or social) is a major challenge.
<section>5</section>
5. Why is discarding a problem ?
It is generally recognised that fisheries statistics upon which fisheries management decisions are based and estimates of optimum fishing practises are made do not include the quantities of organisms discarded at sea and which contribute substantially to the mortality caused by fishing operations. This is specifically recognised in the FAO fish landing statistics, for instance. (See Figure 1) The non-recording of discards is felt particularly, therefore, by those wishing to estimate the out-take of fish and other creatures from a fishery and, from those estimates, derive measures to control fishing intensity and sustainability of the fishery and biological system. Species which are caught incidentally to the main species of interest are less likely to be recorded accurately than those targeted for sale. Indeed, where restrictions are made on the species and sizes of fish and where and when they can be caught, the catchers of "illegal" fish may deliberately hide the fact that
this fish has been caught resulting in under-recording of the impacts of fishing and, if sold, distortion of the trade in fish products. It has been found that relying on fishing crews to record accurately the nature and extent of discards is unreliable and produces inaccurate data. Direct observation and recording by unbiased observers on board vessels of discards is rare and costly, for enforcement or scientific agencies, but is now mandatory in some fisheries such as Namibia and Canada.
The discarding of fish at sea is often associated with the reasons for wastage listed above. This would not be a major biological problem if, when returned to the sea, the fish were alive and able to survive. Most fish species when discarded, however, are already dead or in such a moribund state that they will not survive. Their survival depends on the species, the method of capture and probably the physiological condition of the fish. Estimates of 100% mortality are common and reported in Alverson et al. One study of mortalities of halibut (NRC 1990 cited in Alverson et al) gives figures ranging from 2 - 14 % for long line vessels operating in the North Atlantic to 90 - 100% for ground fish trawl operating in the same waters. The same NRC study gives mortalities for Chinook salmon in the North Pacific of 2 - 28% for fish caught by gillnet in the Washington area to 50 - 90% for the same species caught by purse seine. There is general agreement that round fish with large
swim/air bladders (such as cod, hake, pollock, croakers, groupers and snappers) die as a result of distended bladders when being lifted from the sea, whereas some flat fish, sharks and invertebrates may survive the trauma of rapid depth changes and temperature. The survival rate therefore will depend on species, the depth at which they are caught, gear type, time taken in fishing and a number of other factors. Some species, if returned to the sea quickly, will survive.
<section>6</section>
6. Influence of capture method on quality and possible survival
Fishing methods will influence the quality and therefore usefulness of fish which is discarded. Gillnets, for instance which may be set at sun-down and lifted again at sun-up may have fish in them which has been dead for a number of hours. In tropical waters where sea temperatures can be in the mid 20's Celsius fish can be partially spoilt and may also be attacked by predatory species such as shark. This applies not only to any potential discards, of course, but also to target fish species. Indeed one of the reasons for discards at sea can be that target species are already spoilt before lifting the net.
The quality of trawled fish similarly will depend on time of soaking as well as such factors as the amount of fish in the cod end, the water temperature, the type of substrate etc. Kungsawan (1996) asserts that in Thailand, the quality of bycatch from otter trawl vessels catching shrimp as their main target is worse than that from pair trawlers or gill netters. This results in most otter trawl bycatch being used for fish meal, whereas bycatch from other shrimp fishing methods is more likely to be used for human foods.
The best quality fish at capture will be associated with fishing methods that remove fish from the water immediately they are caught and where fish are usually alive at this stage. These would include the various surrounding and lifting nets and some hook and line fisheries such as pole and line and hand lines. It is usually the case, for instance, that trawl caught fish will be less valuable than fish of the same species caught by hand line. Where fish are discarded from this type of fishery there is also a higher likelihood that they will be discarded alive, that is released, and that they may survive. The fact that they are released alive does not, of course mean that they will survive. Damage inflicted by the catching method may mean they will die later or fall victim to predators or disease because they are in a weakened state. The fact that that they may be released back into a different location and habitat may also mean that they have less chance of survival.
Fish caught and likely to be discarded are usually going to be treated badly so that their quality is not preserved. The possibility of using the fish for human consumption will normally only be possible if some sort of onboard preservation is used or the fish is unloaded onto carrier vessels, for instance, for swift movement to shore base facilities for preservation and processing.
<section>7</section>
7. Impacts of Discards
7.1 Biological and Ecological Impacts
The biological impact of discards varies according to the vulnerability of the species affected. Some can be of major concern, but others are much less of a problem.
The following list, based on Hall (1996), attempts to cover the different levels encountered
* Critical Discards of populations or species that are in danger of extinction.
* Unsustainable Discards, where, although not currently at risk, continued mortality could put a species or population at risk.
* Sustainable Discards which do not pose a threat to the resource.
* Biologically insignificant discards, where the numbers are negligible from the point of view of the population involved.
* Unquantifiable Discards for which a lack of data creates an unknown level of impact. Given the lack of data for most populations, this is the category, according to Hall (1996), with the greatest number of cases.
* Ecosystems impacts, which occur, for instance in tropical shrimp trawling, where a complex of species is removed. In many cases the biological consequences of these impacts are unknown.
* Charismatic discards, which involve species of particular significance to groups of people. The taboos against killing certain animals and the public concern over marine turtles, dolphins and whales come within this category and in many ways have fuelled public debate. The capture of these animals may or may not have significant biological consequences.
It is a generally recognised that the discarding of fish at sea may have detrimental biological effects and may have effects on the stocks of commercially important species. Discards of undersized target species in the Gulf of Maine groundfish fisheries have been identified as contributing to a decline in the populations of fish in the region. (Saville 1980). In the Irish Sea the decline in abundance of the common skate (Raja batis) has been attributed to excessive quantities being taken as bycatch (Brander 1981). In the North Atlantic minimum landing sizes for cod, haddock and whiting lead to the capture of undersized specimens which are in turn disca