<section>3</section>
ACRONYMS, SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
kW = kilowatt
m = metre
m³ = cubic metre
min = minute
mm = millimetre
t = metric ton
sec = second
Abbreviations
AAC = allowable annual cut
DBH = diameter at breast height
F2M = Fazenda Dois Mil
PCT = potential crop tree
UTM = Universal-Transversal-Mercator
Exchange rate applied (as of September 1996)
US$ 1 = R$ 1 (Real)
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study was to thoroughly document and establish data on "environmentally sound forest harvesting associated with careful planning of each phase of the harvesting operations in tropical natural forests of the Amazon in Brazil" as an alternative to the "traditional logging systems" generally used in the Amazon-region in Brazil.
Another aim of the case study was individual testing of the applicability of the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice for each phase of the harvesting operations under conditions of a company working on a commercial basis. The result of this phase is the recommendation of the FAO Model Code for general use where more specific regional codes are missing or existing laws and rules are insufficient to attain low impact harvesting. Low impact forest harvesting is a prerequisite part of sustainable forest management.
The case study on "Environmentally Sound Forest Harvesting. Testing the Applicability of the FAO Model Code in the Amazon in Brazil" was initiated by Rudolf Heinrich, Chief, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, FAO - Rome and co-author of the FAO Model Code, and Ronnie de Camino, Chief Forestry Officer, Precious Woods Management.
In order to meet the targets of the case study, the "F2M forest management project" of Precious Woods Ltd. was chosen to serve as the study object. The F2M project started in 1993, near Manaus, Amazonas. Precious Woods Company Ltd. intends with the project "to demonstrate the economic viability of sustainable forest management integrated with a wood processing industry" (Precious Woods 1996).
The efficiency of the applied harvesting system was investigated by work and time studies analysing the work performance of the operations. The environmental impacts of harvesting were investigated by postharvest assessments. Efficiency and environmental impacts of the "environmentally sound forest harvesting system" were compared with those of the "traditional logging systems" by harvesting in the "traditional way" in another cutting unit of the F2M project area.
The field studies have been carried out by Norbert Winkler, consultant for FAO, in co-operation with Carlos Alberto Guerreiro, Forest Manager of Mil Madeireira, with support of João Heitor Faraco Jr., João Cruz Rodrigues, and Tim van Eldik, all forest staff members of Mil Madeireira Itacoatiara Ltd. Norbert Winkler prepared the report.
<section>5</section>
2. DESCRIPTION OF STUDY AREA
2.1. General information
(based on Precious Woods 1995, 1996)
The case study was done with "Mil Madeireira Itacoatiara Company Ltd.", one of the local subsidiaries of Precious Woods Ltd., which is operating the F2M project near Manaus in the Amazonas-state in Brazil.
The Precious Woods Company Ltd. was founded in 1990 and acts as the group holding company financing sustainable forestry projects through majority holdings in local subsidiaries in the host countries or by transferring funds to these companies. Its purpose in particular is the reforestation of fallow land and the sustainable management of the existing natural forests in tropical countries.
Figure 1. Location of F2M near Manaus (Precious Woods 1995)
Figure 2. F2M project area (Precious Woods 1995)
The F2M project area is located about 227 km east of Manaus (3°S, 59°W) and extends almost 40 km along the Manaus-Itacoatiara highway and 20 km inland to the north (see Figures 1 and 2). Sawn wood is transported by truck to the river port of Itacoatiara on the Amazon River and further transport is by means of ships directly to Europe and the United States of America.
The F2M project covers a total area of 80 900 ha comprising the following areas:
Production Forest Area 52 200 ha (64.5 %)
Preservation Forest Area 23 200 ha (28.7%)
Previously Deforested Area 5 500 ha (6.8 %)
Total F2M Project Area 80 900 ha (100.0 %)
Apart from the deforested area, all areas are untouched and covered by primary forests, which are classified as the forest type of tropical moist forest on "terra firme" - subregion northwestern "Hileia" - Negro to Trombetas river (Schmidt 1989).
An area of 5000 ha in size, set aside to serve as a genetic pool, is located in the north-western part of the project area; the remaining preservation forest area of 18200 ha is formed by smaller areas irregularly distributed and embedded in the production forest area. These preservation areas are mostly slopes and low areas.
The deforested area, located in the south-eastern part of the project area along the state road, "Estrada da Varzea", to Silves, Itapiranga, and Nhamunda, was cleared several years ago for pasture purposes and is currently in the stage of secondary succession.
The forest management system described in the forest management plan is based on the "CELOS Management System" (de Graaf 1986). This system has been adapted and elaborated further by those responsible for the plan, N.R. de Graaf, C.A. Guerreiro, and R. de Camino. The adaptations made are mainly based on the local experiences of the INPA (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas no Amazônia) and sampling techniques developed by EMBRAPA (EMpresa BRAsileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria).
Basic information required on the primary forests of the project area was provided by a general forest inventory, which was conducted as a sampling inventory in 1993 by covering 0.1% of the total forest area. The results obtained for the entire forest area and principal tree species are stated in Table 1.
Table 1. Inventory result of F2M
tree species threshold average volume
all tree species dbh > 5 cm 290 m³/ha
all tree species dbh > 50 cm 110 m³/ha
commercial species dbh > 50 cm 80 m³/ha
Using present-day criteria, a list of all tree species considered to be of commercial interest can be found in Appendix 1, whereas Table 2 shows only the principal tree species of commercial interest.
Table 2. Principal tree species
common name
scientific name
Massaranduba
(Manikara huberi)
Louros
(Ocotea spp., Mezilaurus spp.)
Angelim
(Hymenolobium spp., Dinizia spp.)
Cardeiro
(Scleronema micranthum)
Cupiuba
(Goupia glabra)
Cumarú
(Dipteryx oderata)
Piquiá
(Caryocar villosum)
Tauari
(Cariniana micrantha)
Amapá
(Brosimum parinarioides)
Tachi
(Sclerolobium spp.)
Acaricuara
(Minquartia guianensis)
Breu vermelho
(Protium altosonii)
The general concept of sustainable management for the F2M project comprises the following measures:
· selective harvesting of up to 65 tree species of commercial interest;
· selective harvesting of an average of 35 m³/ha and a maximum of 40 m³/ha (about a half of the average harvestable volume per hectare found for the entire F2M forest area);
· selective harvesting of mature trees with a dbh > 50 cm;
· directional felling to diminish damage to residual trees and facilitate skidding operations;
· low impact extraction operations to minimise damage to residual stands;
· application of silvicultural treatments in order to stimulate tree growth of commercial tree species;
· harvesting cycle of 25 years;
· monitoring system of permanent sample plots for growth and yield assessment and evaluation of damage to the remaining stand as well as for research purposes.
The planned harvesting cycle is 25 years; therefore, the production forest area is divided into 25 annual operating areas of about 2000 ha production forest each. Since most of the project area is flat terrain, a regular grid is laid over the entire project area forming UTM blocks (4 km x 4 km). Each block has been subdivided into regular 10-ha plots (250 m x 400 m). These plots are to be considered the smallest forest management units, which will be referred to as "cutting units" throughout the report.
Photo 1. "Estrada da Varzea" - Forest access provided by public road
In 1993, when the project was started, forest access was provided only by the state road "Estrada da Varzea". Therefore the first annual operating area was located on both sides of this well-maintained dirt road. In 1995, access to parts of the second annual operating area was provided by building 6 km of forest road. Since harvesting operations were planned for the entire area of compartment B in 1996 an additional 14 kilometres of forest road had to be built.
2.2. Description of particular study areas
The field studies on "environmentally sound forest harvesting" were carried out in compartment B, Block 312/9668, Plot G09, which will be referred to as cutting unit B/G09 throughout the report, and those on "traditional logging" were carried out in compartment B, Block 312/9668, Plot F09, which will be referred to as cutting unit B/F09. Commercial inventories including mapping of the cutting units (250 m x 400 m) were conducted before harvesting. In addition, potential crop inventories were carried out before harvesting commenced for selected areas (150 m x 150 m) within cutting units B/G09 and B/F09 which will be referred to as subplot B/G09 and subplot B/F09 throughout the report (see Figure 3 and 4).
Within the frame of the commercial preharvest survey all harvestable trees (commercial species with a dbh > 50 cm) have been identified, marked, counted, and dbh recorded as well as the tree's location drawn on the map of the cutting unit. For details on survey and tree mapping see chapter 3.2.
Figure 3. Tree location map of cutting unit B/G09 including skid trail layout
Figure 4. Tree location map of cutting unit B/F09
In conducting the potential crop inventory, the same procedure had been chosen for the potential crop trees (commercial species with a dbh > 20 cm), since those PCTs are most likely to form the projected harvest in the next harvesting cycle, assumed to be in 25 years.
The stand characteristics found by the commercial inventory for the adjacent cutting units B/G09 and B/F09 are stated in Table 3.
Table 3. Stand characteristics of adjacent study areas before harvesting
Commercial inventory
Study area size of area [ha] volume [m³] trees tree species volume/ha [m³/ha] trees/ha
cutting unitB/G09 10 1100 219 41 110.0 21
cutting unitB/F09 10 1263 236 39 126.3 ---
The stand characteristics found by commercial and potential crop inventory for subplots B/G09 and B/F09 are stated in table 4.
Table 4. Stand characteristics of subplot areas before harvesting
commercial inventory
potential crop inventory
study area
size of area [ha]
tree species
volume/ha [m³/ha]
trees/ha
tree species
volume/ha [m³/ha]
trees/ha
subplot B/G09
subplot B/F09
The values under volume per hectare of commercial species stated in Table 3 show the high variability in the harvestable volume in primary forests, not only compared to the average volume of 80 m³/ha found for the entire F2M forest area but also between adjacent cutting units. Even within a cutting unit the volume per hectare might differ considerably, as one can see by comparing the values found for subplots (see Table 4) to corresponding values stated in Table 3.
The high variability in harvestable volume and tree species distribution found indicates that particular attention must be paid to reliability of data provided by a general inventory. Especially since these data serve as a basis for setting the level of the annual allowable cut. The level of the AAC itself, which should provide the maximum harvest volume while ensuring that the prospects for future harvests do not deteriorate, will be decisive for whether the targets of sustainable forest management are met or not.
The results of the commercial inventory also underscore the importance of a comprehensive preharvest survey for each cutting unit comprising technical, topographic, economic, and ecological factors, since it is considered as the most important tool (Panzer 1991) in reducing logging waste.
The characteristics of timber removals by tree harvest from cutting units and subplots based on inventory data are stated in Table 5 and 6.
Table 5. Characteristics of timber harvest from study areas
Commercial tree harvest
Study area size of area [ha] volume harvested [m³] trees harvested tree species harvested volume harvested/ha [m³/ha] trees harvested /ha
cutting unit B/G09 10 365.4 57 (+3) 24 36.5 6
cutting unit B/F09 10 927.0 164 32 92.7 16
( ) figure in parenthesis gives the number of PCTs harvested during skid trail opening
For the environmentally sound forest harvesting system, the timber removal amounted to 33% of the volume found by the commercial inventory prior to harvesting in cutting unit B/G09, which equals 26% of the trees of commercial interest. The corresponding figures for the traditional logging system are 73% for the volume and 69% for the trees of commercial interest.
Table 6. Characteristics of timber harvest from subplots
Commercial tree harvest Potential crop tree harvest
study area size of area [ha] volume harvested/ha [m³/ha] trees harvested trees harvested/ha volume harvested/ha [m³/ha] trees harvested trees harvested/ha
subplot B/G09 2.25 38.5 10 4 1.9 3 1
subplot B/F09
In the environmentally sound forest harvesting system several PCTs had to be removed in order to facilitate generally recommended straight alignment of skid trails (see also Dykstra & Heinrich 1996).
The information on PCTs provided by the potential crop inventory serves as a basis for the evaluation of potential future crops and for the assessment of damage to residual trees by forest harvesting operations.
<section>6</section>
3. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND FOREST HARVESTING SYSTEM
The environmentally sound forest harvesting system is based on a general forest inventory for the entire F2M forest area and a comprehensive preharvest survey of each cutting unit prior to harvesting. These data enable one to thoroughly plan all harvesting operations associated with skid trail alignment and directional tree felling in order to minimise damage to residual stands and to reduce environmental impacts. All operations undertaken are guided by the consideration that unless the forest is left in a condition that will permit the attainment of a desired future condition, sustainability cannot be assured.
3.1. Planning of harvesting operations
All harvesting operations must be well planned in order to meet the requirements of environmentally sound forest harvesting. Therefore, short term planning, so-called tactical planning, has to be based on strategic planning (Dykstra & Heinrich 1996).
This strategic harvest plan for the project area demarcates non-harvest areas, namely preservation areas and deforested areas, divides the production forest area into compartments and shows the existing as well as the proposed transportation systems. The strategic plan itself is part of the forest management plan and both are based on a comprehensive land-use plan.
The tactical plan provides details of operations that are to be carried out during a period of one year, with emphasis on the dry season. It is estimated that the output in January to April is about 30% lower than the rest of the year. However, one of the intended features of the F2M project is year-round timber harvesting providing stable, continuous employment.
The tactical plan is associated with the annual operating area, which will be referred to as "compartment" throughout the report. These compartments of about 2000 ha production forest and 800 ha protection forest are single, contiguous blocks that are divided into 10 ha-plots, so called cutting units, which are the smallest administrative units. Since these cutting units are contiguous and only ground-skidding machines are used due to favourable terrain conditions, planning the layout of landings and skid trails for all of the units is done simultaneously.
After commercial inventory and terrain reconnaissance have been carried out (two years before harvesting commences), each cutting unit is mapped individually. The boundaries of the cutting unit and all features that may influence harvest planning (water courses, swampy areas, slopes, or other problem sites) are shown on this approximately 1:1700 scale map. Furthermore, the location of each individual tree of the cutting unit that might be harvestable is marked on the map.
All information about each harvestable tree is recorded on inventory sheets in the field and fed into the company-owned data bank for further processing. Running several routines until the threshold volume has been reached; the most mature trees are selected first by considering silvicultural guidelines of the sustainable management plan as well as the actual market acceptance of certain tree species. Although the selection is made individually for each 10 ha-plot, the inventory results of the entire 2000 ha production forest within a compartment are used in the decision process to prevent the felling of species that are too scarce.
All trees selected to be harvested are marked on the computer generated map of the cutting unit and their spatial distribution is evaluated by the computer operator. Poor spatial distribution is corrected if necessary to avoid large canopy openings caused by the felling of several neighbouring trees.
The generated final map of the cutting unit serves as the basis for the layout of skid trails. It shows the location of each harvestable tree, tree selection status, and terrain features.
The skid trail system is designed and drawn on a map, with field checks in cases of question, by the forest engineer supervising all harvesting operations. This ensures that the harvesting plan is feasible and that all harvesting operations can be undertaken safely, efficiently, and economically.
A copy of the map and the accompanying information on each harvestable tree is given to the crew leader of the felling crew, who will determine the best direction of fall for each tree to be harvested. In order to detect hidden defects, namely internal decay, an investigative cut with the chainsaw blade is made into each tree selected. All decisions made on individual trees are based on the transportation system shown on the map, the information provided by the inventory, and information obtained in the field when felling operations are executed.
Photo 2. Decay check of trees selected for harvest
If a selected tree proves rotten or if felling of a selected tree would cause too much damage, another non-selected, harvestable tree is chosen for felling in order to meet the desired volume per cutting unit. Each tree where felling is rejected is marked on the map and the occurrence of decay recorded. The latter provides information on the probability of internal decay occurrence in certain areas and certain tree species, which will increase the reliability of planning based on inventory data in the future.
All trees cut during felling operations are marked on the map. Numbers are fixed on each individual log and recorded on data sheets in order to guarantee that no log will be forgotten during the pre-skidding phase. All new information is fed into the computer after felling operations have been finished. A newly generated map of the cutting unit and a list of all trees with corresponding log numbers are given to the crew leader of the pre-skidding crew.
Usually, pre-skidding of logs is planned to be carried out two weeks after the completion of felling operations in order to avoid any disturbance or delays that might arise if both phases were carried out simultaneously within a cutting unit. Immediately after skid trail opening by the pre-skidding crew, logs are concentrated at the skid trail by means of cable. Some logs might be cut into pieces due to their weight. Numbers are fixed to each new log and are registered.
For skidding, which is usually planned two weeks after pre-skidding, the crew leader of the skidding crew receives the map and the list of all trees with corresponding log numbers in order to avoid any loss due to forgotten logs during the skidding phase.
Actual skid trail location and location of landings will be drawn on the map after their establishment since they are considered to be permanent.
Photo 3. Systematic registration of logs prevents timber losses during the extraction phase
3.2. Survey and tree mapping
3.2.1. Forest management map
As a result of comprehensive land-use planning, the forest management map with elevation contour lines, drawn to a scale 1:20000, shows the following features:
· borders of the permanent forest estate;
· areas of non-forest land uses;
· forest cover type, important topographic features, streams and swamps;
· existing infrastructure and other artificial features;
· areas where timber harvesting is to be prohibited altogether by law or will be restricted due to the general concept of the sustainable management plan;
· annual operating areas where harvesting is to be carried out as identified in the forest management plan.
The areas where timber harvesting operations are prohibited by law are the following:
· streamside buffer zones
at minimum, 50 m from the sides of a river in case of river width > 10 m;
at minimum, 30 m from the sides of a river in case of river width < 10 m;
· vicinity of water springs
radius of 50 m from the edge of water springs;
· steep lands
Slope gradient > 45%.
In order to meet the target of about 1/3 preservation forest area of the total F2M forest area (Precious Woods 1995), the following areas have been selected to become preservation areas (biological reserves) based on data and information provided by the general forest inventory as well as aerial photography:
· area of 5000 ha serving as genetic pool;
· low areas (swamps) where soil damages are unavoidable if ground-skidding systems are used;
· slopes where systems other than ground-skidding are recommended because of damages and costs.
3.2.2. Field survey and tree mapping
A regular grid (north-south/east-west) is laid out over the entire F2M project area forming UTM-blocks (4 km x 4 km) and serves orientation purposes so that all administrative units, compartments, and cutting units, can be conveniently referenced on the ground. All main lines (north-south lines) of the grid were opened and permanently marked by the topographic crew and will be kept open by clearance of undergrowth when necessary.
A topographic crew consists of 6 workers:
1 crew leader with theodolite
2 assistants for field survey and permanent marking of main lines
3 assistants for opening the main lines
Each UTM-block in production forest is subdivided into 10 ha cutting units. Special field crews open help lines 250 m apart running at right angle to the main lines. Starting at the intersection points other lines are opened 400 m apart running at right angle to the help lines to establish the desired grid of 250 m x 400 m rectangles. These are given co-ordinates of letters and numbers so that each cutting unit can be identified. All corner points of each cutting unit are permanently marked. A temporary grid of 50 m x 50 m quadrates, which is needed by the inventory crew, is established within each cutting unit.
A field crew consists of 3 men:
1 crew leader with compass
2 assistants for opening the help lines
A commercial forest inventory conducted during the dry season is planned to be done 2 years before harvesting.
An inventory crew consists of 5 men:
1 crew leader (forester) and
4 assistants (tree identifiers).
The crew members go parallel to one another through the rows of the cutting unit, formed by the 50 m x 50 m quadrates, from south to north and vice versa. They search for trees of commercial interest with dbh > 50 cm. Each tree found is marked; the following parameters are assessed in the field and recorded by the crew leader on data sheets:
· Girth at dbh-height measured by means of a girth measuring tape
· Botanical identification of tree species
· Tree location and tree number
· Quality features, visible defects
· Inclination of tree
· Additional information (measurement height if changed)
A dbh-based formula has been developed by the company to calculate the tree volumes because the measurement of heights is considered imprecise and takes too long.
The following is assessed and recorded in order to provide reliable information for comprehensive planning of harvesting operations:
· Utilisable dead trees including their location
· Topographic features which may influence harvest planning
Other tasks of the inventory crew:
· Tree locations and topographic features are drawn on graph paper
· Climber cutting
In forests where climbers tend to bridge between tree crowns it is recommended that the climbers be cut well in advance of the felling operation (Dykstra & Heinrich 1996). The climbers die and become brittle; this reduces the chance of a felled tree pulling over neighbouring trees as it falls and facilitates directional felling. Therefore, needed climber cutting is done by the inventory crew at the same time harvestable trees are registered.
Based on data provided by the company, the following performance can be expected for individual activities in field surveying and tree mapping:
individual field activity
production rate
establishment of 4 km x 4 km grid
0.01 manday/hectare
line cutting of 250 m x 400 m grid
0.25 manday/hectare
line cutting of 50 m x 50 m grid
0.50 manday/hectare
commercial inventory
0.33 manday/hectare
3.3. Felling operations
Felling, one of the most hazardous occupations, is carried out by well-trained personnel outfitted with appropriate safety gear and using equipment suitable for the given work task. The final decision on the felling direction of each tree to be harvested is made by the crew leader of the felling crew based on the tree location map and the planned skid trail network. The field situation, with respect to the distribution of future crop trees, existing regeneration, and already felled trees, is also considered.
Measures have been taken in order to meet social, ergonomic, economic and environmental objectives more effectively. The environmentally sound forest harvesting system includes all these considerations:
Objectives
Measures
safety of felling operations
personnel fully qualified for the work task, in good health, with ability to recognise hazardous situations, and with personal responsibility;
best qualified chainsaw operators are selected to become crew leaders;
appropriate safety gear and properly maintained equipment;
consistent training in proper felling techniques;
close supervision,
climber cutting prior to harvesting;
minimise damage to residual trees and stand
a maximum of 40 m³/ha for each cutting unit may be harvested, on average 35 m³/ha are harvested;
a maximum of 80% of the commercial volume found for a particular tree species may be harvested, thus assuring the tree species' continued existence;
final decision on felling direction made in the field;
proper felling technique;
climber cutting 2 years before harvesting;
harvesting map stays with the crew leader;
responsibility of the crew leader for felling direction;
maximise volume of wood
proper felling techniques;
utilised from each felled tree
climber cutting 2 years before harvesting;
bucking and grading rules;
close supervision;
facilitate efficient extraction
harvesting map stays with the crew leader;
directional felling;
climber cutting 2 years before felling;
close supervision.
Photo 4. Directional felling, a key for success
In making the final decision on the felling direction, the following has to be considered with respect to:
Extraction
felling direction at an oblique angle to the skid trail (35°-40° angle range suggested by Dykstra & Heinrich 1996);
felling direction on a skid trail in a straight line position but opposite the skidding direction;
trees should be felled towards the skid trail to reduce the extraction distance;
trees should preferably be felled away from the skid trail if large tree crowns are expected to cause problems for the extraction crew;
extraction should not be disturbed by crowns of trees next to a skid trail;
Residual trees
and stand
trees should be felled toward existing canopy gaps if they are not already too large (e.g. for favourable conditions for natural regeneration of the desired tree species);
damage to potential crop trees and advance regeneration should be avoided wherever possible;
Timber utilisation
the planned direction of fall should avoid breakage due to falling on obstacles such as tree stumps, logs, or convex terrain.
The crew leader is responsible for the correct alignment of tree stems with respect to extraction routes. Furthermore, the crew leader supervises and gives advice to the other crew members, alternates with the other chainsaw operators in tree felling, and is responsible for observance of safety precautions by all crew members.
Usually, there was only one chainsaw in use at one time. A second chainsaw was maintained by the crew assistant. The other chainsaw operators support felling preparations.
The analysis of the work studies suggested that in the future a smaller felling crew could be used. The crew and equipment actually observed in the study and the planned crew configuration are shown below:
actual felling crew
planned felling crew
1 crew leader/chainsaw operator
1 crew leader/chainsaw operator
2 chainsaw operators
1 chainsaw operator
1 assistant
1 assistant
The productivity of felling operations should not decrease because of the planned changes concerning the felling crew. Since the chainsaw operating time varied considerably among the three chainsaw operators of the observed felling crew and was up to nearly 50% of the total chainsaw operating time for one of the three chainsaw operators; the planned reduction of the crew size should not overburden the remaining crew members.
3.4. Extraction system
3.4.1. Pre-skidding
The extraction of logs is carried out in two phases. The first phase, the pre-skidding of logs, begins with the opening of a single skid trail by means of a crawler tractor assisted by chainsaw. The skid trail is located according to the alignment shown on the map of the cutting unit. For opening a single skid trail an efficiency level of about 8.3 min/100 m skid trail was found in the studies.
Photo 5. Skid trail opening by the D4 crawler tractor
Turning at the end of the opened skid trail, the crawler tractor moves to the first concentration point determined by the crew leader. This decision is based on the tree and log location map of the cutting unit and the specific field situation. This field decision considers future crop tree locations, regeneration, understory, and obstacles.
The assistants of the pre-skidding crew alternate between pre-setting chokers and pulling the winch line out to the log while the crawler tractor remains on the designated skid trail at all times. The chainsaw operator will crosscut logs and remove smaller trees in the cableway when necessary.
The logs are drawn to the concentration point by means of the winch mounted on the crawler tractor. Since the distance between adjacent skid trails is planned at 100 m, the winching distance will be a maximum of 50 m.
Changes planned to the pre-skidding crew as suggested by the case study are stated below:
actual pre-skidding crew
planned pre-skidding crew
1 machine operator
1 machine operator
1 crew leader
1 crew leader/chainsaw operator
1 chainsaw operator
2 assistants
3 assistants
Changes planned to the equipment used for the pre-skidding of logs as found when the study was carried out are stated below:
equipment used
equipment planned
1 D4H TSK crawler tractor with
winch
1 tracked skidder (designed for
logging)
1 Stihl AV 066 chainsaw
1 Stihl AV 066 chainsaw
Photo 6. Pre-skidding of logs to the skid trail
3.4.2. Skidding
The skidding operation is planned to begin one week after completion of pre-skidding within a cutting unit. The logs prepared for extraction at several points of concentration along the skid trail are delivered to the landing by means of wheeled skidder. The skidder remains on the skid trail at all times, since all logs to be skidded are already concentrated at the skid trail and the logs can be easily picked up with the skidder mounted grapple without any need to leave the skid trail.
The study found no need for changes with regard to the skidding crew and the equipment used for the skidding