<section>a</section>
2.4. Legal aspects
2.4.1. Registration of the enterprise
2.4.2. Food related laws
2.4.1. Registration of the enterprise
Before starting registration procedures, aspiring entrepreneurs should seek professional advice from small enterprise advisors, accountants or solicitors on what is the best type of enterprise to establish, as this varies according to the legal framework and economic structures prevailing at a given time in a particular country.
The form that a business takes is influenced by both the wishes or needs of the owner and also by the types of product that are to be made. Very frequently, new businesses are established by a family member or by a farmer who wishes to process the crops to add value. It is usually simpler and cheaper for these people to register either as personal business with unlimited liability or as a limited company with a single owner/director. However, this may not be appropriate if additional partners are required to contribute capital or specific skills.
Other types of business that can therefore be considered include a limited liability company with several directors or an un-incorporated association that has no limited liability (see Glossary for the meanings of these terms). If the proposed enterprise has a larger number of interested investors, for example a farmers' association, or if the aims also include social benefits (see Part I, Introduction), the form of the business could be a co-operative association, a not-for-profit organisation or a registered charity. However, it should be noted that charity law in many countries prohibits trading.
Once the form of the business has been decided, there are a number of registration procedures that need to be taken before it can begin trading. Again, these vary in both the number of steps and the degrees of complexity and bureaucracy in different countries and it is not possible to be comprehensive in a book of this nature. Professional advice is needed to guide the entrepreneur through each stage, from a solicitor and an accountant who are experienced in the national law in the particular country.
However, as a general guide it is necessary to register a processing business with some or all of the following authorities:
· notify the taxation authorities (e.g. the Sales Tax Commissioner or VAT Office) and complete Notification of Business Intention forms or their equivalent
· notify another branch of the taxation authorities to get an Approval Certificate to indicate that no unpaid income tax is outstanding
· apply to the Local Government Office (e.g. a Town Council or District Council) for a Business Licence
· apply to the Ministry of Health or Bureau of Standards, requesting that a Food Inspector visits the premises to examine the facilities
· when the inspection is completed and a satisfactory report is made, apply for registration as a Food Premises and the issuing of a Food Producer's Licence or Certificate or equivalent
· apply to the Bureau of Standards or equivalent, sending a sample of product for chemical analysis. This will be tested to determine whether it conforms to national legislation on food composition (see below). If it conforms, a Product Approval Certificate or similar will be issued and a Standards Authority symbol may be placed on the product label
· apply to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Customs and Local Government Tax Authority or VAT Office if there are opportunities for remission of taxes on imported ingredients, packaging materials or equipment. This is also necessary to reclaim VAT.
· register the business at a bank and open an account for trading.
If export is being considered it is also necessary to apply to:
· the Ministry of Trade and Industry or equivalent for a Business Licence
· the National or Central Bank for an Export Licence
· the Customs Department for clearance to export.
The majority of these stages require a fee to be paid and there is clearly a considerable expense in both time and travel costs to complete the registration procedure, particularly when the business is located away from the capital city. For inexperienced entrepreneurs, this is a daunting process and many either do not complete it or attempt to bypass it. However, incomplete or fraudulent registration leaves the entrepreneur open to later complications and possible prosecution.
More positively, there are schemes in many countries that are operated by National or Local Governments to encourage small enterprise development. These can vary from subsidised electricity, tax-holidays (tax-free periods of up to ten years), free land for enterprise development, support from a Small Business Advisory Service, or special bonuses if the business aims to employ women, rural people or social and ethnic minorities. The business should therefore be registered with the Ministry of Trade and Industry or other authorities that operate the schemes, in order to obtain these benefits.
Similarly, a number of international development organisations (Appendix IV) operate schemes to encourage small enterprise development and they should be contacted to find out whether credit, training or business support are available. Their local offices are often located in the Capital city, but some may have sub-offices in District Centres. Where donor countries operate bilateral development programmes, information about the available assistance can be obtained from the Aid Section of their Embassies or High Commissions. Finally the new entrepreneur should contact the local Manufacturers' Association or Chamber of Commerce to find out what assistance they can offer to get a new business established.
2.4.2. Food related laws
Food composition
Food labelling
Hygiene and sanitation
Weights and measures
In most countries there are general laws that govern the sale of all goods, including foods, which state that any product should be suitable for its intended purpose. There are also food laws relating to the effects of food on health that say: It is an offence for anyone to add anything to food, to process food or to sell food so that it is injurious to health with the intention that it is sold for human consumption.
Most countries have laws to protect customers from adulteration of foods or other forms of cheating. Typically these say that it is an offence to sell food that is not of the nature, substance nor quality demanded by the purchaser. It is also an offence to falsely describe a food on the label or in advertising, with the intention of misleading the customer.
Within these general laws, there are also specific laws that deal with the composition of certain foods, their safety, the amount that is contained in a package, the hygiene of operators and sanitation of premises where foods are made. These laws are detailed and specific to each country, although they are often based on, or derived from, laws that have been developed in Europe or the USA during the last century. In this section it is therefore only possible to describe the broad outline of the legislation. Entrepreneurs should seek advice on specific national interpretations from professional staff in the local Bureau of Standards or from food technologists who work in universities or food research institutes. Many of these institutions have field workers or outreach programmes that are intended to provide such advice.
Figure 35. - Some headlines showing the effect of not considering food laws
Food composition
Laws relating to the composition of processed foods are complex and specific to particular types of food, particularly those such as pies or prepared foods that present opportunities for adulteration. The intention of the laws is to produce a standard for a particular food and so ensure that all foods sold with that name have that standard composition. This approach is changing in some countries and is being relaxed because of the difficulties of enforcement. Instead the authorities are relying on stricter labelling requirements to inform consumers of the food composition (see labelling below).
If export to Europe, ASEAN or USA is being considered, it is essential to obtain a detailed specification of the required product composition and quality from the local Export Development Authority, from importing companies or their agents, from Fair Trading Organisations or from the Trade Section in Embassies of the countries concerned.
It is not possible in a book of this type to detail the limits that are set for individual foods as these vary from country to country. The section below therefore describes the types of compositional standards that may be in force and the producer should find precise details of each from local authorities or Bureaux of Standards.
In relation to fruit and vegetable products, the following often have compositional standards:
Fruit juices and nectars (Sections 2.2.7 and 2.2.8):
Juice should be only pure juice with nothing added except vitamin C, specified acids used to adjust the pH and maximum levels of residual sulphur dioxide if this has been used as a preservative. Typically nectars should contain a minimum % juice, between 25% and 40% juice depending on the type of fruit and a maximum of 20% sugar or honey. There are also minimum limits for the acid content of nectars.
Soft drinks (Section 2.2.8):
Squashes, crushes and cordials are each defined in law and have minimum fruit contents specified for different types of fruit. These are typically between 1.5% and 5% minimum fruit content for drinks that are not diluted and 7% to 25% minimum fruit content for those drinks that require dilution. Dilution must be four parts water to one part drink. They each have maximum permitted levels of sugar or artificial sweeteners and can contain specified food acids.
Jams and similar products (Section 2.2.9):
Jams should contain a minimum amount of fruit pulp, which varies with the type of fruit being used, but for many is around 200g pulp per kg product. Similarly the amount of fruit juice in jelly and marmalade is specified. Normally jams should have minimum of 60% soluble solids (in practice 68%-70% is used to achieve adequate preservation, especially in tropical climates) and there are limits on residual sulphur dioxide in all products. There are detailed regulations covering definitions of the names jams, jellies, marmalades, conserves, preserves, extra jam or jelly and reduced sugar jam, jelly or marmalade.
Tomato ketchup (Section 2.2.6):
This should have a minimum of 6% tomato solids and not contain seeds. There is a maximum limit on contamination with copper and no other fruits or vegetables can be used except onions, garlic or spices for flavouring.
Additives and contaminants:
There are lists of permitted food colours, emulsifies, stabilisers, preservatives and other additives that can be added to foods. Any chemical that is not on these lists cannot be used. There are also maximum levels set for each additive in specific foods and lists of foods that are able to contain specified preservatives. Contaminants, including poisonous metals such as arsenic and lead, have maximum permitted levels in specified foods.
Food labelling
When prosecutions of food companies are analysed, a large percentage often relate to 'technical' breaches of the law because a label is incorrectly designed. It is therefore in the processors' interest to involve the local Bureau of Standards at an early stage of label design to avoid problems with prosecution and expensive re-design after labels have been printed. There are general labelling requirements that describe the information that must be included on a label (see also Section 2.8.3), but in many countries there are also very detailed laws concerning some or all of the following aspects:
· specify names that must be given to different types of ingredients
· ingredients that are exempt from the law
· the use of words such as Best before and Sell by
· the declaration of alcohol content on spirit drinks
· locations of the name of the food, the sell-by date and the net weight (they must all be in the same field of vision when a customer looks at the label)
· the visibility of information and the ability of customers to understand it (including the relative print sizes of different information)
· claims and misleading descriptions, especially about health-giving or tonic properties, nutritional advantages, diabetic or other medicinal claims
· specifications of the way in which certain words such as flavour, fresh, vitamin etc. can be used.
This is also a complex area, which is not possible to describe in detail in this book and professional advice should be sought from graphic designers who are experienced in label design, or from a Bureau of Standards.
Hygiene and sanitation
Laws relating to food production premises and the staff who handle foods are among the most widely enforced in most developing countries. There are numerous examples of prosecutions by Food Inspectors from Ministries of Health or other enforcement authorities and in some cases, enforced closure of the business for failure to comply with these laws. Guidelines on the design and construction of premises (Section 2.5.3) and hygiene of operators (Appendix I) should therefore be consulted before submitting a new processing facility for inspection and certification (see above).
These guidelines should be rigorously enforced in routine production to ensure that safe, high quality products are produced (see also Section 2.7.2). In summary the laws are concerned with the following aspects of health, hygiene and sanitation:
· processing that is carried out in unsanitary conditions
· or where food is exposed to the risk of contamination
· equipment (which must be able to be cleaned and kept clean)
· persons handling food and their responsibilities to protect it from contamination
· building design and construction including water supplies,
· drainage, toilet facilities, wash-hand basins, provision of first aid facilities, places to store clothing, facilities for washing food and equipment, lighting, ventilation, protection against infestation by rats and insects and removal of wastes.
Weights and measures
The aim of this type of legislation is to protect customers from being cheated by unscrupulous manufacturers, for example from being sold underweight packs of food. The laws are to ensure that the amount of food that is declared on the label as the net weight (the weight of product in a pack) is the same as the weight of food that is actually in the pack. However, it is recognised that not every pack can be filled with exactly the specified weight because both machine-filling and hand-filling of containers is subject to some variability. The laws are therefore designed to allow for this variability but to prevent fraud.
There are two types of weights and measures legislation in force in different countries: the older method, which is still used in most developing countries, is known as the Minimum Weight System. This is intended to ensure that every pack of food contains at least the net weight that is written on the label. If any pack is found below this weight the producer is liable for prosecution. This system works well to protect customers, but is more expensive for producers because they have to routinely fill packs to just above the declared weight to avoid prosecution and they therefore give a small amount of product away in every pack.
A second type of legislation was introduced in Europe to take account of the automated filling and packaging that is used by most producers there. This is known as the Average Weight System and uses a statistical probability of a defined proportion of packages being above the declared weight as a basis for enforcement. As most small scale producers in developing countries do not use automatic fillers and programmable check-weighers, this system is difficult to operate and un-necessarily complex. If however, a producer is considering export to an industrialised country, advice and information on this legislation should be obtained from a local Export Promotion Board or equivalent institution so that an 'e' mark can be obtained to indicate that the process conforms to this system.
In some countries, there are specified weights that must be used when selling dried fruits and vegetables and jams or marmalades (but not other processed fruit and vegetable products).
Figure 36. - Hygiene and sanitation are controlled by law in most countries
<section>b</section>
2.5. Establishing production facilities
2.5.1. Introduction
2.5.2. The site
2.5.3. Design and construction of the building
2.5.4. Equipment
2.5.5. Packaging materials
2.5.1. Introduction
All fruit and vegetable processing operations require an hygienically designed and easily cleaned building to prevent products from becoming contaminated during processing. The two main sources of contamination are 1) insects and animals and 2) micro-organisms. Insects and animals are attracted to food buildings if foods or wastes are left lying round after production has finished. Micro-organisms can grow in food residues that are left on equipment, tables or floors which have not been properly cleaned. Micro-organisms require water to grow (Section I, Introduction) and wet processing therefore has an inherently greater risk of contamination than dry processing does. However, some types of micro-organism can form inert spores that are able to survive under dry conditions and then grow when they come into contact with water or foods and strict hygiene should also be enforced in drying operations. In dry processing there is an additional risk of contamination by dust, which
can spoil foods itself and also harbour micro-organisms. The following aspects of setting up a processing facility should therefore be addressed by entrepreneurs, whether they are constructing a new facility or converting an existing building.
2.5.2. The site
The location of a food building is very important and the following aspects need to be considered when choosing a site:
· location in relation to raw material supplies and likely markets
· ease of access for staff (public transport, distance down an access road)
· quality of road access (all year, dry season only, potholes that may cause damage to products, especially when glass containers are used)
· nearby swamp land that would be a source of smells and insects
· any potential contamination of water supplies upstream of the processing site
· available land for waste disposal away from the building
· electricity supplies
· cleared land to reduce problems caused by insects and birds (preferably planted with short grass, which acts as a dust trap for airborne dust).
2.5.3. Design and construction of the building
Roofs and ceilings
Walls
Windows and doors
Floors
Lighting and power
Water supply and sanitation
Layout of equipment and facilities
In general, a building should have enough space for all production processes to take place without congestion and for storage of raw materials, packaging materials and finished products. However, the investment should be appropriate to the size and expected profitability of the enterprise to reduce start-up capital, the size of any loans taken out and depreciation and maintenance charges.
Roofs and ceilings
In tropical climates, overhanging roofs keep direct sunlight off the walls and out of the building. This is particularly important when processing involves heating, to make working conditions more comfortable. Fibre-cement tiles offer greater insulation against heat from the sun than galvanised iron sheets do. High level vents in roofs both allow heat and steam to escape and encourage a flow of fresh air through the processing room. The vents must be screened with mesh to prevent insects, rodents and birds from entering the room. If heat is a serious problem, the entrepreneur could consider fitting electric fans or extractors, although this clearly increases capital and operating costs.
Rafters or roof beams within the processing and storage rooms are unacceptable. They allow dust to accumulate, which can fall off in lumps to cause gross contamination of products. Similarly, insects can fall from them into products. They also allow paths for rodents and birds, with consequent risks of contamination from hairs, feathers or excreta. It is therefore essential to have a paneled ceiling fitted to any processing or store-oom, with careful attention when fitting them to ensure that there are no holes in the paneling. Care should also be taken to prevent birds, rodents and flying insects gaining access to the processing room through gaps in the roof structure or where the roof joins the walls.
Walls
As a minimum requirement, all internal walls should be rendered or plastered with a good quality plaster to prevent dust forming in the processing room. An experienced plasterer should be used to ensure that no cracks or ledges remain in the surface finish, which could accumulate dirt and insects. The lower area of walls, to at least 1.08 metres (four feet) above the floor, is most likely to get dirty from washing equipment, from product splashing etc. and special attention should be paid to ensure that this area is easily cleaned. Higher areas of walls should be painted with a good quality emulsion. The lower parts of walls should be either painted with a waterproof gloss paint, preferably white, to allow them to be thoroughly cleaned, or ideally they should be tiled with glazed tiles. If tiling a process room is too expensive, it is possible to select particular areas such as behind sinks or machinery and only tile these parts. In some countries there is a legal
requirement for specified internal finishes and this should be checked with the Ministry of Health or other appropriate authority (see also Section 2.4.2)
Windows and doors
Window sills should be made to slope for two reasons: to prevent dust from accumulating and to prevent operators from leaving cloths or other items lying there, which in turn can attract insects. Windows allow staff to work in natural daylight, which is preferable to and cheaper than electric lighting. However, in tropical climates there is a natural inclination for workers to open windows to allow greater circulation of fresh air. This provides easy access for flying insects, which can readily contaminate the product. Windows should therefore be fitted with mosquito mesh to allow them to be left open.
Normally doors should be kept closed, but if they are used regularly there is again a tendency for them to be left open with similar consequences of animals and insects entering the plant. In this case, thin metal chains or strips of material that are hung vertically from the door lintel may deter insects and some animals, while allowing easy access for staff. Alternatively mesh door screens can be used. Doors should be fitted accurately so that there are no gaps beneath them and all storeroom doors should be kept closed to prevent insects and rodents from destroying stock or ingredients.
Figure 37 - A well-designed processing room
Floors
It is essential to ensure that the floors of processing rooms and storerooms are constructed of good quality concrete, smooth finished and without cracks. In some developing countries, it is possible to buy proprietary floor paints or vinyl based coatings, but these are usually very expensive. Generally, it is not adequate to use the red wax floor polishes that are commonly found in households, as these wear away easily and could contaminate either products or packages. Over time, spillages of acidic fruit products react with concrete and cause it to erode. Attention should therefore be paid to cleaning up spillages as they occur and to regularly monitor the condition of the floor.
The comers where the floor and the walls join are places for dirt to collect. During construction of the floor, it should therefore be curved up to meet the wall. It is possible to place fillets of concrete (or 'coving') in the comers of an existing floor to fill up the right angle, but care is needed to ensure that new gaps are not created which would harbour dirt and insects.
The floor should slope at an angle of approximately 1 in 8 to a central drainage channel. At the end of a day's production, the floor can be thoroughly washed and drained. Proper drainage prevents pools of stagnant water forming, which would in turn risk contamination of equipment and foods. The drainage channel should be fitted with an easily removed steel grating so that the drain can be cleaned. Where the drain exits the building, there is a potential entry point for rodents and crawling insects unless wire mesh is fitted over the drain opening. This too should be easily removed for cleaning.
Lighting and power
General room lighting should be minimised wherever possible. Full use should be made of natural daylight, which is both free and better quality light, especially for intricate work. Where additional lighting is needed, florescent tubes are cheaper to operate than incandescent bulbs. However, if machinery is used that has fast moving exposed parts, these should be lit with incandescent bulbs and not tubes. This is because even though the parts should have guards fitted, a rotating machine can appear to stand still if its speed matches the number of cycles of the mains electricity that powers fluorescent tubes - with obvious dangers to operators.
All electric power points should be placed at a sufficiently high level above the floor that there is no risk of water entering them during washing the floor or equipment. Ideally, waterproof sockets should be used. It is important to use each power point for one application and not use multiple sockets which risk overloading a circuit and causing a fire. If there are insufficient power points for the needs of a process, additional points should be installed, even though this is more expensive. All plugs should be fitted with fuses that are appropriate for the power rating of the equipment and ideally the mains supply should have an earth leakage trip switch. If three-phase power is needed for larger machines or for heavy loads from electric heating, it is important that the wiring is installed by a qualified electrician to balance the supply across the three phases.
Water supply and sanitation
Water is essential in nearly all fruit and vegetable processing, both as a component of products and for cleaning. An adequate supply of potable water should therefore be available from taps around the processing area. In many countries, the mains supply is unreliable or periodically contaminated and it is therefore necessary for the entrepreneur to make arrangements to secure a regular supply of good quality water each day. This can be done by installing two high level, covered storage tanks either in the roof-space or on pillars outside the building. They can be filled alternately when mains water is available and while one tank is being used, any sediment in water in the other tank is settling out. As sedimentation takes several hours, the capacity of each tank should be sufficient for one day's production. The tanks should have a sloping base and be fitted with drain valves above the slope and at the lowest point. In use, water is taken from the upper valve and when the
tank is almost empty, the lower valve is opened to flush out any sediment that has accumulated.
Water that is included in a product should be carefully treated to remove all traces of sediment and if necessary, it should be sterilised. This is particularly important if the product is not heated after water has been mixed in as an ingredient.
There are four ways of treating water at a small scale: by filtration; by heating; by ultra-violet light and by chemical sterilants, such as hypochlorite (also named 'chlorine solution' or 'bleach'). Other water treatment methods are generally too expensive at a small scale of operation.
Filtration through domestic water filters is slow, but having made the capital expenditure, it is relatively cheap. Larger industrial filters are available in some countries. Heating water to boiling and holding it at that temperature for 10-15 minutes is simple and has low capital costs, but it is expensive because of fuel costs and it is time consuming to do routinely. Heating sterilises the water but does not remove sediment and boiled water may therefore require filtering or standing to remove sediment.
Ultra-violet light destroys micro-organisms in water and commercial water treatment units that use this principle (Figure 38) are coming down in price to the point that they can be suitable for those small scale processors that use a lot of water. Again, this method does not remove sediment from the water.
Finally, chemical sterilisation using hypochlorite is fast, relatively cheap and effective against a wide range of micro-organisms. Cleaning water should contain about 200 ppm of chorine and water that is used as an ingredient should contain about 0.5 ppm to avoid giving a chlorine flavour to the product. A chlorine concentration of 200 ppm can be made by adding 1 litre of bleach to 250 litres of water and a 0.5 ppm solution is obtained by adding 2.5 ml of bleach to 250 litres of water. Although chlorine kills most micro-organisms, it also has a number of disadvantages: it can corrode aluminium equipment; it can taint foods; bleach must be handled with great care as it damages the necessary, the concentration of chlorine in water can be measured using a chemical dye that produces a colour when it reacts with chlorine. The intensity of the colour is compared to standard colours on glass discs in a 'comparator'.
Good sanitation is essential to reduce the risk of product contamination and to deter insects, rodent and birds. All wastes should be placed in bins and not piled on the floor. Processes should have a management system in place to remove wastes from the building as they are produced, rather than letting them accumulate during the day. Wastes should never be left in a processing room overnight. This aspect is described further in Section 2.7.2, and summarised in Appendix I.
Figure 38. - Ultra-violet water steriliser
(Courtesy of UV Systems Ltd.)
Good sanitation is essential to reduce the risk of product contamination and to deter insects, rodent and birds. All wastes should be placed in bins and not piled on the floor. Processes should have a management system in place to remove wastes from the building as they are produced, rather than letting them accumulate during the day. Wastes should never be left in a processing room overnight. This aspect is described further in Section 2.7.2, and summarised in Appendix.
Layout of equipment and facilities
The different areas required for fruit and vegetable processing are shown in Figure 39 for a drying unit and in Figure 40 for other types of production. The layouts of these processing rooms show how raw materials move through a process and through the room without paths crossing. Different stages in a process should be physically separated wherever possible. This helps prevent contamination of finished products by incoming, often dirty, raw materials and clearly identifies areas of the room where special attention to hygiene is necessary. This is particularly important to prevent contamination arising from activities such as bottle washing in which inevitable breakages produce glass splinters that could contaminate a product. This separation also reduces the likelihood of accidents or of operators bumping into each other.
Perishable raw materials should be stored separately from non-perishable ingredients and packaging materials. A separate office allows records to be filed and kept clean and provides a quieter working environment for book-keeping. Toilets should either be housed in a separate building or two doors should exist between them and a processing area. All workers should have access to hand-washing facilities with soap and clean towels. Laboratory facilities are generally not needed in fruit and vegetable processing, although a separate table for conducting quality assurance checks or check-weighing packages of finished product (Section 2.7.2) could be located in the office or in a separate area of the processing room.
2.5.4. Equipment
Dried products
Boiled, concentrated and pasteurised products
Fermented and distilled products
Packaging, filling and sealing equipment
When selecting equipment, it should be the correct size for the intended scale of production (obtained from the Feasibility Study, Section 2.3.3).