<title>CL 113/Report. Report of the Council of FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
INTRODUCTION
1. The Hundred and Thirteenth Session of the Council was held in Rome from 4 to 6 November 1997 under the Chairmanship of José Ramón López Portillo, Independent Chairman of the Council.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE ^1
2. The Council noted the Declaration of Competence and Voting Rights presented by the European Community and adopted the Agenda and Timetable for the Session. The Agenda is given in Appendix A to this Report.
ELECTION OF THREE VICE-CHAIRMEN AND DESIGNATION OF THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF DRAFTING COMMITTEE ^2
3. The Council elected three Vice-Chairmen for its Session: Tang Zhengping (China) Gerd Massmann (Germany), and Saeed Nouri-Naeeni (Iran, Islamic Republic of).
4. The Council elected Atul Sinha(India) as Chairman of the Drafting Committee with the following membership: Algeria, Australia, Canada, Chile, China, Germany, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Syria and Uruguay.
ACTIVITIES OF FAO
PREPARATIONS FOR THE TWENTY NINTH SESSION OF THE FAO CONFERENCE ^3
Nominations of the Chairman of the Conference, and of the Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference
5. In accordance with Rule VII-1 of the General Rules of the Organization the Council agreed to put the following nominations before the Conference:
Chairman of the Conference: Lyle VANCLIEF (Canada)
Chairman of Commission I: Saeed NOURI-NAEENI (Iran, Islamic Republic of)
Chairman of Commission II: Anthony BEATTIE (United Kingdom)
Chairman of Commission III: Bob Francis JALANG'O (Kenya)
Election of the Nominations Committee
6. In accordance with Rule XXIV-5(b) GRO, the Council elected the following 11 Member Nations to the Nominations Committee:
ANGOLA
BANGLADESH
BELGIUM
CANADA COSTA RICA
FINLAND
GUINEA
HONDURAS LEBANON
ROMANIA
THAILAND
REPORT OF THE CCP CONSULTATIVE SUB-COMMITTEE ON SURPLUS DISPOSAL (CSSD) (RELAYED TO THE COUNCIL AT THE REQUEST OF THE CCP) ^4
7. The Council considered and endorsed the Report of the 36th Session of the CCP Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal (CSSD). Some members confirmed their endorsement of the Report while reiterating their concern at the exemption from prior consultation procedures of bilateral transactions through the World Food Programme (WFP) and monetary grants where the commodity was purchased from a low-income, food-deficit country (LIFDC). The Council emphasized the importance of the CSSD monitoring all the transactions set out in the new Register of Transactions. With reference to the issue of the location of the CSSD Secretariat, which had been raised at the CCP meeting in February 1997, some members reiterated their request to the FAO Secretariat for a report.
8. The Council adopted the following Resolution, which modified the Procedures contained in the Annex to Council Resolution 1/53:
Resolution 1/113
Consultative Obligations of Member Nations under FAO Principles of Surplus Disposal
THE COUNCIL,
Noting that the Consultative Sub-committee on Surplus Disposal (CSSD), a subsidiary body of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP), was established by the FAO in 1954 to monitor international shipments of surplus agricultural commodities used as food aid in order to minimize the harmful impact of these shipments on commercial trade and agricultural production,
Recalling the Annex to Council Resolution 1/53 (October 1969) containing procedures for notifications and consultation on food aid transactions under the Principles of surplus disposal and including the Catalogue of Transactions^ 5,
Considering that the CCP at its Sixtieth Session (April 1995) had welcomed the incorporation of the Principles in the WTO Agreement on Agriculture and had urged the Sub-committee to undertake a review of the Principles, focusing in particular on the Catalogue of Transactions, including the "grey area" transactions,
Considering that the CCP at its Sixty-First Session in February 1997 recommended that the CSSD further consider its report which should be presented to the Bureau for review and subsequently relayed by the Bureau to the FAO Council for decision, and that the report of the CCP containing this recommendation was endorsed by the Council at its Hundred and Twelfth Session in June 1997:
1. Endorses the recommendations of the CSSD, for a revision of the Procedures contained in the Annex to Resolution 1/53, including the change of the term Catalogue of Transactions to Register of Transactions, as set out in the Annex to this Resolution;
2. Requests the Director-General
(a) to transmit to Member Nations and Associate Members the text of the present Resolution and the annexed recommendations and to invite them to signify their readiness to follow the agreed procedures, and
(b) to draw the attention of Member Nations and Associate Members to the benefits to be derived from the widest possible participation of Governments in the activities of the CSSD.
Rome, 6 November 1997
Annex to Resolution 1/113
PROCEDURES FOR NOTIFICATIONS AND CONSULTATION UNDER THE PRINCIPLES OF SURPLUS DISPOSAL RECOMMENDED BY FAO
The following procedures for notification and consultation are applicable to transactions of the types mentioned in the Register of Transactions reproduced below.
Notification and Consultation
(1) All reporting and consultative obligations and procedures shall be based on the principle of reciprocity among Member Nations and Associate Members.
(2) Before carrying out any transaction in agricultural commodities^6 of a type mentioned in the Register of Transactions, and taking into account the special situations covered in paragraphs (3), (4) and (5), below, the supplying country shall:
(a) undertake bilateral consultations with countries substantially interested by reason of their exports of the commodity concerned to the recipient country;
(b) notify the CSSD of the main features of the proposed transaction in order to provide other countries directly interested in exports of the commodity an opportunity for bilateral consultations, it being understood that this would not result in any lengthening of the total period of consultation.
(3) The above procedures shall not apply to:
(a) Transactions effected through intergovernmental organizations (including WFP) whose commodity transfers are already subject to special consultative rules or through intergovernmental organizations (including UNICEF and UNRWA) whose operations are of such a nature and volume as not to constitute a substantial danger of harmful interference with normal patterns of production and international trade. In such cases, donor countries shall notify the CSSD ex post facto as soon as practicable.
(b) Emergency transactions. In such cases, donor countries shall notify the CSSD ex post facto.
(c) Monetary grants as set out in category 4 in the Register of Transactions where the commodity is purchased locally or from a low-income food-deficit country (LIFDC) as defined by the Food and Agriculture Organization. In such cases, donor countries shall notify the CSSD ex post facto.
(4) Transactions of relatively small size (as defined below) which are not likely to result in harmful interference with normal patterns of production and international trade shall be notified to the CSSD ex post facto as soon as practicable. Relatively small size levels are defined as follows: for wheat and other cereals, a quantity not over 10,000 tonnes; for rice, a quantity not over 1,000 tonnes; for dry skim milk, a quantity not over 400 tonnes, and for butteroil, a quantity not over 200 tonnes. These are aggregate quantities for one donor to a single recipient country during a 12-month period.
(5) FAO Member Nations which effect transactions through private charitable institutions shall periodically notify the members of CSSD using the CSSD distribution machinery in a reasonably comprehensive form, of the relevant data on the current pattern of programmes and projects, so that a Member Nation which considers its commercial trade endangered may request bilateral consultation.
Modifications to the List of Transactions and to the Register of Transactions
(6) There was general agreement that the lists of transactions were not exclusive and that some new types of transactions might be identified in the future. The Committee considered that the CSSD should be prepared to examine proposals by Member Nations for additions to or deletions from the List of Transactions^7 and modifications to the Register of Transactions. If the CSSD, after taking account of arrangements in other international organizations, concluded that the type of transaction concerned fell within the scope of the FAO Principles of Surplus Disposal, it could request the CCP to decide whether it should be added to the categories of transactions subject to consultations and/or reporting.
Position of developing countries
(7) The Committee reaffirmed that, as agreed by the Council at its Twenty-Ninth Session, the governments of recipient countries continued to be under no obligation to take steps for prior consultation or reporting. The Committee agreed that, in keeping with the spirit of the FAO Principles of Surplus Disposal and Guiding Lines, the recommended procedures for consultations and reporting should not constitute an obstacle to, or cause undue delay in, the provision of food aid which was urgently required by a developing deficit country.
(8) The Committee agreed that special consideration should be given to the interests of developing exporting countries which depended heavily on export earnings from agricultural commodities. It also agreed that special consideration should be given to the safeguarding of local production and markets of developing countries.
Obligations of Member Nations in Other Organizations or under International Agreements
(9) The Committee recognized that in relation to the transactions it had identified, Member Nations may also have incurred obligations in other organizations and under international agreements, and that nothing recommended above in any way diminished these obligations or commitments. Likewise, nothing recommended above detracted from the generality of the FAO Principles of Surplus Disposal.
Register of Transactions ^8
1. Donations of domestically-produced commodities from a government to a government of an importing country, an intergovernmental organization^9 or a private institution for free distribution directly to the final consumers in the importing country.
3. Monetary grants by the government of an exporting country to an importing country, for the specific purpose of purchasing a commodity from the exporting country.
4. Monetary grants by a government either to a supplying country (or countries) or to a recipient country for the specific purpose of purchasing a commodity from an exporting country (or countries) or from local suppliers in the recipient country for delivery to/in the specific recipient country.
5. Monetary grants by a government to an intergovernmental organization or to a private institution for the specific purpose of purchasing commodities in the open market (including local purchase) for delivery to/in eligible recipient countries (developing countries).
6. Transfers of commodities under the rules and established procedures of the World Food Programme.
7. Sales for the currency of the importing country which is not transferable and is not convertible into currency or goods and services for use by the contributing country.
8. Sales for the currency of the importing country which is partially convertible into currency or goods and services for use by the contributing country.
9. Government-sponsored loans of agricultural commodities repayable in kind.
10. Sales^10 on credit in which, as a result of government intervention, or of a centralized marketing scheme, the interest rates, period of repayment (including periods of grace) or other related terms do not conform to the commercial rates, periods or terms prevailing in the world market. In particular with respect to period of repayment, credit transactions are distinguished as follows: (a) 10 years or more; (b) over 3 years and under 10 years.
11. Sales^11 in which the funds for the purchase of commodities are obtained under a loan from the government of an exporting country tied to the purchase of those commodities, distinguished as follows with respect to period of repayment: (a) 10 years or more; (b) over 3 years and under 10 years.
12. Transactions under categories 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 subject to tied Usual Marketing Requirements or to tied Offset Purchasing Requirements.
13. Transactions under categories 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 subject to tied purchase of fixed quantities of the same or another commodity from the exporting country.
14. Government and non-government sponsored barter transactions not involving price concessions.
15. Non-government sponsored barter transactions involving price concessions.
16. Sales for non-convertible currency not involving price concessions.
NEGOTIATION OF A LEGALLY BINDING INSTRUMENT ON PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT (PIC) ^12
9. The Council welcomed the progress made by the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC).
10. The Council noted that the functions of the interim Secretariat and the Convention Secretariat are expected to result in additional financial obligations.
11. The Council requested that an estimate of additional financial requirement for the Interim Secretariat be made available to the Conference. The Council recommended that the Conference, subject to an agreement on the additional financial requirements:
* Authorize the participation of the FAO Secretariat in an Interim Secretariat and in a Secretariat to the Convention if so desired during the negotiations and adopted by the Diplomatic Conference, provided that such arrangements were satisfactory to the Director-General.
* Agree to accept changes in the voluntary PIC procedure, if so decided by the Diplomatic Conference.
DESERT LOCUST SITUATION: MEASURES TAKEN AND FURTHER ACTION REQUIRED ^13
12. The Council noted the relatively calm Desert Locust situation but recommended to the Conference that locust-affected countries, supported by donors, maintain a high level of vigilance in the Western (West and Northwest Africa), Eastern (South-West Asia), and the Central Region (the Red Sea countries), especially where active locust populations still remained. In this context, the Council called on locust-affected countries to continue the process of sustaining and strengthening their locust survey and control teams as the fundamental element of successful preventive locust control.
13. The Council expressed its satisfaction at the progress made in establishing the EMPRES (Desert Locust) Programme in the Central Region, and in formulating an extension of the Programme to the Western Region (West and North-West Africa). The Council recommended that the Conference call on the international community and the locust-affected countries to continue to support the on-going Central Region Programme, and to urgently extend this support to the implementation phase of the Western Region.
14. The Council recommended to the Conference that the locust-affected countries be requested to re-evaluate existing regional locust control structures, in order to achieve an appropriate geographical coverage and to calculate in a realistic manner the financial resources that will be necessary to assist Member Nations to take common action.
15. In commenting on the Desert Locust Situation document, the Council took note of the progress already made in the development of products used at a very low concentration and the Council recommended to the Conference that emphasis be given to further research on, and to implementing the use of, alternatives to chemical pesticides which would minimize the negative effects of locust control on the environment. Research, especially within EMPRES, should also cover strategy development as part of the effort to strengthen national capacities and increased sustainability of locust control efforts.
PROGRAMME AGAINST AFRICAN TRYPANOSOMIASIS ^14
16. The Council endorsed the objective and structure for the Programme Against African Trypanosomiasis (PAAT) in recognition of the considerable impact of trypanosomiasis on animal production and food security, and for its potential to contribute to the objectives of the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
17. The Council noted the changes proposed in the reduction of the Statutory Bodies from three, namely the Commission on African Animal Trypanosomiasis and the two Panels of Experts on Ecological, Technical and Development Aspects, to a single body under the title of "the Panel of Advisory Group Coordinators". The establishment of this body should follow normal FAO procedures.
18. The Council strongly expressed its concern that the proposal had not first been submitted for the consideration of the technical bodies, namely the Committee on Agriculture (COAG), but nevertheless agreed that due to the importance of subject to food security it should be forwarded to Conference and not be delayed for a further two years.
19. The Council agreed that the draft resolution pertaining to the establishment of PAAT be forwarded to the Conference for consideration. It noted, however, that the establishment of PAAT would not involve additional Regular Programme resources beyond those allocated in the Programme of Work and Budget 1998-99.
20. The Council accordingly forwarded the following draft Resolution for consideration by the Conference:
Draft Resolution for the Conference
The Programme Against African Trypanosomiasis (PAAT)
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing the severity of the impact of tsetse and trypanosomiasis on livestock, agriculture and human welfare in Africa,
Well aware that the disease has direct implications in attaining the objectives of the World Food Summit Plan of Action,
Welcoming FAO's initiative to secure international collaboration and coordination through the Programme Against African Trypanosomiasis (PAAT):
1.Urges all Member Nations affected by the disease to reinforce their efforts to combat the disease and to coordinate their actions through PAAT and the Joint FAO/WHO/OAU/IAEA Secretariat to this Programme.
2.Requests the Director-General:
i) to further define and pursue how the potential offered by PAAT may contribute to the broader objectives of Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development (SARD);
ii) to consolidate international action in trypanosomiasis control by formalizing, through an exchange of letters, the collaborative links required with WHO, IAEA, and OAU in order to effectively establish the Joint PAAT secretariat;
iii) to give formal recognition, within FAO, to the PAAT Programme Committee;
iv) to afford PAAT the priority, and profile warranted by its potential to contribute to the aims of the World Food Summit Plan of Action;
v) to abolish the two existing Statutory Bodies "The Panels of Experts on Ecological, and Technical Aspects and on Development Aspects to the Programme for the Control of African Trypanosomiasis and Related Development"and replace by the single Statutory Body, namely the "Panel of PAAT Advisory Group Coordinators"and to facilitate annual meetings;
vi) to abolish the Commission on African Animal Trypanosomiasis based on the consideration that the subject may be discussed, on an as required basis, by the FAO Regional Conference for Africa.
PROGRAMME, BUDGETARY, FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
PROGRAMME OF WORK AND BUDGET 1998-99^15
21. The Council examined the Programme of Work and Budget (PWB) proposals addressing in particular the two main scenarios illustrated in the document. It noted that these scenarios corresponded to zero real growth (ZRG) and zero nominal growth (ZNG), which had been prepared in accordance with its request at its last session. Although some members would have preferred more information on the impact of the ZNG scenario, the Council welcomed the extensive information provided in the document, reflecting its own directives and the advice of the Programme and Finance Committees. The Council recognized the desirability of a more concise format in the future. It welcomed the detailed review of the proposals carried out by the Programme and Finance Committees.
22. The Council noted with appreciation that the PWB proposals had taken into account the views expressed by its Technical Committees. It also welcomed the attention given to maintaining an adequate balance between normative and operational activities. In this connection, the Council recalled their complementarity and the expectations of the membership that both be continued and strengthened.
23. The Council recognized that the proposals incorporated the impact of the exchange rate, as it had also requested at its last session, based on the use of a provisional rate of Lire 1690 to US$ 1. It noted that this provisional rate was very close to current rates.
24. The Council was informed that recently-revised estimates of staff redeployment and separation costs associated with post reductions led to unbudgeted costs of approximately US$ 4 million and US$ 12 million under ZRG and ZNG, respectively.
25. Some members stated that a further reduction in administrative costs and maximization of efficiencies was essential to limit cutbacks in technical and economic programmes, and provided some suggestions in this regard. Other members stressed the substantial savings already achieved in the recent past and the need for consolidation of these gains at the present juncture, before considering further changes in organizational structure.
26. Bearing in mind the discussion to be held in Commission II of the Conference in the following week, members provided their views on the substantive contents of the proposals and the various options under consideration, also reflecting positions of regional groups.
27. Most members reiterated their preference for real growth, in the light of the extensive requirements for assistance in countries. They also emphasized the objectives agreed at the World Food Summit which called for active support from FAO. In this context, they accepted the zero real growth option as the minimum necessary for FAO to be able to fulfil its mandate. They objected to the substantial reduction of outputs involved in the ZNG scenario.
28. Other members aimed at a budget level which may allow for some flexibility on the budget for technical and economic programmes on the condition of further reductions in non-substantive programmes, such as administrative costs.
29. Still other members felt that the ZNG scenario would preserve FAO's substantive capacity to implement an effective Programme of Work which met identified priorities. They considered that under this scenario the budget was more likely to be fully funded and that a ZNG budget would be fully consistent with current pressures to contain public expenditures in many countries. In agreeing with these views, one member of this group noted that it would prefer ZNG or below scenario.
30. One member recalled its government's position that the budget level should be between US$ 610 and US$ 615 million.
31. Another member stressed its specific interest in reinstating the work on the World Apparel Fibre Consumption Survey, which had been previously discontinued.
32. In conclusion, the Council recalled the unanimous desire to avoid the difficulties experienced at the last Conference. Given the range of positions still prevailing among the membership, it urged further efforts to seek consensus on the budget level.
33. The Council, noting that as of 3 November 1997 there were 79 Member Nations who had made no payment on their 1997 assessed contributions and that 75 members were with arrears of contributions, also reiterated the importance of all members meeting their financial obligations to the Organization and settling their contributions due in time, as well as arrears.
34. The Council stressed the need for members to strengthen their sense of belonging to the Organization.
REPORT OF THE JOINT MEETING OF THE PROGRAMME AND FINANCE COMMITTEES (ROME, SEPTEMBER 1997) ^16
Programme Budget and Medium-term Planning Process ^17
35. In noting the positive reactions of the Joint Meeting to the proposals for a revised programme budget process, the Council decided to address the matter more fully under Agenda Item 10, in view of the more detailed examination of the proposals by the Programme Committee.
Savings and Efficiencies in Governance: Review of FAO Statutory Bodies ^18
36. The Council expressed its appreciation for the report of the Ad-Hoc Contact Group on Statutory Bodies which had been set up by the Programme and Finance Committees. The Council recognized that the Report aimed at achieving greater efficiencies, as requested by the Council. The Council also took note of the comments made during the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees (document CL 113/2, paras 26-31).
37. The Council reviewed the Draft Resolution for the Conference proposed by the Ad Hoc Contact Group, as well as some specific recommendations concerning Statutory Bodies and their Subsidiary Bodies. In responding to the concerns about specific recommendations contained in the Report, the Council emphasized that the authority to abolish or modify the terms of reference of Subsidiary Bodies of Statutory Bodies rested with the Statutory Body. In this connection, the Council amended the Draft Resolution for the Conference and recommended that its wording should be carefully examined by the Conference before its approval in order to avoid any possible misunderstandings.
38. The Council decided to transmit the following Draft Resolution to the Conference for its consideration:
Draft Resolution for the Conference
Review of FAO Statutory Bodies
THE CONFERENCE,
Conscious of the continuing need to enhance the efficiency of the Organization and its governance in a time of financial challenge, to eliminate Statutory Bodies that are obsolete, to ensure more flexible task-oriented and time-bound working arrangements for those that remain and to limit the creation of new bodies to those that are strictly necessary,
Recognising the importance of moving towards increased self-financing for Statutory Bodies that have regional focus, and of enhancing the responsiveness of those bodies to the needs of their members:
1. Decides to abolish the bodies listed in Annex A to this Resolution;
2. Recommends to the parent bodies concerned that their Subsidiary Bodies listed in Annex B be abolished and calls on those parent bodies to take the necessary action unless they consider, taking into account the financial and programme implications, that there are overriding reasons for retaining any such bodies in existence and to report to the Council through the Programme and Finance Committees on the actions taken and, where appropriate, on the reasons for retaining any of the Subsidiary Bodies recommended for abolition;
3. Requests the Director-General to consult with the organizations listed in Annex C with a view to securing alternative arrangements for, or the abolition of, the joint bodies listed in that Annex as deemed appropriate, and authorises their abolition, as appropriate;
4. Recommends to the Codex Alimentarius Commission that it continue its review of the usefulness of its Subsidiary Bodies set out in Annex D;
5. Encourages regional commissions established under Article VI of the Constitution to seek more extra-budgetary resources to supplement the resources made available to them under the FAO Regular Programme Budget, taking into account the economic capacity of the regions concerned and of their members;
6. Calls on the Contracting Parties to conventions and agreements establishing regional bodies under Article XIV of the Constitution to seek where appropriate, increasingly to provide such bodies with their own financial resources, whether through cooperative programmes or other voluntary contributions, or through the establishment of autonomous budgets financed from mandatory contributions;
7. Decides that in future, Statutory Bodies should be established only where strictly necessary and where the work to be undertaken cannot be carried out by ad-hoc groups, and that the terms of reference of all new bodies created should provide for a periodic review of their usefulness;
8. Further decides that, to this end, the following factors should be taken into account in establishing new technical bodies and in the establishment of new Subsidiary Bodies:
* Centrality to the FAO mandate and the Organization's current priorities as expressed by FAO members and reflected in planning documents;
* Clarity of the definition of the task, which should normally be of limited duration;
* Positive impact of the body's work at the level of FAO members;
* FAO's comparative advantage, hereby avoiding over-lap and creating synergy with the work of other bodies;
* Proportion of the FAO membership to which the work of the proposed body is of importance with due regard to the economic capacity of less advantaged members, including least developed countries and small island developing states;
* Willingness of their members to contribute financially and through non- monetary inputs to the work of the body, especially where the body will serve a more limited number of countries, with due regard to the economic capacity of their less advantaged members and the availability of other financial support;
9. Requests all Statutory Bodies to examine how their rules of procedure and working methods could be streamlined to facilitate positive inter-action among participants at meetings, to promote a task-orientation and to strengthen the involvement of civil-society partners;
10. Further requests the Secretariat to prepare information notes to facilitate review by the Council, following discussion in the Programme and Finance Committees, of a) possibilities for streamlining procedures and avoiding repetitious discussion in bodies at various levels, taking full account of the experience of other international organizations; and b) modalities for greater civil society involvement;
11. Decides that, in general, Executive Committees should cease to be listed as formal Statutory Bodies in the Directory of FAO Statutory Bodies, except for the Executive Committee of the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
ANNEX A
GLOBAL BODIES
Commissions and Committees
- Commission on Fertilizers (FERT)
- FAO Olive Production Committee (0P)
- FAO Fertilizer Industry Advisory Committee of Experts (FIAC)
- Panel of Experts on Improved Weed Management
- Panel of Experts on Agricultural Engineering
- FAO Statistics Advisory Committee of Experts (SAC)
- Consultative Group on Tropical Forests Action Programme
- FAO Advisory Committee on Forestry Education (ACFE)
REGIONAL BODIES
Commissions and Committees
- Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics (FDT)
- Commission on African Animal Trypanosomiasis
- Regional Commission on Farm Management for Asia and Far East
- Regional Commission on Food Security for Asia and Pacific
- Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for South-West Atlantic (CARPAS)
- Near East Regional Economic & Social Policy Commission (ESPC/NE)
Expert Committees and Panels
- Panel of Experts on Development Aspects of African Trypanosomiasis Control Programme
- Panel of Experts on Ecological/Technical Aspects of Programme for Control of African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development
ANNEX B
GLOBAL BODIES
Commissions and Committees
- Working Group of FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGFRA)
- Sub-Group on Rice Grading and Standardization of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:R)
- Sub-Group on Statistics of Inter-governmental Group on Oilseeds, Oils and Fats of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:OF)
- Inter-governmental Group on Cocoa of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:CC)
- Sub-Group on Cocoa Grading of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:CC)
- Advisory Working Party on Hard Fibre Research of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:HF)
- Sub-Group on Statistics of Inter-governmental Group on Bananas of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:BA)
- Sub-Group of Exporters of Inter-governmental Group on Bananas of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:BA)
- Steering Sub-Group of Inter-governmental Group on Citrus Fruit of the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP:CI)
- Inter-governmental Group on Wine and Vine Products of the Committee on Commodity Problems 