<title>Issues and Opportunities in the Evolution of Private Forestry and Forestry Extension in Several Countries with Economies in Transition in Central and Eastern Europe</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The nations of Eastern Europe have a long and well-recognized history and traditions of forestry practices, particularly in the development of silvicultural and management techniques for large royal or government forest estates. These forest estates, in many countries, were often significantly increased shortly after World War II as the result of nationalization.
Recently, however, many countries of Eastern Europe are undergoing or have undergone dramatic shifts in forest ownership patterns. Through processes of compensation, restitution and privatization, thousands of hectares of state forest land have been placed in the hands of private individuals. There has been a tremendous increase in the number of private forest owners, many with small and sometimes dispersed holdings and little background in forest management. Thus, one of the most affected sub-sectors may well be forestry extension, which changes fundamentally as a function of forest ownership. Extension for private owners, who by definition have a say in how their land is managed, differs from 'extension' for state lands where the government personnel often has direct authority to manage the forest estate. Forest management techniques developed for large government forest estates must therefore be revised, adapted, updated and communicated to private owners and new
approaches must be developed for small private owners. Appropriate organizations and associations of forest owners and farmers should be promoted to assure coordinated management and economies of scale. The commitment and participation of private owners in all phases of forest development and conservation must be assisted and developed. Small forest owners, often under economic pressure, are those most needing advice and assistance to manage their forests sustainably.
In addition, similar policy and tenure changes in the agriculture sector also imply a new role for forestry extension, especially in the areas of agroforestry and the conversion of marginal, degraded or abandoned agricultural lands into forests. These changes combined with changes in the political arena will even affect the remaining government forest estate where new levels of public participation and involvement may be required.
Many of the countries in Eastern Europe are facing the same challenges in forestry extension. This publication attempts to address this situation by documenting and analysing recent changes in forest ownership patterns, discussing the needs of and identifying possible approaches for, forestry extension in the region. It is based on a survey of nine countries, four country profiles written by national experts, country visits by an expert from the region and meetings and interactions with resource persons from the area. While a variety of forms of forest ownership exist, such as communal management, this document deals mainly with private forestry sensu stricto.
Many people have contributed to this work - both from inside FAO and from the countries concerned. Those who wrote country profiles are indicated under the respective sections. Tamas Marghescu visited and wrote country profiles for several countries. He also collaborated with Jon Anderson, Forestry Extension Officer, FAO, on the regional overview. Mr. Anderson initiated the work and edited much of the volume. Additional editing and formatting was done by Kathryn Carlisle. Many other resource persons, too numerous to mention individually - particularly those from the countries themselves who commented frankly on an initial draft - deserve recognition here. Within FAO special mention needs to be given to Jean Clement, Marc de Montalembert and Lennart Ljungman for suggestions and contributions.
This book, while dealing with a complex and on-going process, should be useful to a broad range of foresters, extensionists, planners, and policy and decision makers, and to those involved in international cooperation concerned with this region. It is hoped that it will contribute concretely to sustainable forest management in the region.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
Countries covered in the study
<section>2</section>
Acronyms and Abbreviations
CBG
Community Based Groups
CEE
Central and Eastern Europe
CNC
Close to Nature Composition
CNF
Close to Nature Forestry
ICAS
Romanian Institute of Forest Research and Management
IUCN
The World Conservation Union
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
UNCED
United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development
WWF
Worldwide Fund for Nature
<section>3</section>
Currencies
CURRENCY
$ EQUIVALENT JUNE 96
Armenia
Drum
Latvia
Latvian Rouble (Rublis)
Lithuania
Talonas (lit)
Poland
Zloty
Romania
Leu
Slovakia
Slovak Crown (Koruna Slovenska)
Slovenia
Slovenian Tolar (Sit)
* All calculations throughout this document are based on exchange rates from June 1996.
<section>4</section>
Introduction and Methods
Since the early 1990s, many nations around the world, particularly in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE), have embarked on a process of transformation or transition of their economies from central planning to a more market orientation. This transition is not simply economic but affects also the political and social spheres. These changes are having, and will continue to have, important impacts on virtually all areas of life in these nations. Forestry is not an exception.
Many countries in the region went through varying degrees of nationalization of private property, including forest land, in the years following World War II. Much of the means of production (labor, land and capital) came under state ownership and control in centrally planned economies. However, since the early 1990s a reverse trend is apparent, marked by privatization, a reduction of state influence and a shift towards a market economy and political pluralism.
Privatization as used here encompasses three main processes:
· The selling (or privatization) of former state property (enterprises, real estate) to non-state entities.
· The restitution of nationalized or collectivized private property to their former owners.
· The transfer of state property to private concerns in order to satisfy demands made on the state mainly as compensation for the previous nationalization (expropriation) and collectivization of private property.
Governments in the countries in transition of CEE have often established specialized ministries and/or agencies to implement privatization with the secondary objective of utilizing the income from privatization for investments urgently needed in the general transformation process of the national economy.
The goal of much of the economic liberisation has been to stimulate economic growth and improve standards of living. However, the transition has resulted in some economic hardships, hopefully temporary, including the bankruptcy of certain industries, unemployment, a decrease in production, inflation, currency devaluation, reduced real income (especially in public employment and pension schemes), the development of trade deficits in areas previously self-sufficient, and the growth of the 'black economy'. There are fears that the new economic environment may be increasing the hardship and suffering on the part of a large portion of the population who are therefore looking for short term economic gains. However, in some countries, the economic forecasts suggest improving conditions for most people.
Methods
A survey of the status of private forestry and forestry extension in several CEE countries was conducted as a first step to identifying needs, trends and in developing appropriate capacities for forestry extension. Initially, countries were contacted as a result of their participation in the FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO) Meeting of March, 1995. Later, other countries became interested in participating and provided data. It should be noted that the countries covered in this report were not necessarily chosen to reflect a range of bio-physical or socio-economic conditions and be a 'representative sample'. However it is felt that their experience is of interest to a range of other countries in the area and outside.
A simple questionnaire (see Annex 1) was designed and sent to officials responsible for forestry in the selected countries. The questionnaire contained a request for information on:
· total forest area and percent of forest area;
· forest ownership patterns before the year 1985;
· forest ownership pattern in 1995;
· planned forest ownership pattern (policy statement);
· number of private forest owners per private forest property size classes;
· total area of private forest property per different size classes;
· existence of forestry extension mechanisms;
· types of government support for forestry extension;
· institutional arrangements for forestry extension;
· existence of forest owners' associations or groups;
· types and adequacy of training of forestry extension personnel;
· main problems associated with forestry extension; and
· identification of needs in relation to forestry extension.
Completed questionnaires were received from nine countries (Armenia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia). In addition, a number of authors were commissioned to provide more detailed information in the form of country papers. Country papers have been prepared for Armenia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia (See Table 1). The reports of the FAO/World Bank Investment Center were also consulted.
Table 1: Basic information sources
Countries
Completed questionnaire
by agency/person
Country paper
author
Armenia
YES
Armenian Forest State Forest Enterprise, 1995
Forestry Extension in Armenia
Ter-Gazarian. 1996
Croatia
YES
Jela Bilandzija, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Czech Republic
YES
Ministry of Agriculture, 1995
Hungary
YES
Gyula Holdampf, Head of Section Ministry of Agriculture Department of Forestry
Latvia
YES
State Forest Service, 1995
The State of Forestry Extension in Latvia
Marghescu, T. 1996
Lithuania
NO
Forestry Extension in the Republic of Lithuania, Status Report
Marghescu. T. 1995
Poland
YES
Ministry of Environmental Protection, Natural Resources and Forestry, Department of Forestry, 1995
The State of Forestry Extension in Poland
Marghescu, T. 1996
Romania
YES
Borlea, G.F. 1996
Forestry Extension in Romania
Borlea, G.F. 1996
Slovakia
YES
Hrvol, R. 1996
The Study of the Status of Forestry in Selected Countries with Economies in Transition
Hrvol, R. 1996
Slovenia
YES
Golob, A. Ministry of Forestry Agriculture, Forestry and Food, 1996
Forestry Extension in Slovenia
Golob, A. 1996
This information was analysed and discussed with resource people from the region and was complemented by bibliographic research. In some cases, information for other countries in Europe, notably France and the former Federal Republic of Germany, has been provided for general comparison and reference.
This document is divided into two main sections. Section I provides a comparative overview of the evolution of private forestry and the needs and approaches for forestry extension within selected countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Section II contains the country profiles on forestry extension for seven countries in the region.
<section>5</section>
Forest Sector Trends
Forest resources of countries in Central and Eastern Europe
Forest industry
Marketing and trade of wood and wood products
Forestry education
Forestry research
Public participation
Forest policy and legislation
Forest resources of countries in Central and Eastern Europe
Forest cover in CEE countries is diverse. Countries with a relatively high percentage of forest cover are Croatia (44%), Latvia (44%), Estonia (48%), Slovenia (54%) and Slovakia (41%). Countries with relatively low percentage of forest cover include Armenia (12%), Republic of Moldova (9%) and Ukraine (15%). According to the 'FAO Forest Resource Assessment, 1990' (FAO, 1995), the average forest cover for Europe is 27% (figures of Belarus, Ukraine and other former USSR not included in calculation).
Table 2: Forest resources of selected countries in transition
Country
Forest area (ha)
% of total land area
Data source
Albania
Bemmann, Forst- und Holzwirtschaft Osteuropas. Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift no. 23 vol. 6.11.1995, 50. Jahrgang.
Armenia**
Armenian State Forest Enterprise, 1996. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Belarus
Bemmann, Forst- und Holzwirtschaft Osteuropas. Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift no. 23 vol. 6.11.1995, 50. Jahrgang.
Bulgaria
Bemmann, Forst- und Holzwirtschaft Osteuropas. Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift no. 23 vol. 6.11.1995, 50. Jahrgang.
Croatia**
FAO, 1995. Forest resources assessment 1990, global synthesis FAO Forestry Paper no. 124, FAO Rome, Italy.
Czech Republic**
Ministry of Agriculture, Czech Republic, 1995. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Estonia
Leemet and Karoles, 1995. Estonian Forests and Forestry. Article in Baltic Forestry, 1995 vol. 1, no. 1.
Georgia
Bemmann, Forst- und Holzwirtschaft Osteuropas. Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift no. 23 vol. 6.11.1995, 50. Jahrgang.
Hungary**
Hungarian Ministry of Agriculture, 1996. Hungarian Forestry. Brochure (36 pp.).
Latvia**
State Forest Service of Latvia, 1995. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Lithuania**
Marghescu, 1995. Forestry Extension in the Republic of Lithuania, Status Report (7 pp.) Consultancy report, FAO Forestry Department, Rome, Italy.
Moldova
FAO, 1995. Forest resources assessment 1990, global synthesis. FAO Forestry Paper no. 124, FAO Rome, Italy.
Poland**
Polish Ministry of Environmental Protection, Natural Resources and Forestry, Department of Forestry, 1995. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Romania**
Borlea 1996. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Slovakia**
Hrvol, 1996. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Slovenia**
Slovenian Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food, 1996. Completed FAO Forestry Department questionnaire.
Ukraine
FAO, 1995 Forest resources assessment 1990, global synthesis FAO Forestry Paper no. 124, FAO Rome, Italy.
*forest land area
** covered in this study
Average standing volume varies between 79 m³/ha in Albania (including coppice and shrub forest) and 217 m³/ha in former Czechoslovakia (Bemmann, 1995).
Average annual increment figures vary between 1 m³/ha in Albania (this figure increases if only high forest areas are calculated) and 8 m³/ha in former Czechoslovakia (Bemmann, 1995).
The per caput forest area in CEE varies widely from country to country. It is 0.09 ha/caput in the Republic of Moldova and 1 ha/caput in Estonia/Russian Federation: 5 ha per caput (FAO, 1995).
Forests in the region are negatively affected by factors such as air pollution, pest outbreaks and radioactivity. The forest area most damaged is the 'Black Triangle' (border triangle of three countries - Germany, Czech Republic and Poland). In Hungary and Romania, the 'oak decline' is taking its toll. It is believed to be connected to coppice management and stress factors (long drought periods in combination with frost), reducing the vitality of oaks, making them susceptible to secondary diseases caused by fungi and insects. In eastern Poland and Lithuania, large forest tracks of spruce and pine are affected by infestation cycles of Lymantria monchana, Pityogenes chalcographus and other insects, requiring large-scale, pest-management operations.
For a number of reasons, it is difficult to estimate the contribution of the forestry sector to the national economy of these, or any countries. Information is lacking or difficult to analyze and compare in many areas. However, it is estimated that forest products contributed 7% to the gross domestic product (GDP) of former Czechoslovakia (probably among the highest in Europe), 5% to Romania, 4% to Poland and 2% to Hungary. In comparison, forest products contribute 1% to the GDP of France and 7% to Finland. These figures are probably conservative since they consider only roundwood product values (SOFO, 1995). In many of the countries, environmental, hunting, recreational and other values are also important.
Forest industry
State-owned, forest-industry enterprises in the centrally-planned, economic environment were often linked to state-owned forest enterprises in a vertically integrated organization. Forest enterprises sold wood for set prices or internally transferred raw material free of charge to forest-industry enterprises. In most countries of the region, forest-industry enterprises have now been privatized to some extent. In order to modernize their technology and compete under the new market conditions, enterprises needed capital. This led to the development of joint ventures with foreign investors. Some outdated enterprises closed down completely. Countries where vertically organized, combined forest/forest industry enterprises continued to operate under state ownership, the economic operation of resource management was, at least through bookkeeping, separated from the forest industry unit. The survival of state-owned forest industry will be ensured only through profits due to adequate
management, marketing and continuous investment in competitive technology. Some forest-industry plants continue to work with their present, outdated technology, since relatively low labor costs provide a profit margin. Reluctance to invest in new technology is attributed to unfavorable loan conditions, posing too high a risk. Especially in the beginning of the transition period, forest and forestry industry enterprises were flooded by Western experts and companies seeking to sell their services and technology. 'In many countries, the privatization of forest industry is occurring in isolation from forestry. Increasing the capacity of the forest industries will increase the demand for raw material and, in the face of economic recession, governments (still the major forest owners) may be tempted to draw excessively on forest resources to obtain badly needed capital for investment' (Marghescu, 1994).
Marketing and trade of wood and wood products
With the collapse of the economic union of centrally planned countries of CEE (COMECON), previous export possibilities for semi-finished and finished wood products to the former Soviet Union were, to a large extent, terminated. Also largely terminated were exports of logs from the former Soviet Union to these countries. The few exports to Western Europe, which had been administered by the state foreign trade organizations, only served the purpose of hard currency supply. The exported semi-finished and finished products mainly belonged to the low-price and low-quality range. In 1989, imports of wood products from Eastern Europe to countries such as the Federal Republic of Germany accounted for only 9% of total imports and Germany only exported 2% of its total exports to COMECON countries. The exports to the East were disrupted and CEE countries had to orient themselves in a western direction to develop new export markets. In 1991 and 1992, a large number of suppliers from the
East were trying to step into the Western market with timber and cut wood. However, their expectations were sometimes unrealistic in terms of quality, measurements and supply conditions (Schweinle, 1992). Marketing and market intelligence operations are often activities carried out by the different companies in complete isolation from each other. In many countries of the region there is no central, marketing-information organization to inform companies on international market developments. CEE countries have adjusted standards according to Western partners' in terms of reliable and correct product grading. However, improvements could still be made in this field. There are even reports on organized crime influences in the forest-industry sector in some countries (Neumann and Matysiak, 1996).
Forestry education
Technical and higher forestry education in the CEE countries has traditionally been of a high standard in the biological sciences. The transition process, however, demanded fundamental curriculum changes. The main changes are taking place in the subject areas of forestry economics and forest policy, since these were previously influenced by socialist ideologies. The need for a new subject area (forestry extension) is apparent in connection with the evolving private forest sector. Another radical change took place in the area of compulsory language education. Previously, Russian was compulsory. Today students are able to select between different languages, including English, German and French. The libraries of most forestry education institutions, however, still contain much outdated literature. New textbooks and Western periodicals are scarce due to financial restrictions. Supplementary communication channels (electronic distance learning and Internet) could ease the
problem. The adjustment of teaching staff to the new situation will take time - in some cases a full generation. Some institutions are closely cooperating with partner institutions in the West. The exchange of teaching staff, especially in the area of forestry economics and forest policy, is a priority. In 1994, the Technical University of Dresden, Germany (former East Germany) founded a chair for Forestry and Wood Industries of Eastern Europe to support European integration throughout the transition process in Eastern Europe (Bemmann, 1995).
Forestry research
Forestry research institutions in most CEE countries are presently engaged in crisis management. Prior to the economic and political changes, forestry research institutions were an integral part of central planning and research subjects had to conform to certain political and economic objectives. Research was almost exclusively financed from state budget resources. With transition process and increasingly scarce state resources, research institution personnel have often been diminished. Radically trimmed institutions often found themselves unable to keep up important, long- and medium-term projects initiated prior to cutbacks. In addition, research topics were scientific and technical in nature, without anticipating the socio-economic needs of the merging class of private owners in forestry and farming. The practical links between research, education and extension were not well developed.
Management of the institutions has had considerable difficulties adapting to a new economic environment. Research has to be marketed and sold, short-term economic impact must be considered, national and international competition for scarce resources must be faced and consumers of research results who are willing to share costs are needed. In the more practical environment, applied research seems to be gaining importance compared to basic research. The low salary of researchers leads partly to the dispersion of research personnel to better paid jobs and to the search for supplemental occupations. Such a state of affairs leads to a further reduction of effective time devoted to research (Krott, 1996). The democratization in CEE countries has opened up new dimensions for international forestry-research cooperation and for the exchange of data and information.
Public participation
Political liberalization and democratization in CEE and, almost simultaneously, UNCED (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development) in Rio in 1992, led to the development and growth of national and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs), with environmental concerns. WWF (Worldwide Fund for Nature) and IUCN (The World Conservation Union) established a network of country offices in the CEE. Government administrations, including the state authorities for forestry, must now consider the viewpoints of NGOs, representing opinions with certain public support, in decision-making processes. The relatively restricted community of forestry professionals in the past was self enclosed and only occasionally received political directives from outside. Professional problems were solved inside the circle, which now has to open up to wider public discussions. Overall, the public is demanding more information and a greater role in decision making in forestry. The
forestry sector is continuously increasing public relations to gain support in the struggle for state budgetary support. Evolving and sometimes substantial private forest ownership further contributes to the opening of the once exclusive forestry sector. As much as NGOs, the private forestry sector, especially where owners are well organized, is fulfilling a watchdog function, scrutinizing the steps of forestry administrations and of state forest management organizations. Local organizations are being formed or revived that have great interest in the forestry debate.
Forest policy and legislation
The changes taking place in the CEE countries have required a renewal and revision of the policy and legislation frameworks in all sectors - an enormous task. For forestry legislation and policies, UNCED (1992) and subsequent follow-up action led to the upsurge of environmental protection, effecting the forestry sector.
Almost all CEE countries have formulated new forest laws in the past five years such as the Czech Republic (Principles of the State Forest Policy, 1994), Slovakia (State Forest Policy, 1995) and Slovenia (Forestry Development Programme of Slovenia, 1996) (see Table 7). Poland and Latvia, were planning to complete forest policies in 1996.
New forestry legislation is dealing with the management regulations for both state and private forest ownership. Sustainability is understood not only as the sustained production of wood, but comprises the sustainability of the entire forest ecosystem with its multiple functions (environmental, social and economic) and processes. Silvicultural and forest management practices are increasingly guided towards close-to-nature forestry in Slovenia in particular. Environmental and nature protection is receiving more attention, which leads, at least in the medium term, to restrictions of economically-oriented forest management.
Table 3: Forestry legislation in CEE countries and year of enactment
Country
Forest legislation
Year
Armenia
Forest Code
Croatia
Law on Forests, National Forest Policy
Czech Republic
Forest Act
Estonia
Forest Act
Hungary
Law on Forests and the Protection of Forests
Latvia
Law on Forest Management and Utilization
1992 (revised 1994)
Lithuania
Forest Act
Poland
The Act Concerning Forest
Romania
Silvic Code (Forest Code)
Slovakia
Act on Forests
(to be revised)
Slovenia
Forest Act
Policy debates and the re-opening of questions about forest legislation and policy are not unique to the CEE. Western European countries are also in the process of adapting their forest policies in the light of international agreements following UNCED, and there is a move towards harmonization of national policies in Europe. One important issue in forest policies of most CEE countries is afforestation. Afforestation is regarded as a viable solution to utilize low-productivity of agricultural land and wasteland more effectively. Some countries are considering or have started to implement large-scale forestation programmes to combat rising rural unemployment. While CEE countries must move ahead with the sound formulation and implementation of their own forest policies and legislation, this will eventually have to, at least partially, reflect agreements and negotiations at the regional and international levels.
<section>6</section>
Forest Ownership Patterns
Total forest area privately owned
Size of private holdings
In the countries of CEE formerly under centrally planned economies, forest resources and forest industries were owned or controlled and managed by the State for more than four decades. With the political change, the countries also began examining the privatization possibilities in the forest sector. The question of restitution of forest resources to former owners and the compensation of demands (related to losses through expropriation in the late 1940s) with forest property was and remains a hot political issue. Most forest administrations, due to lack of political lobby, had to give in to political pressure and rapidly, substantial forest resources became privately owned, sometimes too fast to avoid predictable problems, such as the fragmentation of the forest resource in small private holdings.
Most CEE countries have set a policy imposing an upper limit to the privatization of forest resources. Substantial forest resources, it is felt, have to remain state property to secure the provision of social and environmental services of forest resources on a sustainable basis. They are also to be a shining example for private forest owners. Nevertheless, some countries in CEE do not have the economic resources to adequately finance state forestry. Therefore, state forest administrations are being reformed, introducing corporate structures and mechanisms to raise efficiency. In many countries, state forest enterprises are selling or privatizing their equipment for harvesting, transport, forest road construction and maintenance operations to former employees, who then work as contractors for the enterprise. A problem which frequently occurs is that these contractors usually are not able to carry out necessary modernization of their equipment due to the lack of capital. There
is widespread neglect of safety rules, ergonomic/health related issues and adequate training of the work force. An overly profit-oriented structure could also lead to neglect of the social and environmental aspects of forestry and compromise sustainability.
The forest ownership pattern of the countries under review was limited, with the exception of Poland and Slovenia, to two forms of ownership - state-owned forest and forests owned by collective farms. After World War II, large-and medium-sized forest property (mainly > 25 ha) had been nationalized in Poland. Small private property (17% of all forests in Poland), however, continued to exist formally, even though the State took control of its management. In Slovenia, 20% of private forests (large estates) were nationalized after World War II, however, two-thirds of Slovenian forests were still privately owned during the socialist period. The private forest owners had to sell their timber to the State and had to eventually form cooperatives, which were incorporated into forest management enterprises in charge of managing all Slovenian forests. In the late 1980s, the system collapsed and farmers started to sell timber on their own. In the other countries, expropriated forests
were transformed into state-owned forests, or were attached to collective farms together with nationalized, agricultural land.
With the radical political changes, privatization and restitution became the foremost important agenda items in the transition process. Agencies, institutions and even ministries were created to administer and manage the process. Policies, laws and implementation guidelines were formulated. Forestry professionals were cognisant of the risks of forest privatization without a protective framework (such as a forestry extension system) to ensure the sustainable management of private forest property. Some countries surveyed, started with the privatization to various degrees, seemingly without such a framework.
Total forest area privately owned
Slovenia is presently the country with the highest share of private forests (68%). The share of private forests in Poland and Slovenia is not the result of privatization, since these private forests already existed in the socialist period. In Romania, in 1946, 30% of the forest resources were privately owned and 46% of all forests belonged to the communities. At present a uniform area of 1 ha of forest is being returned to the former private forest owners, which accounts for around 6% of the total forest area in the country. In Armenia, agricultural land is being privatized, but no forest land. Some of the privatized agricultural land will be converted to forest land use in the future through forestation. Private farmers may benefit from extension for agroforestry and soil/water conservation. In Latvia, the restitution process is implemented in two stages - the land use right is transferred and then the full acknowledgment of land property rights follows. In 1991, the
declared Lithua