<title>Management of agricultural drainage water quality</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Irrigation and drainage play a critical role in meeting the food requirements of the world's population on a sustainable basis. More than one third of the total global food harvest comes from an estimated 260 million ha of irrigated lands which is about one sixth of the total cultivated land. The World Food Summit convened by FAO in Rome in 1996, the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, and the International Conference on Water and Environment, Dublin 1992, have all emphasized the importance of protecting the world's land and water resources in order to produce the necessary food and preserve the environment.
In humid regions, agricultural drainage is required to remove excess soil water in the plant root zone. In irrigated agriculture, drainage is of critical importance in controlling salinity and waterlogging. In seeking these benefits, drainage systems have sometimes led to adverse environmental impacts. Specifically, the disposal of low quality drainage effluent to water bodies has damaged some aquatic ecosystems, and inhibited the beneficial uses of the receiving water. Public pressure is growing for drainage systems to be planned in ways that ensure that important ecological habitats are preserved, and that agricultural practices do not impair water quality.
This technical document was prepared in response to public statements and societal concerns for environmental protection, and to provide for a safe, secure and sustainable food production system. The need for this publication was identified by the Working Group on Drainage of the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage (ICID) and was fully supported by FAO.
The publication is intended for use by planners, irrigation and drainage engineers and environmental specialists. It would be useful in project identification and to assess potential adverse water quality impacts of drainage disposal practices and identify alternative mitigation technologies. In addition, monitoring programmes to collect desired information are suggested. The individual papers, prepared by specialists, were edited into a volume by Professor Chandra Madramootoo, McGill University, Quebec, Canada; Mr. William R. Johnston, California, USA, and Professor Lyman S. Willardson, Utah State University, Utah, USA.
The publication is a welcome addition to FAO's Water Reports series. It is hoped that the document will serve to improve the design, installation and operation of drainage systems. This in turn will improve the productivity of poorly drained cropland, and ensure that the twin objectives of food production and preservation of water quality are harmoniously achieved.
FAO welcomes comments, if any, from the readers and the practitioners who use the publication in their work. Comments should be addressed to: Chief, Water Resources, Development and Management Service, Land and Water Development Division, Food and Agriculture Organization, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The following persons served as members of an ICID ad hoc committee, responsible for guiding the document: Chandra A. Madramootoo (Chair), Martin K. Fritsch, William R. Johnston, Walter J. Ochs, Lambert K. Smedema, Lyman S. Willardson and Daniel Zimmer. Several of the committee members also served as authors, and were responsible for soliciting contributions from other writers. The contributions of all authors and co-authors are deeply appreciated.
Members of the ICID Working Group on Drainage and of the ICID Working Group on Environmental Impacts of Irrigation, Drainage and Flood Control Projects reviewed and provided useful comments on the draft chapter outlines and the final document. We are grateful to Robert Bos, Herman Bouwer, Heiko Diestel, Flemming Konradsen, Wayne Skaggs and Peter Widmoser for serving as external peer reviewers of the document. Thanks are due to the staff of the Water Quality and Environment Group, Water Resources, Development and Management Service of FAO, for the final review of the text.
The financial support provided by FAO to prepare the document is greatly acknowledged. Special thanks are due to Dr. Hans W. Wolter, Chief, Water Resources Development and Management Service, FAO, for his encouragement and support during the preparation of this volume. Dr. M.A. Chitale, Secretary-General of the ICID, and staff of the ICID Central Office in New Delhi are thanked for their support.
The Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, provided logistical and office support during the preparation of the document; Georges Dodds and Maria Gabriel were especially helpful, and their contributions are gratefully acknowledged. The manuscript was edited by Mr. Julian Plummer to whom we are very grateful.
Chandra A. Madramootoo, William R. Johnston and Lyman S. Willardson, Editors
<section>3</section>
List of symbols, abbreviations and acronyms
Ag
Silver
AOP
Advanced oxidation process
As
Arsenic
ASAE
American Society of Agricultural Engineers
ASCE
American Society of Civil Engineers
B
Boron
BOD
Biological oxygen demand
Ca
Calcium
Cd
Cadmium
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations (US)
Cl^-
Chloride ion
cm
Centimetre
cm/year
Centimetres per year
CNA
Comisión Nacional del Agua (Mexico)
CO[3]^2-
Carbonate ion
Cr
Chromium
Cu
Copper
dam³
Cubic decametres
DBCP
Dibromochloropropane
DMSe
Dimethylselenide
DRI
Drainage Research Institute (Egypt)
dS/m
DeciSiemens per metre
EC
Electrical conductivity
EIA
Environmental impact assessment
EIS
Environmental impact study
ERS
Economic Research Service of the USDA
ET
Evapotranspiration
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Fe
Iron
GAC
Granular activated carbon
ha
Hectares
HCO[3]^-
Bicarbonate ion
Hg
Mercury
ICID
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage
ILRI
International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement (The Netherlands)
K
Potassium
kg
Kilogram
LR
Leaching requirement
Mg
Magnesium
m
Metre
m³
Cubic metre
m g/g
Micrograms per gram
m g/litre
Micrograms per litre
md
Millidarcies
mg/kg
Milligrams per kilogram (= parts per million)
mg/litre
Milligrams per litre
mm/day
Millimetres per day
mm/year
Millimetres per year
Mn
Manganese
Mo
Molybdenum
MPa
MegaPascals
N
Nitrogen
Na
Sodium
Ni
Nickel
NO[3]^-
Nitrate ion
N0[3]-N
Nitrate N
O&M
Operation and maintenance
Percent
PO[4]^3-
Phosphate ion
P
Phosphorus
Pb
Lead
PEEM
Panel of Experts for Environmental Management
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
R&D
Research and development
SAR
Sodium adsorption ratio
SCARP
Salinity control and reclamation project (Pakistan)
Se
Selenium
SO[4]^2-
Sulphate ion
S
Sulphur
t
Ton
TDS
Total dissolved solids
THM
Trihalomethane
TSS
Total soluble salts
U
Uranium
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
USEPA
United States Environmental Protection Agency
UV
Ultraviolet
V
Vanadium
WHO
World Health Organization of the United Nations
WRDP
Water resources development project
Zn
Zinc
<section>4</section>
Glossary of technical terms
Anadromous fish: Fish which at certain seasons ascend rivers from the sea or ocean to spawn, e.g., salmon.
Aquifer: A water bearing stratum of permeable rock, sand or gravel.
Cavernous geology: Underground stratum or zones with rock or soil conditions having caverns or cavities.
Constructed evaporation pond (basin): Area for impoundment of saline drainage water for evapoconcentration (desiccation). Typically constructed by excavating soils from the interior of basins to build up their embankments. Such ponds may contain more than one cell.
Constructed wetland: Conversion of an area into a wetland by building dikes, small dams and/or shaping land to provide an appropriate water regime for hydrophytic vegetation.
Controlled drainage: The operation of a water table management system with water table control structures adjusted to limit drainage system discharge, and to maintain a free water surface (water table) within the soil profile.
Conventional drainage: Subsurface drainage without water table control structures.
Designated salt sinks: A depository for saline waters and salt deposits such as oceans, saline lakes, wetlands or evaporation ponds.
Flow-through wetlands: Constructed wetlands or natural depressional areas prepared to facilitate the controlled movement of surface waters through specially selected vegetation to enhance removal of pollutants and improve water quality.
Free outlet drainage: See conventional drainage.
Geohydraulic characteristics: Physical properties of the soil and subsoil that have an impact on the internal movement of water, nutrients and pollutants.
Helminths: Parasitic worms of the phylum platyhelminthes including digenetic flukes (class Trematoda, e.g., Schistosoma spp.) and tapeworms (class Cestoidea, e.g., Taenia solium, pork tapeworm).
Hydrophytic vegetation: Plants which must be in water, either completely submerged or emersed, for part of their life cycle.
Hypersaline water: Water with excessive or supersaturated salt content.
Imhoff tank: Two-stage wastewater treatment tank combining sedimentation of settleable solids in an upper compartment and anaerobic digestion of the settled solids in a lower compartment.
Improved drainage: Any technique aimed at improving the natural drainage capacity of land; it can be either surface drainage or subsurface drainage, or a combination of both.
Interactive management programme: Real time monitoring and evaluations to operate an agricultural water supply system efficiently and effectively.
Pond mineralogy: Classification of evaporite minerals precipitated out of impounded water. These include calcite, gypsum, halite and thenardite.
Preferential flow: Movement of water and solutes through large cracks or worm holes in the soil profile.
Schistosomiasis: Also known as bilharziasis, this a disease caused by blood flukes (see helminths). The flukes live in the venules of the large intestine (Schistosoma mansoni), small intestine (S. japonicum) and urinary bladder (S. haematobium), and have limited pathogenic effects. Symptoms appear upon the release of eggs which cause ulceration and abscesses of the intestinal or urinary walls, leading to bloody diarrhoea or urine and abdominal pain. S. mansoni is the most common causative organism and S. haematobium the rarest and least severe. S. japonicum causes the most severe symptoms and is the most likely to be fatal.
Sub-irrigation: Operation of a water table management system by adding water to a subsurface drainage system to maintain a free water surface in the soil profile at a desired elevation (see controlled drainage).
Subsurface drainage: Any drainage system (either drainage wells, open ditches or buried drain pipes) that controls the water table.
Surface drainage: Planned removal of excess water from the land surface by means of natural or constructed channels, including the shaping and grading of land surfaces where necessary.
Vertical drainage: A system of deep wells designed to control the water table.
Waterfowl habitat: Vegetation and water regimes which facilitate the breeding, nesting, feeding and cover required for the production and proliferation of ducks, geese and other waterfowl.
Water table management system: See controlled drainage and sub-irrigation.
Wetlands: Lands that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for plant and animal life in saturated soil conditions.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Chandra A. Madramootoo
McGill University, Quebec, Canada
Need for artificial drainage
Agricultural, environmental and socio-economic benefits of drainage
Types of drainage systems
Environmental impact assessment
Water quality issues
Drainage water management and disposal options
Planning and designing drainage systems to protect and enhance water quality
There are several concerns about the sustainability of irrigation and drainage projects, and there are water quality problems related to the disposal of drainage water. There are also problems with land degradation due to irrigation induced salinity and waterlogging. There have been instances where saline or high nutrient drainage water has damaged aquatic ecosystems. Drainage continues to be a vital and necessary component of agricultural production systems. In order to enhance the net benefits of drainage systems, more attention will need to be given to the water quality impacts of drainage water disposal. This document identifies potential problems and management options in the development, production, treatment and disposal of agricultural drainage water.
Need for artificial drainage
Excess water in the crop root zone soil is injurious to plant growth. Crop yields are drastically reduced on poorly drained soils, and, in cases of prolonged waterlogging, plants eventually die due to a lack of oxygen in the root zone. Sources of excess soil water that result in high water tables include: high precipitation in humid regions; surplus irrigation water and canal seepage in the irrigated lands; and artesian pressure. Waterlogging in irrigated regions may result in excess soil salinity, i.e., the accumulation of salts in the plant root zone. Artificial drainage is essential on poorly drained agricultural fields to provide optimum air and salt environments in the root zone. Drainage is regarded as an important water management practice, and as a component of efficient crop production systems. World food supply and the productivity of existing agricultural lands can only be maintained and enhanced if drainage improvements are undertaken on cropland currently
affected by excess water and high water tables.
Drainage (both surface and subsurface) is not simply the conversion of wetlands, but the improvement of naturally inadequately drained cropland. It is complementary to irrigation and is viewed as an essential component of irrigated agriculture. The objective is to increase production efficiency, crop yields and profitability on naturally poorly drained agricultural lands.
Agricultural, environmental and socio-economic benefits of drainage
The primary benefits of drainage go beyond the control of excess soil water and accumulation of excess salts in the crop root zone (Fausey et al., 1987). The coincident environmental and socio- economic benefits associated with disease vector control and public health must be fully recognized. One of the major environmental benefits of drainage is its positive impact on improving the health of humans, plants and farm animals. Drainage of wet, swampy areas has led to a reduction in mosquito breeding sites in all parts of the world. The effect has been a drop in the incidence and prevalence of important water related and mosquito transmitted diseases, e.g., malaria, yellow fever and filariasis. Furthermore, drainage of stagnant water can eliminate foot-rot in large animals and, to a certain extent, the breeding environment of aquatic and semi-aquatic snails, which are the intermediate host of schistosomiasis. Drainage also reduces or eliminates mildew infections and various
root rots of plants. The overall impact of improved drainage has been an improvement in hygienic conditions, in the health sector and in the productivity of human beings. By growing high value food crops in well-drained soils, the health, nutrition and economic status of rural populations can be improved. There are also increased opportunities for employment, as new industries may develop in prosperous areas.
Where drainage is used to reclaim salinized and waterlogged lands, it is an environmentally beneficial practice, because the land is returned to its full productive potential. The adaptation of subsurface drainage systems to serve as sub-irrigation or controlled drainage systems leads to other benefits, i.e., the reduction of nitrate pollution.
The field-scale benefits of drainage can be summarized as follows:
i. Drainage promotes beneficial soil bacteria activity and improves soil tilth.
ii. There is less surface runoff and soil erosion on drained land.
iii. Improved field machine trafficability reduces soil structural damage. Soil compaction is reduced and less energy is required for field machine operations. Drainage also allows for more timely field operations. Consequently, the growing season can be lengthened and crops can achieve full maturity.
iv. Crop yields are increased because of improved water management and uptake of plant nutrients.
v. Higher value crops can be planted, and there is flexibility to introduce new and improved cropping systems.
vi. In general, land value and productivity are increased.
vii. Farm income is increased and income variability reduced.
viii. Drainage maintains favourable salt and air environments in the crop root zone.
Types of drainage systems
Surface drainage
Subsurface drainage
Secondary drainage treatments
Agricultural land drainage usually consists of surface or subsurface systems, or a combination of both. At the field scale, subsurface drain pipes and field ditches normally exit to an open main or collector drain. At the regional level, the latter then empties into a river or its tributaries. In some instances, depending on the character of the hydrological basin, main drains may dispose of drainage water to an evaporation pond, to a wetland, or to a saline agriculture/ agriculture-forestry system. A schematic of drainage system components and several options for drainage water disposal within a watershed are shown in Figure 1. Not all of these management options will necessarily be used in a single watershed.
FIGURE 1 Drainage water disposal options within a watershed
Surface drainage
Surface drainage is often achieved by land forming and smoothing to remove isolated depressions, or by constructing parallel ditches. Ditches and furrow bottoms are gently graded and discharge into main drains at the field boundary. Although the ditches or furrows are intended primarily to convey excess surface runoff, there is some seepage through the soil to the ditches, depending on the water table position. This could be regarded as a form of shallow subsurface drainage. Surface drainage is especially important in humid regions on flat lands with limited hydraulic gradients to nearby rivers or other disposal points. There is also a need for good surface drainage in semi-arid regions which are affected by monsoons.
Subsurface drainage
Surface drainage alone is seldom sufficient to remove excess water from the crop root zone. Deep ditches or subsurface pipe drainage systems enable a more rapid water table drawdown. The downstream ends of the laterals are normally connected to a collector drain. The required diameter of the pipe collectors increases with the area drained. Drain spacing is usually dependent on soil hydraulic conductivity and a design drainage rate coefficient. Depending on topography, land formation and proximity of a water receiving body, the collector may outlet by gravity to an open main drain or into a sump. In the latter case, the discharge is then pumped to another drain, or ultimately to a lake or stream.
In some flatter parts of eastern Canada, the eastern and mid-western United States, and parts of Europe, subsurface pipe drains are also used for sub-irrigation. In this case, in dry periods, surface water is introduced into the drain pipe system from an external source, and the water table is raised. Moisture then moves upward by capillary action to the root zone. Sub-irrigation is regarded as a highly energy and water efficient method of irrigation. In another process, known as controlled drainage, elevated water tables can be maintained with a control structure on the collector pipe.
Horizontal subsurface drainage systems are used in irrigated arid and semi-arid regions to reclaim saline and waterlogged lands, and to maintain favourable long-term salt and water balances in the crop root zone. Salinity and waterlogging are caused by a build up of the water table due to deep percolation of normal excess water and canal seepage. Buried pipe drains are generally installed deeper in arid regions than in humid regions in order to control salinity. Water in excess of plant evapotranspiration (ET) needs is always unavoidably applied during irrigation. This additional quantity of water applied is known as the leaching fraction. Naturally occurring as well as applied salts are then leached from the root zone by this water, and removed from the field via the pipe drains. Deeper drain installation ensures that salts do not rise too rapidly to the soil surface due to capillary action. Drainage also prevents waterlogging of the root zone. The amount of irrigation
water to be removed is generally less in arid than in humid regions. Vertical drainage by means of tube-wells is also used to control waterlogging and salinity in some parts of the world, e.g., India, Pakistan and central Asian republics. The primary purposes of tube-wells are the same as those of horizontal drains, and at the same time to extract groundwater for irrigation. As a result of pumping, the water table is lowered, and salinization due to capillarity is minimized. This situation is ideal where the groundwater is not very brackish or saline, and is therefore suitable for irrigation. In areas where the groundwater is highly saline, the pumped water may be too saline for irrigation, unless mixed with fresher or less saline water. Where the groundwater is too saline for crop production, it must be disposed of. Drainage does not have a direct impact on groundwater quality. It only serves to collect and transport excess water.
Secondary drainage treatments
Methods of improving the internal drainage of low permeability soils include: subsoiling, deep tillage, mole drainage, and biological practices, viz., cropping with deep rooted legumes (e.g., alfalfa) and crop rotations. In some parts of the world, deep rooted trees are used to lower the water table. There are usually no water quality hazards associated with these supplemental drainage practices.
Environmental impact assessment
Many institutions require an environmental impact assessment (EIA) prior to construction activities associated with new projects or the rehabilitation of existing projects. The objectives are to identify potential adverse environmental effects, the magnitude of these effects, and to develop mitigative measures. Positive benefits are also identified. In cases where the adverse impacts far outweigh the expected benefits, the project may be completely redesigned or suspended. This is also the case where mitigative measures would be either too costly or technically not feasible. The EIA should be conducted in the earliest stages of decision making, when crucial decisions are still being deliberated.
According to Ochs and Bishay (1992), environmental effects can be classified as:
i. direct and indirect, or first order and higher order. These are chain effects which are felt throughout, and possibly downstream of a catchment.
ii. secondary. The primary activity of a drainage project may be extended to include secondary activities.
iii. synergistic. These effects include an increased threat to the survival of certain species of wildlife that are under pressure in several ways as a result of the same project.
The ICID has developed an 'Environmental Checklist to Identify Environmental Impacts of Irrigation, Drainage and Flood Control Projects' (ICID, 1993). The World Bank has prepared an Environmental Assessment Sourcebook (World Bank, 1991). FAO has produced a paper on the steps in the EIA process and the major environmental impacts of irrigation and drainage projects (FAO, 1995). The purpose of these documents is to enable detailed environmental impact assessments of irrigation and drainage projects to be conducted. The ICID checklist provides a comprehensive list of environmental parameters which must be evaluated in an EIA. Table 1 shows the ICID checklist of possible environmental impacts of irrigation, drainage and flood control projects.
Ochs and Bishay (1992) listed the main steps in the EIA process as:
i. Scoping. This is a public process, involving the participation of all parties. It results in specific guidelines for inclusion in the environmental impact study (EIS). (EIS refers to the document, whereas EIA refers to the entire process).
ii. Drawing up the EIS. Potential adverse and beneficial impacts are identified. Proposed actions with alternatives are indicated and mitigative measures are presented.
iii. Submitting the EIS for public review.
iv. Receiving advice from the reviewing agency.
v. Accepting the EIS.
vi. Choosing project components. The decision-maker chooses the project option to be implemented and the mitigative measures.
vii. Implementing the project.
viii. Monitoring. During and after project implementation, the actual environmental impacts are monitored and compared with the EIS predictions. This is useful for improving future predictions and project designs.
Matrices and checklists are some of the tools most commonly used in an EIA to assess the magnitude or relative weight of both positive and adverse environmental effects. It is hoped that the criteria on drainage water quality provided in the publication will further assist in the evaluation of EIA of irrigation and drainage projects.
Water quality issues
The installation of drainage systems may result in changes to the associated ecosystem. These changes may be either beneficial or adverse. The positive environmental benefits were listed earlier in this chapter. However, there are potential adverse water quality impacts associated with drainage. The concentrations of salts, nutrients and other crop-related chemicals in drainage discharge vary with time and discharge rate. The use of fertilizers and pesticides in intensive agricultural production has sometimes led to damage to downstream aquatic ecosystems (FAO, 1996). Drainage planners therefore need to analyse effluent for nutrients and pesticides. The nutrients of most concern are N and P. In addition, from time to time, natural trace elements from the soil itself may be harmful to the ecosystem. Effluent laden with N and P stimulates eutrophication in receiving water bodies. In addition to agricultural chemicals and trace elements, drainage water from irrigated areas
frequently contains salts. The impact of salts on downstream users needs to be evaluated. Some soils are abundant in trace elements, and these could leach to the drainage system. Small amounts of trace elements such as As, Cd, Hg, Pb, B, Cr and Se are harmful to aquatic species because of biological magnification. The environmental consequences of disposing of drainage water from California's irrigated San Joaquin Valley into the 470 ha Kesterson Reservoir (a closed basin) are well known. The reservoir was a waterfowl habitat, and concentrating Se in the drainage water caused fish species to disappear, and resulted in deformities in waterbird embryos. The failure to construct an adequate outfall drain to the sea, the use of a waterfowl habitat for drainage water disposal, and the lack of proper water quality monitoring were the major reasons for these negative environmental impacts. Care must be taken to ensure that the disposal of drainage water does not interfere with the
ecosystem's aquatic and terrestrial species. Concern has been expressed about damage by agricultural drainage water to estuarine fisheries in some countries.
TABLE 1 ICID checklist of possible environmental impacts of irrigation, drainage and flood control projects
Site:
Date:
Hydrology
1-1 Low flow regime
1-2 Flood regime
1-3 Operation of dams
1-4 Fall of water table
1-5 Rise of water table
Pollution
2-1 Solute dispersion
2-2 Toxic substances
2-3 Organic pollution
2-4 Anaerobic effects
2-5 Gas emissions
Soils
3-1 Soil salinity
3-2 Soil properties
3-3 Saline groundwater
3-4 Saline drainage
3-5 Saline intrusion
Sediments
4-1 Local erosion
4-2 Hinterland effect
4-3 River morphology
4-4 Channel structures
4-5 Sedimentation
4-6 Estuary erosion
Ecology
5-1 Project lands
5-2 Water bodies
5-3 Surrounding area
5-4 Valleys and shores
5-5 Wetlands and plains
5-6 Rare species
5-7 Animal migration
5-8 Natural industry
Socio-economic
6-1 Population change
6-2 Income and amenity
6-3 Human migration
6-4 Resettlement
6-5 Women's role
6-6 Minority groups
6-7 Sites of value
6-8 Regional effects
6-9 User involvement
6-10 Recreation
Health
7-1 Water and sanitation
7-2 Habitation
7-3 Health services
7-4 Nutrition
7-5 Relocation effect
7-6 Disease ecology
7-7 Disease hosts
7-8 Disease control
7-9 Other hazards
Imbalances
8-1 Pests and weeds
8-2 Animal diseases
8-3 Aquatic weeds
8-4 Structural damage
8-5 Animal imbalances
Drainage water management and disposal options
On-farm source control
Re-use of drainage water
Disposal and management of drainage water in closed basins
Water table management
Drainage water can be disposed directly to open surface water bodies, e.g., rivers, lakes, outfall drains, seas or oceans. Wetlands, evaporation ponds and solar evaporators are used as discharge points where there is no direct outlet to one of the open surface water bodies mentioned above. This is generally the situation in hydrologically closed drainage basins. Some re-use of drainage water for irrigation is another management option, where sequential irrigation of increasingly salt-tolerant plants, ending with Salicornia, occurs. Drainage water can also be disposed of by injection to the deep groundwater.
If drainage water is disposed of to large, open surface water systems with significant dilution or assimilative capacity, then water quality problems are minimized. However, water quality problems may develop with repeated re-use, disposal in closed basins and injection to deep wells. In this last case, the concern is that if the drainage water contains sufficient amounts of salts, nitrates, bacteria and trace elements, the groundwater could become contaminated. The problem may be especially severe if the aquifer is also used for drinking water supplies downslope.
On-farm source control
The most efficient method of minimizing environmental problems is to implement source control practices at the farm level. In irrigated areas, this can be achieved by improved irrigation water management. Higher irrigation efficiencies and lined irrigation conveyance structures will reduce the amount of drainage water which needs to be removed. Furthermore, timely and efficient applications of fertilizers and pesticides, used only when necessary, will reduce chemical leaching. Research by Madramootoo et al. (1995) has shown that intercropping corn with a legume or ryegrass reduces the amount of nitrates found in drainage water.
Re-use of drainage water
In many regions where irrigation water is scarce, drainage water is used to meet crop water requirements. Re-use is only sustainable if the drainage water is of sufficiently good quality. Some of the water quality concerns about drainage water re-use with plants of increasing salt tolerance are that: the effluent may be high in salt content (in irrigated lands); the drainage water can be contaminated with trace elements, toxic organic substances, industrial waste and municipal waste in open main drains. Contaminated drainage water could lead to various problems including: impairment of soil physical and chemical properties, water related health problems, and possible contamination of food products.
Disposal and management of drainage water in closed basins
Ultimate disposal of drainage water to a river or sea is not always possible. Closed drainage basins present a unique environmental or water quality challenge. In such situations, evaporation ponds may be an appropriate means for disposing of drainage water. However, these ponds may eventually lead to other environmental problems. For example, toxic substances could accumulate in the ponds. Furthermore, in arid climates, as pure water evaporates from the pond, the concentration of the remaining water approaches that of brine. The health of waterfowl, fish and other aquatic biota which use the pond could be negatively affected. Other environmental problems associated with evaporation ponds include: use of the pond to collect wastewater from homes; human health problems caused by consuming water from the ponds; and the need to ultimately dis