<title>Renewable biological systems for alternative sustainable energy production (FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin - 128)</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
Sincere thanks are extended to Mrs. Hayami Amano for her efficient help in preparing this bulletin.
<section>2</section>
Contributors
Yutaka Ado
General Manager
R&D Management Department
Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co., Ltd.
1-6-1 Ohtemachi, Chiyoda, Tokyo 100 Japan
Yasuo Asada, Ph.D.
Chief, Molecular Bioenergetics Laboratory
National Institute of Bioscience and Human-Technology
Agency of Industrial Science and Technology
Ministry of International Trade and Industry
1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305 Japan
John R. Benemann, Ph.D.
Visiting Researcher
Department of Civil Engineering
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 U.S.A.
Michimasa Kishimoto, Ph.D.
Associate Professor
Faculty of Engineering
Osaka University
2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565 Japan
Jun Miyake, Ph.D.
Senior Researcher, Bionic Design Group
National Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research
Agency of Industrial Science and Technology
Ministry of International Trade and Industry
1-1-4 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305 Japan
Kazuhisa Miyamoto, Ph.D.
Professor
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Osaka University
1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565 Japan
Naomichi Nishio, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Fermentation Technology, Faculty of Engineering
Hiroshima University
Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima 739 Japan
<section>3</section>
Foreword
Few can argue that energy is the basis of modem, urban life on this planet. The evolution of industrial civilization paralleled the increasing use of energy resources. After millennia of using wood, more efficient and convenient charcoal became the energy form of choice during the Middle Ages. Energy utilization took a giant leap forward when coal and coke began to fuel the furnaces of the Industrial Revolution. The powerful steam engines depended upon copious supplies of readily available fuel and coal ultimately became the primary source of industrial energy for the remainder of the 19th Century.
Although petroleum had been known for centuries and had been used for a wide range of purposes including medicine, commercial production did not begin until 1859. The original application for petroleum-based products was primarily lighting, but the convenience of an easily pumpable fuel quickly stimulated the development of the internal combustion engine. By 1892, small gasoline engines, powerful enough to run road vehicles had been invented. The 'age of the automobile' had begun and oil soon replaced coal as the dominant source of energy. Although the commercial potential of fossil fuels was known at that time, the extent to which we would become so dependent upon them was not.
This century has seen the world become a willing captive to an unsustainable future. The economically developed world is addicted to high energy consumption and global economic development will be reflected by the ever-expanding use of fossil fuels. The predicted growth in world population, supposedly peaking somewhere between 8 to 10 billion people will become a critical issue as the less developed countries of the world develop their economies and strive to enjoy their full and fair measure of the biosphere's renewable and non-renewable resources.
Since oil and coal are extracted from earth sources, supplies are finite and there are considerable concerns over the extent of remaining reserves. Far more significant for the quality of our life on this planet are the environmental problems associated with oil and coal utilization. Severe atmospheric pollution, acid rain and oil spills have defiled the world we live in to an unspeakable extent. Of even greater concern is the ceaseless buildup of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere and the potential warming trend associated with the Greenhouse effect. However, despite the dual oil price shocks of 1973 and 1980, total CO[2] emissions into the atmosphere increased by more than 40% in the two decades between 1970 and 1990. It is a pattern we seem incapable of controlling.
The struggle we face in the future will not be characterized by a single battle or a focused apocalyptic event. If we continue with our current lifestyle, we will experience a slow protracted diminution of quality of life. In how many capitals cities of the world today do we see traffic police wearing masks to protect them from pollution? How many millions of new cases of respiratory disease are due to an atmosphere increasingly degraded by automobile exhausts and industrial emissions?
It is clear that the continued utilization of fossil fuels as a dominant energy source is not consistent with the long-term sustainability of our environment. Other practical forms of commercial industrial energy must be developed and in particular, sources that are renewable and pose the minimum risk to our environment. It was for the purpose of encouraging this concept and widely disseminating some of the more recent development sin this field that FAO requested Professor Miyamoto of Osaka University to compile the following Bulletin on Renewable Biological Systems for Alternative Sustainable Energy Production. Together with his colleagues. Professor Miyamoto has put together a most interesting text which I am certain readers will enjoy. It covers the basic concepts and limitations of renewable biological energy systems and goes on to provide an inspiring vision of their future potential. It is hoped that this Bulletin will stimulate scientists and researchers around the
world to focus additional effort in this very important field. As with all Bulletins of this type, we seek the comments of readers in order to improve future editions of this work.
Morton Satin
Chief,
Agro-Industries and Post-harvest Management Service
Agricultural Support Systems Division
FAO
Comments and inquiries should be addressed to:
The Chief
Agro-Industries and Post-harvest Management Service
Agricultural Support Systems Division
FAO of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
<section>4</section>
Summary
The energy crisis experienced in the 1970s was followed by increased concern for the environment with major emphasis on protection of the global ecosystem. The luxurious use of fossil fuels yields significant developmental benefits for industrialized societies, but takes its toll on the environment in the form of large amounts of agricultural, domestic and industrial waste. It is therefore important to pursue material and energy recycling, while minimizing waste, at a global level.
A biomass energy system is a typical example of a recycling system, in which CO[2] is fixed via photosynthesis, and energies accumulated in biological materials are used to release CO[2]. CO[2] fixation by microalgal mass culture is an attractive proposal since through its metabolic machinery, algal biomass is capable of producing H[2]. Algal biomass is also applicable as a substrate for lipid conversion to oil and for cyanobacterial H[2] production. Both bacterial and cyanobacterial H[2] production are currently being investigated with a view to improving productivity through the advanced technology of genetic manipulation. In addition, limited global fossil fuel reserves, make the production of oil from lipids and fatty acids contained in algal biomass an attractive proposition. To this end, thermochemical liquefaction of microalgal biomass is being studied as a means of producing petroleum fuel analogs.
Alcoholic fermentation of cellulosic biomass is of importance because cellulose biomass occurs abundantly in the form of agricultural and forestry wastes. Anaerobic digestion of organic wastes involves a complex series of microbial reactions resulting in the production of methane gas. This process is widely applied in small-scale energy production in rural areas. Modem technologies capable of producing ethanol and methane in larger-scale operations have also been developed.
The potentials and limitations of plant and bacterial photosynthesis and methodologies for improving the quality of biomass energy through microbial conversion processes are discussed in this bulletin. Basic studies on future energy production via microalgal CO[2] fixation, and the future of renewable energy biological systems are also reviewed and discussed.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1 - Biological energy production
1.1 Energy and environmental issues
1.2 Photosynthesis and biomass
1.3 General problems
References
1.1 Energy and environmental issues
The widespread use of fossil fuels, has brought numerous benefits to industrialized societies. Large amounts of agricultural, domestic and industrial wastes generated in these countries as a result of development, have potentially detrimental effects both on the environment and on human health. Itai-itai and Minamata diseases in Japan, are just two examples of the effects of air and water pollution on human health. The importance of protecting the environment and restoring environmental damage cannot be overemphasized.
In recent years, environmental pollution has become a global problem. Internationalization of industrial and social activities has given rise to problems such as global warming, desertification, and acid deposition. These global problems are rooted in the materially-rich lifestyles which are supported by abundant and wasteful use of fossil fuels in industrialized countries. Rapidly increasing industrial activities in China, India, and in other developing countries implicates that these countries will inevitably contribute to deterioration of the global environment and to destruction of the global ecosystem. Lifestyle changes, and changes in our key industrial systems are required in order to minimize the impact of environmental pollution. The recycling of materials, and thus minimizing the generation of waste, is a basic concept which must be implemented in order to meet the new demands of sustainable development in both industrialized and developing countries.
Mechanisms for implementing this concept and for establishing environmentally compatible technologies which support the future "recycling" world are required. Systems, which utilize energies produced from biomass are typical examples of energy recycling systems. Biotechnology is one of the future-oriented technologies, and one that will play a major role in the exploitation of biomass energy. All biomass (plant, animal and microbial), originates through CO[2] fixation by photosynthesis. Biomass utilization is consequently included in the global carbon cycle of the biosphere. Biomass energy in developing countries, originates from fuelwood, animal wastes, and agricultural residues, and is primarily utilized for activities which are essential to survival, such as cooking and obtaining water. Improvements in the living standards in these countries will result in the non-essential use of energy. Development of technologies that efficiently produce biomass, and convert it to more
convenient forms of energy is therefore very important.
1.2 Photosynthesis and biomass
1.2.1 Photosynthetic efficiency
1.2.2 Biomass wastes and their conversion
1.2.3 Fuel production via microalgal CO2 fixation
1.2.1 Photosynthetic efficiency
Photosynthesis can be simply represented by the equation:
CO[2] + H[2]O + light !' 6 (CH[2]O) + O[2]
Approximately 114 kilocalories of free energy are stored in plant biomass for every mole of CO[2] fixed during photosynthesis. Solar radiation striking the earth on an annual basis is equivalent to 178,000 terawatts, i.e. 15,000 times that of current global energy consumption. Although photosynthetic energy capture is estimated to be ten times that of global annual energy consumption, only a small part of this solar radiation is used for photosynthesis. Approximately two thirds of the net global photosynthetic productivity worldwide is of terrestrial origin, while the remainder is produced mainly by phytoplankton (microalgae) in the oceans which cover approximately 70% of the total surface area of the earth. Since biomass originates from plant and algal photosynthesis, both terrestrial plants and microalgae are appropriate targets for scientific studies relevant to biomass energy production.
Any analysis of biomass energy production must consider the potential efficiency of the processes involved. Although photosynthesis is fundamental to the conversion of solar radiation into stored biomass energy, its theoretically achievable efficiency is limited both by the limited wavelength range applicable to photosynthesis, and the quantum requirements of the photosynthetic process. Only light within the wavelength range of 400 to 700 nm (photosynthetically active radiation, PAR) can be utilized by plants, effectively allowing only 45 % of total solar energy to be utilized for photosynthesis. Furthermore, fixation of one CO[2] molecule during photosynthesis, necessitates a quantum requirement of ten (or more), which results in a maximum utilization of only 25% of the PAR absorbed by the photosynthetic system. On the basis of these limitations, the theoretical maximum efficiency of solar energy conversion is approximately 11%. In practice, however, the magnitude of
photosynthetic efficiency observed in the field, is further decreased by factors such as poor absorption of sunlight due to its reflection, respiration requirements of photosynthesis and the need for optimal solar radiation levels. The net result being an overall photosynthetic efficiency of between 3 and 6% of total solar radiation.
1.2.2 Biomass wastes and their conversion
Wastes and residues currently constitute a large source of biomass (1). These include solid and liquid municipal wastes, manure, lumber and pulp mill wastes, and forest and agricultural residues. With the exception of feedstocks of low water content, most of this biomass cannot be directly utilized, and must undergo some form of transformation, prior to being utilized as a fuel. Biological processes for the conversion of biomass to fuels include ethanol fermentation by yeast or bacteria, and methane production by microbial consortia under anaerobic conditions.
Wood wastes in the paper and pulp industries and bagasse from the sugar-cane industry are examples of biomass likely to accumulate at a single site. The cellulosic nature of these biomass materials, necessitates their hydrolysis to glucose, prior to ethanol fermentation. The net energy balance for the processes involved can, however, be problematic in that energy requirements for cellulose hydrolysis and distillation, must be lower than the energy in the output ethanol.
Unlike ethanol fermentation, anaerobic digestion for methane production, utilizes organic materials containing carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Many species of microbes work cooperatively in an anaerobic digester, in which these polymeric materials (i.e. carbohydrates, proteins and lipids) are first decomposed to organic acids, and then to hydrogen and carbon dioxide, from which methane is synthesized by methanogens. A variety of raw materials which include agricultural wastes, municipal solid wastes, market garbage, and waste water from food and fermentation industries, are applicable as substrates for this process. Waste products derived from animal husbandry are applicable to anaerobic digestion, with the added bonus of solving the environmental issues of unpleasant odors and eutrophication. Although small-scale digesters are popularly used at both the farm and village levels, large-scale operations are still in need of considerable technical improvement and cost
reduction, and thus require both microbial and engineering studies.
Methane and ethanol can also be produced from cultured microalgal biomass through anaerobic digestion and microbial fermentation processes, respectively. The economics of fuel production from microalgal biomass is however largely dependent on a microalgal CO[2] fixation step similar to that required for the production of H[2] and algal oils.
1.2.3 Fuel production via microalgal CO2 fixation
One of the most serious environmental problems today is that of global warming, caused primarily by the heavy use of fossil fuels. In Japan, large amounts of CO[2] are released into the atmosphere from electric power plants and industry. The CO[2] generated by these large point sources could potentially be recovered with relative ease through the use of an established technology such as chemical absorption. The enormity of the amounts of potentially recoverable CO[2] would however necessitate the development of technologies for sequestering or, more favorably, utilizing this CO[2].
Photosynthetic microalgae are potential candidates for utilizing excessive amounts of CO[2], since when cultivated these organisms are capable of fixing CO[2] to produce energy and chemical compounds upon exposure to sunlight. The derivation of energy from algal biomass is an attractive concept in that unlike fossil fuels, algal biomass is rather uniformly distributed over much of the earth's surface, and its utilization would make no net contribution to increasing atmospheric CO[2] levels. Although algal biomass is regarded as a low-grade energy source owing to its high moisture content, through biological processes, it may be converted to modem gaseous and liquid fuels such as hydrogen, methane, ethanol, and oils.
Hydrogen is regarded as a potential energy source of the future, since it is easily converted to electricity and bums cleanly. Hydrogen is currently produced by fossil fuel-based processes which emit large amounts of CO[2], and relatively smaller amounts of other air pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Biological H[2] production has thus recently received renewed attention owing to urban air pollution and global warming concerns (2). Biological hydrogen production methodologies incorporating artificial reconstitution systems with chloroplast, ferredoxin, and hydrogenase; a heterocystous cyanobacterial system with oxygen scavengers; and an algal system in a day-and-night cycle, have been studied in
Japan. From an engineering point of view, however, bacterial fermentation mechanisms for hydrogen production under either dark or light conditions is currently of importance in terms of environmental issues and the utilization of organic wastes such as waste effluent of the food and fermentation industries, pre-treated sewage sludge, and market garbage.
The use of microalgae as sources of liquid fuels is an attractive proposition from the point of view that microalgae are photosynthetic renewable resources, are of a high lipid content, have faster growth rates than plant cells, and are capable of growth in saline waters which are unsuitable for agriculture. While the lipid content of microalgae, on a dry cellular weight basis varies between 20 and 40 %, lipid contents as high as 85 % have been reported for certain microalgal strains. Botryococcus braunii, is a unique microalgal strain, having a long-chain hydrocarbon content of between 30 and 40% (dry weight basis), which is directly extractable to yield crude oil substitutes. Both physical and chemical processes are applicable in the production of liquid fuels from algal strains of high lipid content. These processes include direct lipid extraction in the production of diesel-oil substitutes, transesterification in the formation of ester fuels, and hydrogenation in the
production of hydrocarbons (3). Oily substances are also produced via liquefaction of microalgal biomass through thermochemical reactions under conditions of high pressure and temperature.
1.3 General problems
Among the biomass conversion processes discussed thus far, methane and ethanol production from various wastes is economically feasible within the restraints of scale and location. Although biological processes for the production of gaseous and liquid fuels have been well demonstrated with cultured microalgal biomass, these processes must still be integrated into a system capable of meeting basic requirements for overall efficiency of converting solar energy into biofuels. Furthermore, a model system must at least in principle, be capable of easy scale-up and not be limited by either engineering or economic factors. Under the current petroleum economy, prospects for the use of H[2] or oils produced by biological processes seem remote. However, future requirements for a "clean environment" necessitate fundamental research into microbial and algal physiology and genetics, together with basic engineering research on converters and total systems.
In its effort to address global warming and other environmental problems, the Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth (RITE), engaged in investigating projects, including the Project for Biological CO[2] Fixation and Utilization, and the Project for Biological Production of Hydrogen Through The Use of Environmentally Acceptable Technologies was established by the Japanese Government in 1990. These projects employ researchers from both national institutes and private companies who are engaged in the research and development of technologies for microbiological CO[2] fixation and the production of hydrogen. At the same time, research efforts at the university level include biochemical and genetic studies on CO[2]-fixing and H[2]-producing enzymes, and the application of these enzymes to the development of more efficient energy systems.
The following Chapters, address biological and engineering aspects of alternative sustainable energy production, with emphasis on recent progress in four specific areas: (i) fuel alcohol production from cellulosic biomass, (ii) improved methane fermentation from industrial and agricultural residues, (iii) biological H[2] production from water and various wastes, and (iv) oil production through thermochemical liquefaction of microalgal biomass. The final Chapter outlines prospects for the future of renewable energy systems, although this is by no means a simple task, since problems concerned with energy, the environment, population, and food, are all interrelated.
References
1. Hall, D.O. and House, J.I., Biomass and Bioenergy, 6,11-30 (1994).
2. Miyamoto, K., In "Recombinant Microbes for Industrial and Agricultural Applications" Eds. Murooka, Y. and Imanaka, T., 771-785 (1994) Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, Basel, Hong Kong.
3. Borowitzka, M.A., In "Micro-algal biotechnology" Eds. Borowitzka, M.A. and Borowitzka, L.J., 257-287 (1988) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 2 - Energy conversion by photosynthetic organisms
2.1 Photosynthetic capture of solar energy
2.2 Photosynthesis mechanisms
2.3 Hydrogen production through solar energy conversions
References
Adverse environmental effects of the use of fossil fuels have been thoroughly discussed in Chapter 1. Energy demands are nevertheless expected to continue increasing with global improvements in living standards. There is however a limit to the amount of energy consumption that can be tolerated by nature. Excessively large amounts of energy produced by nuclear fusion for example, have the potential of altering terrestrial climates. Renewable sources of energy which do not alter global energy levels are therefore desirable.
2.1 Photosynthetic capture of solar energy
2.1.1 Solar energy
2.1.2 Why is biotechnology now applied to energy technology?
2.1.1 Solar energy
Approximately 5.7 x 10^24 J of solar energy are irradiated to the earth's surface on an annual basis. Plants and photosynthetic organisms utilize this solar energy in fixing large amounts of CO[2] (2x10^11 t = 3x10^21 J/year), while amounts consumed by human beings are relatively small, (3 x 10^20 J/year) (1), representing only 10% of the energy converted during photosynthesis.
Although large amounts of solar energy are irradiated to the earth's surface, the effective energy concentration (energy/unit area) of solar energy at any one point on the earth's surface is small - only about 1 kW/m^2 at most, even at noon. Such low effective energy concentrations, limit the use of solar energy as a primary energy source, and elevate the costs associated with its accumulation and transmission.
Technologies for the utilization of low-density energy sources must be developed in order to facilitate the use of solar energy. Solar energy conversions through the use of photosynthetic microorganisms do not incorporate the use of complex systems or large quantities of factory manufactured products, and indeed have relatively minimal investment and resource requirements. Additionally, these technologies are largely dependent on the use of renewable resources, thereby generating minimal amounts of waste. Recent advances in biotechnology have made possible studies on the utilization of biological processes such as photosynthesis for energy production.
2.1.2 Why is biotechnology now applied to energy technology?
The use of natural energy involves the control of entropy. Prior to the industrial revolution, wood served as a major energy source. However, the industrial revolution gave rise to the widespread use of both coal and petroleum as energy sources. Since coal and petroleum were often produced at sites far from their consumption points, recuperation of their production costs involved mass production, thus precipitating the formation of an integrated industrial society. This integrated system soon reached its limits, making it necessary to consider discrete social systems that utilize delocalized abundant energy sources.
Integration is necessary in any system where energy, goods, and information are dispersed. Integration of systems involves the use of entropy-reducing processes. Application of mechanical methods to the integration of systems incorporates large amounts of energy expenditure. Existing problems cannot therefore be resolved without modification of existing social systems. Consequently, energy production technology must be reformed. Microorganisms have the ability to reduce entropy through energy utilization, and can potentially simplify the conversion and accumulation of solar energy and energy utilization over large areas.
Following the industrial revolution, energy-releasing techniques were developed. The development of techniques which control entropy are essential for human survival. To this end, there is a need for the development of industrial technology which makes use of biological principles in a sophisticated manner.
2.2 Photosynthesis mechanisms
2.2.1 Plant photosynthesis
2.2.2 Bacterial photosynthesis
Biological energy conversions can be categorized into two groups: i) photosynthesis (the process whereby solar energy is fixed to yield energy useful to organisms and industry), and ii) biomass conversion (the product of photosynthesis) into energy. Photosynthesis occurs in plants, algae and photosynthetic bacteria, while biomass conversion reactions often occur in non-photosynthetic microorganisms. This Chapter focuses on photosynthetic processes.
2.2.1 Plant photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is often regarded as a CO[2] anabolic reaction, whereby glucose is formed from CO[2] and water. CO[2] anabolism is an energy-consuming reaction in that it utilizes chemical energy produced by photosynthesis. In its narrowest sense, photosynthesis can be regarded as a process whereby energy is supplied for CO[2] anabolism. In a broader sense, photosynthesis, including CO[2] anabolism, can be divided into several steps: i) photoelectric charge isolation using photon energy (conversion to electrical energy), ii) fixation of electrical energy in the form of chemical energy (ATP synthesis), and iii) chemical reactions involving ATP (fixation of CO[2], and hydrogen production).
The supply of energy for CO[2] anabolism is common to all photosynthetic organisms which exhibit photosynthesis. Energy conversion, ATP synthesis and the production of both CO[2] and hydrogen on the other hand, are not unique to photosynthetic organisms, but occur in all types of microorganisms, and are in fact similar to the respiratory processes which occur in mitochondria of higher organisms.
Two types of photosynthesis are distinguishable on the basis of source of the electrons used as energy carriers. In plants such as green algae, and cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), water is the electron source, while in photosynthetic bacteria, organic or sulfur compounds provide electron sources.
Photosynthetic mechanisms which occur within plant photosynthetic membranes are schematically presented in Figure 2-1. Two Photosystem II water molecules are initially decomposed by four incident photons, to yield one oxygen molecule and four excited electrons. Excited electron energy is subsequently utilized in ATP synthesis. Unlike in the case of ordinary chemical reactions, ATP synthesis cannot be stoichiometrically analyzed (2). The ratio of excited photons to ATP produced is still a somewhat debatable issue. Although it has generally been thought that two photons give rise to the formation of two ATP molecules, some researchers claim that three photons are involved (3). Furthermore, other researchers have suggested a loose coupling between proton transport and ATP synthesis (4, 5):
4 photons + 2H[2]O + 2(or more)ADP = 2(or more)ATP + 4H^+ + 4e^-+O[2]
Subsequent to their energy release in ATP production, photosystem II electrons are transported to photosystem I, where they are again excited to a higher energy level, allowing them to be utilized for NADP reduction. NADP serves both as an electron carrier and an oxidizing and reducing agent in vivo. Two photons are utilized per molecule of NADP reduced:
4 photons + 4e^- + 2NADP + 4H^+ = 2NADPH.
Photosystem I may also be involved in ATP synthesis. In cases where it is involved, excited photosystem I electrons are recycled:
4 photons + 2(or more)ADP = 2(or more)ATP.
Fixation of one molecule of CO[2], involves the following reaction:
CO[2] + 3ATP + 2NADPH = CH[2]O + 3ADP + 2NADP.
If two ATP molecules are obtained through Photosystem II excitation (Eq. 2-1), the net reaction, following equations 2-1 through 2-4 is:
CO[2] + 10 photons + H[2]O = CH[2]O + 1/2O[2].
Figure 2.1 - Schematic representation of mechanisms involved in plant photosynthesis
Experimental data indicates that between 8 and 12 photons are required for fixation of one molecule of CO[2]. Since the energy equivalent of one photon (700 nm) is approximately 170 kJ/E, and the change in free energy during the fixation of CO[2] is approximately 450 U/mol, the energy efficiency of this process for monochromatic light of a wavelength of 700 nm is estimated to be approximately 21-33%. However, owing to the quantum nature of photosynthetic reactions, energy efficiency decreases if light of shorter wavelengths (i.e. higher quantum energy) is used. Additionally, energy losses, energy requirements for plant growth, and the distribution of solar energy wavelengths need to be considered.
Plant photosynthesis takes place only in the presence of visible light (400-700 nm). However, solar light contains both visible and infrared components. Since visible light accounts for about 45% of all solar energy, the maximum achievable energy efficiency for CO[2] fixation using solar radiation is approximately 13%.
2.2.2 Bacterial photosynthesis
Bacterial photosynthesis is thought to be a relatively old form of photosynthesis. It incorporates the use of either organic or sulfur compounds as electron donors in photosystem I (Figure 2-2). Unlike in the case of plant photosynthesis, cyclic photophosphorylation takes place in bacterial photosynthesis, i.e. electrons are repeatedly excited in a cyclic manner, with ATP being generated in each cycle. Photosynthetic bacteria are also capable of reducing electron carriers such as NAD, via a linear reaction similar to the electron transmission which occurs during plant photosynthesis (Figure 2-2).
Figure 2.2 - Schematic representation of mechanisms involved in bacterial photosynthesis
CO[2]-fixing reactions do not produce energy during bacterial photosynthesis (i.e equimolar amounts of organic compounds are produced through decomposition of organic compounds), except when sulfur compounds serve as electron carriers. The energy conversion efficiency for this type of photosynthesis is more fully described in Chapter 5.
2 photons + 1 (or more)ADP = 1 (or more)ATP.
Electrons are donated as follows:
CH[2]O + H[2]O = 4e^- + 4H^+ + CO[2].
The structure of the photosynthetic reaction center (RC), involved in the early steps of photosynthesis, has been elucidated for