<title>Guidelines for Quality Management in Soil and Plant Laboratories. (FAO Soils Bulletin - 74)</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Quality assurance in analytical laboratories, irrespective of the discipline, is considered a matter of course. However, many laboratories find it very difficult to effectively and systematically implement the necessary procedures of quality assurance, and implementation leaves much to be desired in many places. Particularly, laboratories with marginal budgets, or smaller research laboratories working without much competition, often do not have the necessary resources and incentives to engage in a comprehensive effort as done by laboratories seeking accreditation. Proper training and refresher courses may be neglected or, all too often, properly trained staff resign to take up a better position elsewhere. Much neglected aspects of laboratory work also include keeping of full, systematic records and drafting and implementation of proper operating procedures and protocols.
To assist soil and plant laboratories with the mentioned constraints, ISRIC, with the support of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), developed practical guidelines for effective quality management. Emphasis was placed on achieving an improvement of performance by adopting a limited number of relatively simple rules and inexpensive measures based on the principles of Good Laboratory Practice. The many examples and model documents included in these guidelines should facilitate the adaptation and adoption of specific procedures and documents.
I hope that these guidelines will find their way and prove useful to many laboratories.
Robert Brinkman
Director
Land and Water Development Division
FAO
<section>2</section>
PREFACE
Analytical data produced by different soil and plant laboratories appear to show an often distressingly large variability. Soil parameters are, amongst others, used for soil classification and correlation, land evaluation, soil quality, fertility, and pollution assessment. Erroneous data may lead to very costly mistakes by administrators and other authorities and also hamper technology transfer. In an attempt to reduce the observed variability, laboratory cross-checking programmes conducted in the recent past, notably ISRIC's Laboratory Methods and Data Exchange Programme (LABEX), have indicated that this phenomenon can, amongst others, to a large extent be attributed to essentially two causes:
1. High inaccuracy (bias) through lack of standardization of analytical procedures.
2. High imprecision (scattering) caused by lack of within-laboratory consistency.
Efforts to standardize soil analytical procedures on an international level are at present being undertaken by working groups of ISO (International Standardization Organization, Technical Committee 190). The solution of within-laboratory problems has been left to the initiatives of individual institutes. Therefore, particularly commercial laboratories whose success is directly related to the quality of their product, often have a lead here.
It is generally accepted that the quality of the output of laboratories strongly depends on the quality of the organization of the work, not only at the level of execution of the analysis but also at management level ('good tree, good fruits'). To achieve optimal performance, the concept of "Good Laboratory Practice" (GLP) was developed and has been practised now for quite some time by a number of categories of laboratories where the quality of the work is of vital importance, e.g. in the fields of food, medicine, toxicology, pollution, etc.
Implementation of GLP in soil and plant analytical laboratories in a consequent manner has not been done on a large scale yet, particularly not in developing countries, but it seems to be the only way to significantly and structurally improve the laboratory performance.
It is somewhat unfortunate and confusing that GLP as a descriptive general term is in fact, by origin, a rather strict set of regulations for test laboratories. In the context of the present Guidelines the term "Proper Laboratory Practice" would perhaps be more appropriate. Of late, the term "Quality Management" has come into fashion and it is felt that this term fairly well covers the intention of the present book.
In many countries governments are introducing the rule that orders for environmental and ecological analyses should only be given to laboratories that are accredited for this type of work. For accreditation, consequent Quality Management is an essential aspect. It is, however, not the purpose of this paper to guide laboratories to accreditation (at best it could be a start). Accreditation is a ponderous and expensive major undertaking often involving the hiring of specialist consultants and the employment of (extra) personnel trained in laboratory organization and quality assurance. The present objective is rather to introduce a number of basic measures in the laboratory which do not necessarily require a substantial input of capital but may involve a change in attitude and practice of all laboratory personnel. On the other hand, where costs are involved the justification can perhaps be found in an analogy with advertising: 'advertising is expensive, not advertising is more
expensive'.
When reading the protocols, operating procedures and other instructions for Good laboratory Practice as part of Quality Management, one may feel that a good many of them are already in practice in one way or the other. Therefore, making an inventory of existing documents should always be a first step. In many cases, however, these concern half-way measures, not properly written up (or filed somewhere and never seen) and the interpretation of which varies from person to person and from time to time. In many cases, notes and calculations are made on odd pieces of paper which happen to lie around. Rejected analytical results or readings are thrown away and malfunctioning apparatus is left to colleagues without notification. Good Laboratory Practice tries to avoid these engrained habits by consequent documentation of all relevant actions ('what isn't written, isn't done'). Cynics sometimes tauntingly refer to GLP as 'Generates Lots of Paper'. Obviously, documentation can be
overdone and then it may be counterproductive. In the present manual, too much documentation is consciously avoided. A workable approach is preferred to a fully elaborated procedure involving a drastic change in prevailing practice which may cause evading tactics or an attitude of rejection. Stricter or more comprehensive measures can always be implemented later when the need arises.
A step-by-step approach should in any case be practised with the implementation of all new Quality Management rules and measures. There is a limit to what personnel and a laboratory as a whole can handle, absorb or digest in a limited span of time with a certain budget.
Success depends on the fulfilment of three major preconditions:
1. The directorate of the institute supports (or rather demands) the improvement.
2. The necessary means and time are made available.
3. Participation of all personnel who should be made aware and be involved from the outset.
The first two items are the responsibility of the management of the institute, the third is mainly (but not only) the concern of the laboratory staff. The third condition underscores once again the importance of the cooperation, participation, involvement and contribution of all laboratory staff throughout the implementation of consequent Quality Management.
<section>3</section>
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 What is Quality?
1.2 Quality Management
1.3 Quality Assurance
1.4 Quality Control
1.5 Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)
Since this manual is aimed at improving the performance of a laboratory, the activities involved focus on the term "quality". The quality of the product, in the present case analytical results, should obviously be acceptable. To establish whether the product fulfils the quality requirements these have to be defined first. Only after that it can be decided if the product is satisfactory or if and what corrective actions need to be taken.
1.1 What is Quality?
The term "quality" has a relative meaning. This is expressed by the ISO definition: "The totality of features and characteristics of a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs". In simpler words, one can say that a product has good quality when it "complies with the requirements specified by the client". When projected on analytical work, quality can be defined as "delivery of reliable information within an agreed span of time under agreed conditions, at agreed costs, and with necessary aftercare". The "agreed conditions" should include a specification as to the precision and accuracy of the data which is directly related to "fitness of use" and which may differ for different applications. Yet, in many cases the reliability of data is not questioned and the request for specifications omitted. Many laboratories work according to established methods and procedures which are not readily changed and have inherent default specifications.
Moreover, not all future uses of the data and reports can be foreseen so that specifications about required precision and accuracy cannot even be given. Consequently, this aspect of quality is usually left to the discretion of the laboratory. However, all too often the embarrassing situation exists that a laboratory cannot evaluate and account for its quality simply because the necessary documentation is lacking.
In the ensuing discussions numerous activities aimed at maintaining the production of quality are dealt with. In principle, three levels of organization of these activities can be distinguished. From the top down these levels are:
1. Quality Management (QM)
2. Quality Assurance (QA)
3. Quality Control (QC)
1.2 Quality Management
Quality Management is the assembly and management of all activities aimed at the production of quality by organizations of various kinds. In the present case this implies the introduction and proper running of a "Quality System" in laboratories. A statement of objectives and policy to produce quality should be made for the organization or department concerned (by the institute's directorate). This statement also identifies the internal organization and responsibilities for the effective operation of the Quality System.
Quality Management can be considered a somewhat wider interpretation of the concept of "Good Laboratory Practice" (GLP). Therefore, inevitably the basics of the present Guidelines largely coincide with those of GLP. These are discussed below in Section 1.5.
Note. An even wider concept of quality management is presently coming into vogue: "Total Quality Management" (TQM). This concept includes additional aspects such as leadership style, ethics of the work, social aspects, relation to society, etc. For an introduction to TQM the reader is referred to Parkany (1995).
1.3 Quality Assurance
Proper Quality Management implies consequent implementation of the next level: Quality Assurance. The ISO definition reads: "the assembly of all planned and systematic actions necessary to provide adequate confidence that a product, process, or service will satisfy given quality requirements." The result of these actions aimed at the production of quality, should ideally be checked by someone independent of the work: the Quality Assurance Officer. If no QA officer is available, then usually the Head of Laboratory performs this job as part of his quality management task. In case of special projects, customers may require special quality assurance measures or a Quality Plan.
1.4 Quality Control
A major part of the quality assurance is the Quality Control defined by ISO as "the operational techniques and activities that are used to satisfy quality requirements. " An important part of the quality control is the Quality Assessment: the system of activities to verify if the quality control activities are effective, in other words: an evaluation of the products themselves.
Quality control is primarily aimed at the prevention of errors. Yet, despite all efforts, it remains inevitable that errors are be made. Therefore, the control system should have checks to detect them. When errors or mistakes are suspected or discovered it is essential that the "Five Ws" are trailed:
- what error was made?
- where was it made?
- when was it made?
- who made it?
- why was it made?
Only when all these questions are answered, proper action can be taken to correct the error and prevent the same mistake being repeated.
The techniques and activities involved in Quality Control can be divided into four levels of operation:
1. First-line control: Instrument performance check.
2. Second-line control: Check of calibration or standardization.
3. Third-line control: Batch control (control sample, identity check).
4. Fourth-line control: Overall check (external checks: reference samples, interlaboratory exchange programmes).
Because the first two control levels both apply to the correct functioning of the instruments they are often taken together and then only three levels are distinguished. This designation is used throughout the present Guidelines:
1. First-line control: Instrument check / calibration.
2. Second-line control: Batch control
3. Third-line control: External check
It will be clear that producing quality in the laboratory is a major enterprise requiring a continuous human effort and input of money. The rule-of-fist is that 10-20% of the total costs of analysis should be spent on quality control. Therefore, for quality work at least four conditions should be fulfilled:
- means are available (adequate personnel and facilities)
- efficient use of time and means (costs aspect)
- expertise is available (answering questions; aftercare)
- upholding and improving level of output (continuity)
In quality work, management aspects and technical aspects are inherently cobbled together and for a clear insight and proper functioning of the laboratory these aspects have to be broken down into their components. This is done in the ensuing chapters of this manual.
1.5 Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)
Quality Management in the present context can be considered a modem version of the hitherto much used concept "Good Laboratory Practice" (GLP) with a somewhat wider interpretation. The OECD Document defines GLP as follows: "Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) is concerned with the organizational process and the conditions under which laboratory studies are planned, performed, monitored, recorded, and reported."
Thus, GLP prescribes a laboratory to work according to a system of procedures and protocols. This implies the organization of the activities and the conditions under which these take place are controlled, reported and filed. GLP is a policy for all aspects of the laboratory which influence the quality of the analytical work. When properly applied, GLP should then:
- allow better laboratory management (including quality management)
- improve efficiency (thus reducing costs)
- minimize errors
- allow quality control (including tracking of errors and their cause)
- stimulate and motivate all personnel
- improve safety
- improve communication possibilities, both internally and externally.
The result of GLP is that the performance of a laboratory is improved and its working effectively controlled. An important aspect is also that the standards of quality are documented and can be demonstrated to authorities and clients. This results in an improved reputation for the laboratory (and for the institute as a whole). In short, the message is:
- say what you do
- do what you say
- do it better
- be able to show what you have done
The basic rule is that all relevant plans, activities, conditions and situations are recorded and that these records are safely filed and can be produced or retrieved when necessary. These aspects differ strongly in character and need to be attended to individually.
As an assembly, the involved documents constitute a so-called Quality Manual. This comprises then all relevant information on:
- Organization and Personnel
- Facilities
- Equipment and Working materials
- Analytical or testing systems
- Quality control
- Reporting and filing of results.
Since institutions having a laboratory are of divergent natures, there is no standard format and each has to make its own Quality Manual. The present Guidelines contain examples of forms, protocols, procedures and artificial situations. They need at least to be adapted and many new ones will have to be made according to the specific needs, but all have to fulfil the basic requirement of usefulness and verifiability.
As already indicated, the guidelines for Quality Management given here are mainly based on the principles of Good Laboratory Practice as they are laid down in various relevant documents such as ISO and ISO/IEC guides, ISO 9000 series, OECD and CEN (EN 45000 series) documents, national standards (e.g. NEN standards)*, as well as a number of text books. The consulted documents are listed in the Literature. Use is also made of documents developed by institutes which have obtained accreditation or are working towards this. This concerns mainly so-called Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Protocols. Sometimes these documents are hard to acquire as they are classified information for reasons of competitiveness. The institutes and persons which cooperated in the development of these Guidelines are listed in the Acknowledgements.
* ISO: International Standardization Organization; IEC: International Electrical Commission; OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; CEN: European Committee for Standardization, EN: European Standard; NEN: Dutch Standard.
<section>4</section>
2 STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
2.1 Definition
2.2 Initiating a SOP
2.3 Preparation of SOPs
2.4 Administration, Distribution, Implementation
2.5 Laboratory notebook
2.6 Relativization as encouragement
SOPs
2.1 Definition
An important aspect of a quality system is to work according to unambiguous Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). In fact the whole process from sampling to the filing of the analytical result should be described by a continuous series of SOPs. A SOP for a laboratory can be defined as follows:
"A Standard Operating Procedure is a document which describes the regularly recurring operations relevant to the quality of the investigation. The purpose of a SOP is to carry out the operations correctly and always in the same manner. A SOP should be available at the place where the work is done".
A SOP is a compulsory instruction. If deviations from this instruction are allowed, the conditions for these should be documented including who can give permission for this and what exactly the complete procedure will be. The original should rest at a secure place while working copies should be authenticated with stamps and/or signatures of authorized persons.
Several categories and types of SOPs can be distinguished. The name "SOP" may not always be appropriate, e.g., the description of situations or other matters may better designated protocols, instructions or simply registration forms. Also worksheets belonging to an analytical procedure have to be standardized (to avoid jotting down readings and calculations on odd pieces of paper).
A number of important SOP types are:
- Fundamental SOPs. These give instructions how to make SOPs of the other categories.
- Methodic SOPs. These describe a complete testing system or method of investigation.
- SOPs for safety precautions.
- Standard procedures for operating instruments, apparatus and other equipment.
- SOPs for analytical methods.
- SOPs for the preparation of reagents.
- SOPs for receiving and registration of samples.
- SOPs for Quality Assurance.
- SOPs for archiving and how to deal with complaints.
2.2 Initiating a SOP
As implied above, the initiative and further procedure for the preparation, implementation and management of the documents is a procedure in itself which should be described. These SOPs should at least mention:
a. who can or should make which type of SOP;
b. to whom proposals for a SOP should be submitted, and who adjudges the draft;
c. the procedure of approval;
d. who decides on the date of implementation, and who should be informed;
e. how revisions can be made or how a SOP can be withdrawn.
It should be established and recorded who is responsible for the proper distribution of the documents, the filing and administration (e.g. of the original and further copies). Finally, it should be indicated how frequently a valid SOP should be periodically evaluated (usually 2 years) and by whom. Only officially issued copies may be used, only then the use of the proper instruction is guaranteed.
In the laboratory the procedure for the preparation of a SOP should be as follows:
The Head of Laboratory (HoL) charges a staff member of the laboratory to draft a SOP (or the HoL does this himself or a staff member takes the initiative). In principle, the author is the person who will work with the SOP, but he or she should always keep in mind that the SOP needs to be understood by others. The author requests a new registration number from the SOP administrator or custodian (which in smaller institutes or laboratories will often be the HoL, see 2.4). The administrator verifies if the SOP already exists (or is drafted). If the SOP does not exist yet, the title and author are entered into the registration system. Once the writing of a SOP is undertaken, the management must actively support this effort and allow authors adequate preparation time.
In case of methodic or apparatus SOPs the author asks one or more qualified colleagues to try out the SOP. In case of execution procedures for investigations or protocols, the project leader or HoL could do the testing. In this phase the wording of the SOP is fine-tuned. When the test is passed, the SOP is submitted to the SOP administrator for acceptance. Revisions of SOPs follow the same procedure.
2.3 Preparation of SOPs
The make-up of the documents should meet a minimum number of requirements:
1. Each page should have a heading and/or footing mentioning:
a. date of approval and/or version number;
b. a unique title (abbreviated if desired);
c. the number of the SOP (preferably with category);
d. page number and total number of pages of the SOP.
e. the heading (or only the logo) of originals should preferably be printed in another colour than black.
Categories can be denoted with a letter or combination of letters, e.g.:
- F for fundamental SOP
- A or APP for apparatus SOP
- M or METH for analytical method SOP
- P or PROJ for procedure to carry out a special investigation (project)
- PROT for a protocol describing a sequence of actions or operations
- ORG for an organizational document
- PERS for describing personnel matters
- RF for registration form (e.g. chemicals, samples)
- WS for worksheet (related to analytical procedures)
2. The first page, the title page, should mention:
a. general information mentioned under 2.3.1 above, including the complete title;
b. a summary of the contents with purpose and field of application (if these are not evident from the title); if
desired the principle may be given, including a list of points that may need attention;
c. any related SOPs (of operations used in the present SOP);
d. possible safety instructions;
e. name and signature of author, including date of signing. (It is possible to record the authors centrally in a register);
f. name and signature of person who authorizes the introduction of the SOP (including date).
3. The necessary equipment, reagents (including grade) and other means should be detailed.
4. A clear, unambiguous imperative description is given in a language mastered by the user.
5. It is recommended to include criteria for the control of the described system during operation.
6. It is recommended to include a list of contents particularly if the SOP is lengthy.
7. It is recommended to include a list of references.
2.4 Administration, Distribution, Implementation
From this description it would seem that the preparation and administration of a SOP and other quality assurance documentation is an onerous job. However, once the draft is made, with the use of word processors and a simple distribution scheme of persons and departments involved, the task can be considerably eased.
A model for a simple preparation and distribution scheme is given in Figure 2-1. This is a relation matrix which can not only be used for the laboratory but for any department or a whole institute. In this matrix (which can be given the status of a SOP) can be indicated all persons or departments that are involved with the subject as well as the kind of their involvement. This can be indicated in the scheme with an involvement code. Some of the most usual involvements are (the number can be used as the code):
1. Taking initiative for drafting
2. Drafting the document
3. Verifying
4. Authorizing
5. Implementing/using
6. Copy for information
7. Checking implementation
8. Archiving
Fig. 2-1. Matrix of information organization (see text).
There is a multitude of valid approaches for distribution of SOPs but there must always be a mechanism for informing potential users that a new SOP has been written or that an existing SOP has been revised or withdrawn.
It is worthwhile to set up a good filing system for all documents right at the outset. This will spare much inconvenience, confusion and embarrassment, not only in internal use but also with respect to the institute's management, authorities, clients and, if applicable, inspectors of the accreditation body.
The administrator responsible for distribution and archiving SOPs may differ per institute. In large institutes or institutes with an accredited laboratory this will be the Quality Assurance Officer, otherwise this may be an officer of the department of Personnel & Organization or still someone else. In non-accredited laboratories the administration can most conveniently be done by the head of laboratory or his deputy. The administration may be done in a logbook, by means of a card system or, more conveniently, with a computerized database such as PerfectView or Cardbox. Suspending files are very useful for keeping originals, copies and other information of documents. The most logic system seems to make an appropriate grouping into categories and a master index for easy retrieval. It is most convenient to keep these files at a central place such as the office of the head of laboratory. Naturally, this does not apply to working documents that obviously are used at the work
place in the laboratory, e.g., instrument logbooks, operation instruction manuals and laboratory notebooks.
The data which should be stored per document are:
- SOP number
- version number
- date of issue
- date of expiry
- title
- author
- status (title submitted; being drafted; draft ready; issued)
- department of holders/users
- names of holders
- number of copies per holder if this is more than one
- registration number of SOPs to which reference is made
- historical data (dates of previous issues)
The SOP administrator keeps at least two copies of each SOP; one for the historical and one for the back-up file. This also applies to revised versions. Superseded versions should be collected and destroyed (except the copy for the historical file) to avoid confusion and unauthorized use.
Examples of various categories of SOPs will be given in the ensuing chapters. The contents of a SOP for the administration and management of SOPs can be distilled from the above. An example of the basic format is given as Model F 002.
2.5 Laboratory notebook
Unless recorded automatically, raw data and readings of measurements are most conveniently written down on worksheets that can be prepared for each analytical method or procedure, including calibration of equipment. In addition, each laboratory staff member should have a personal Notebook in which all observations, remarks, calculations and other actions connected with the work are recorded in ink, not with a pencil, so that they will not be erased or lost. To ensure integrity such a notebook must meet a few minimum requirements: on the cover it must carry a unique serial number, the owner's name, and the date of issue. The copy is issued by the QA officer or head of laboratory who keeps a record of this (e.g. in his/her own Notebook). The user signs for receipt, the QA officer or HoL for issue. The Notebook should be bound and the pages numbered before issue (loose-leaf bindings are not GLP!). The first one or two pages can be used for an index of contents (to be filled in
as the book is used). Such Notebooks can made from ordinary notebooks on sale (before issue, the page numbering should then be done by hand or with a special stamp) or with the help of a word processor and then printed and bound in a graphical workshop.
The instructions for the proper use of a laboratory notebook should be set down in a protocol, an example is given as Model PROT 005. A model for the pages in a laboratory notebook is given.
2.6 Relativization as encouragement
In the Preface it was stated that documentation should not be overdone and that for the implementation of all new Quality Management rules the philosophy of a step-by-step approach should be adopted. It is emphasized that protocols and SOPs, as well as the administration involved, should be kept as simple as possible, particularly in the beginning. The Quality Management system must grow by trial and error, with increasing experience, by group discussions and with changing perceptions. In the beginning, attention will be focused on basic operational SOPs, later shifting to record keeping (as more and more SOPs are issued) and filling gaps as practice reveals missing links in the chain of Quality Assurance. Inevitably problems will turn up. One way to solve them is to talk with people in other laboratories who have faced similar problems.
Do not forget that Quality Management is a tool rather than a goal. The goal is quality performance of the laboratory.
SOPs
F 002 - Administration of Standard Operating Procedures
PROT 005 - The Use of Laboratory Notebooks
Model page of Laboratory Notebook
F 002 - Administration of Standard Operating Procedures
LOGO
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE
Page: 1 # 2
Model: F 002
Version: 1
Date: 95-06-21
Title: Administration of Standard Operating Procedures
File:
1. PURPOSE
To give unambiguous instruction for proper management and administration of Standard Operating Procedures as they are used in the Regional Soil Survey Institute (RSSI).
2. PRINCIPLE
Standard Operating Procedures are an essential part of a quality system. For all jobs and duties relevant operating procedures should be available at the work station. To guarantee that the correct version of the instruction is used copying Standard Operating Procedures is prohibited. Standard Operating Procedures are issued on paper with the heading printed in green.
3. FIELD OF APPLICATION
Generally for use in the quality system of RSSI but more specifically this instruction is for use in the Chemistry Department.
4. RELATED SOPs
- F 011
The preparation of SOPs for apparatus
- F 012
The preparation of SOPs for methods
- PROJ 001
The preparation of SOPs for special investigations
5. REQUIREMENTS
Database computer program, PerfectView or Cardbox
6. PROCEDURE
6.1 Administration
The administration of SOPs for the Chemistry Department can be done by the Head of Laboratory.
6.2 Initiating new SOP
(See these Guidelines, 2.2)
6.3 Revision of SOPs
(see these Guidelines, 2.2)
Author:
Sign.:
QA Officer (sign.):
Date of Expiry:
6.5 Distribution of SOPs
When the Sop fulfils all the necessary requirements it is printed. The author hands over the manuscript (or the floppy disk with text) to the SOP administrator who is responsible for the printing. The number of copies is decided by him/her and the author. Make matrix of distribution (see Guidelines for Quality Management Fig. 2-1).
The author (or his successor) signs all copies in the presence of the administrator before distribution. As the new copies are distributed the old ones (if there was one) are taken in. For each SOP a list of holders is made. The holder signs for receipt of a copy. The list is kept with the spare copies.
Copying SOPs is forbidden. Extra copies can be obtained from the SOP administrator.
Users are responsible for proper keeping of the SOPs. If necessary, copies can be protected by a