<title>Farm Management for Asia: a Systems Approach. (FAO Farm Systems Management Series - 13)</title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND DEDICATION
In preparing this book, the authors have received assistance directly or indirectly from many people. Initial inspiration was provided by Dr Neal Carpenter, then Chief of FAO's Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP), who saw the need for a more holistic approach to agricultural development problems at farm, household and village levels. Following Dr Carpenter's untimely death, the project was carried through with the energetic support of his successors including Dr Malcolm Hall and Dr Karl Friedrich. The first draft was constructively criticised by Dr John Dixon, also of AGSP. Nor would the work have been possible without the assistance and cooperation of the great many specialists, particularly small farmers and professional agriculturalists, with whom we have talked and worked throughout Asia. Our thanks must also go to Ms Sally Bearman and Ms Suzanne Blair for assistance in editing, processing and formatting the manuscript as camera-ready copy.
The book has two source streams. One, the formal stream, consists of analytical frameworks and techniques pertinent to the planning and management of farm systems. Our consulting of other authors in these matters is acknowledged in the cited references. Beyond suggested classification schema for agricultural systems, farm types and the modes and fields of farm management analysis, we add little that is new. The main task was to apply these formalities to the world of small traditional farm systems. Thus we exploit also a second stream: that of informal knowledge and village lore which flows to us from the developing world itself - and we try to gain from it sufficient insight to suggest what scope (and limitations) there might be for applying modem farm management techniques in the context of farm systems in old traditional but inevitably changing cultures.
Full acknowledgment of the debt which we owe to the small-farm households of Asia is not possible. This book is dedicated to them with respect and gratitude.
Douglas J. McConnell
John L. Dillon
<section>2</section>
FOREWORD
This book was produced by FAO as part of the work program of its Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP) for the furtherance of a systems approach to farm development, especially of small traditional farms of the tropical world. Impetus to this has been given by the ongoing activity of FAO's Regional Commission on Farm Management in Asia and the Far East.
Because of both the importance of small farms in Asia and the continuing expansion of farm management analytical concepts and methodology, it is timely to build on previous FAO publications in this field. Substantially, these began with the publication in 1958 of W.Y. Yang's book Methods of Farm Management Investigations and, recognizing FAO's special interest in world food security and the sustainable development of small farms, have continued through to today's FAO Farm Systems Management Series to which this book belongs.
The present volume is not an updated compendium of methodology. The authors have first developed an agricultural systems framework and a classification of farm types and the modes and fields of farm management analysis. They have then selected from the existing body of farm management methodology those techniques for analysis and planning which, on the experience of several decades, seem to be of greatest practical use for professionals analysing and planning farm-level agricultural systems, viz: budgeting, enterprise and whole-farm comparative analysis, response analysis, mathematical programming, simulation and risk analysis. Although the authors' techno-ideological framework is economics, they point out that it usually does not matter which discipline - agronomy, economics, engineering, sociology ... - takes the lead role in the analysis of small-farm systems as long as these typically diversified farms and their farm-household units are approached holistically as
functioning integrated systems which need to be adequately understood before prescription for 'improvement' is offered.
Most modem textbooks on farm management are set in the context of modem Western commercial farming. In being oriented to the small farms and rural households of Asia where population pressure is greatest, this book illustrates the practical application of analytical methods described in J.L. Dillon and J.B. Hardaker's book Farm Management Research for Small Farmer Development in this same series.
To contribute positively to sustainable agricultural development, these methods must contribute to the betterment of food security and income of poor folk supported by small farms using traditional technology and internally generated resources. To assist in this, the first requirement is that we have a better understanding of the actual agro-economic structuring, nature and functioning of these small-farm systems and their households. We must seek such understanding with great care and humility. For as this book points out, these small farm-household systems which were once dismissed as 'backward' and as prima facie evidence of under-development, will generally on closer inspection prove to be far more sustainable, efficient and resilient than the bulk of commercial agriculture in the West.
From decades of experience, we now know better than to try to replace traditional smallholder agriculture with some allegedly superior form of modem commercial agricultural production transferred from the West. The degree of interdependence among crop and livestock activities and between the farm and the household in such small-holder systems is such that one would not attempt to adjust, improve or modernize any single element without expecting repercussions throughout the whole system. This characteristic of more-or-less tight structural integration does not necessarily mean that all these farms are biologically and economically efficient and sustainable. They range from what are arguably the world's most sustainable, sophisticated and complex systems - the household forest-gardens of Sri Lanka, Kerala and Java - to systems which, through excessive demands placed on them, not infrequently generated by external factors, have become degraded to the point of abandonment.
In this book the authors present a powerful argument for the application of farm management and farming systems analysis to these complex small-holder agricultural systems in Asia. They leave the reader with profound respect for what this traditional world of the small farm can offer in return.
Doyle Baker
Chief, Farm Management and Production Economics Service, Agricultural Support Systems Division
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS, ACRONYMS AND SYMBOLS USED
a:
the lower-range or minimum value of a random variable
A:
an annual payment amount which, continued over n years, constitutes an annuity with a terminal value A[n] = A[(1+i)^n-1]/i or which amortizes a PV where A = PV[i(1+i)^n]/[(1+i)^n-1]
A[n]
a future amount to be received or paid in n years' time; it is equivalent to an annuity over n years of A = A[n]i/[(1+i)^n-1] and has a PV of A[n]/(1+i)^n
AB:
allocation budgeting
ac:
acre(s)
ac ft:
acre feet (of irrigation water)
AME:
adult male equivalent, a standardized unit of labour measurement
APP:
average physical product, equal to Y/X for Y = f(X)
AU:
animal unit, a standardized unit for aggregation or comparison of different types of animals
AVP:
average value product, equal to (APP)p[y]
b:
the upper-range or maximum value of a random variable
B:
the resource pool available to the farmer or, in LP, the level of resource constraints or activities constituting the farm 'plan' at each iteration
B:
size of the available cash budget
B/C:
ratio of benefits to costs
B-1:
in AB and SP, the initial set of resource constraints
B-i:
in AB and SP, the balance of resource constraints after sequential introduction of the i-th activity into the plan, i = 1,2,...
C:
depending on context, cost or the coconut-to-copra conversion rate
CDF:
cumulative distribution function
CE:
a decision maker's certainty equivalent for a risky prospect
cm:
centimetre(s)
COP:
cost of production, calculated per unit of output as total cost divided by quantity of output, i.e., TC/Y
CV:
CY:
crop-cycle year of a perennial crop
d:
the constant annual rate of depreciation under the declining-balance method
D:
the annual depreciation cost as measured by the straight-line method
D[t]:
the annual depreciation cost in year t as measured by the declining-balance or sum-of-integers methods
DC:
direct cost of an enterprise (or activity), calculated as the sum of its VC plus its share of farm FC
DI:
dU/dX:
marginal utility of X for U = f(X)
dY/dX:
marginal product of X in Y = f(X) or the first derivative of Y with respect to X
E:
EMV:
the expected money value of a risky prospect
EU:
subjective expected utility of a risky prospect
EV:
expected value of a risky prospect
f[0.i]:
the i-th fractile of a probability distribution; a proportion 0.i of the distribution of a random variable X will lie below the value X = f[0.i]
FC:
fixed cost
F(PV):
CDF of PV
F(X):
the cumulative probability or CDF of a random variable X
G:
yield of grain
GAMS:
General Algebraic Modelling System
GM:
gross margin, calculated as gross return less variable cost
GR:
gross return or gross revenue
ha:
hectare(s)
HYV:
high-yielding variety
i:
real annual rate of interest after correcting for inflation or deflation, equal to [(1+i*)/(1+w)]-1, or, when used as a subscript, denotes the i-th member of a set
i*:
nominal annual rate of interest or rate of discount
IRR:
internal rate of return defined as the annual interest rate i at which the PV of an investment's costs is equal to the PV of its gross returns
K:
in LP, the maximum level of an activity permitted by a particular constraint
kg:
kilogram(s)
km:
kilometre(s)
L:
the expected total years of useful life of a capital item
LP:
linear programming
LU:
labour unit, a standardized unit for measuring labour
m:
metre(s)
m:
the modal value of a random variable
-M:
in LP, the notional high negative p value placed on Q[i]
MC:
marginal cost or the change in TC as one more unit of a variable input factor is used
mds:
maunds, a volumetric measure used in Pakistan and India
MOTAD:
Minimization of Total Absolute Deviations, a form of linear risk programming
MPP:
marginal physical product, equal to dY/dX for Y = f(X)
mt:
metric tonne(s)
mths:
months
MVP:
marginal value product, equal to (MPP)p[y]
n:
depending on context, the number of observations on a variable, or the size of a sample, or the number of input factors in a production process, or the number of equal intervals (usually years) in a period of time
n[i]:
for a given farm system, the number of individuals in the i-th species, or area devoted to the i-th species or activity, or income from the i-th species or activity; used in calculating the DI of a farm system
N:
depending on context, quantity of nitrogen fertilizer or, for a given farm system, the total population of individuals across all species, or total area across all species or activities, or total farm income or value across all species or activities; used in calculating the DI of a farm system
no.:
number
NPK:
fertilizer containing nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium
NR:
net return or net revenue, calculated as TGR minus TC
Nu:
Ngultrum; Bhutanese unit of currency
OC:
overhead costs, defined as fixed costs accrued on a whole-farm basis
OGM:
operational gross margin of an enterprise (or activity), calculated as TGR minus DC of the enterprise (or activity)
O[i]:
the i-th possible outcome of a particular risky decision
p:
in LP, the unit price or value of each real or disposal activity; it is equivalent to an activity's unit GM
p[g]:
unit price of grain
p[i]:
unit price of the i-th good
p[n]:
unit price of N
p[x]:
unit price of input factor X
p[y]:
unit price of product Y
P:
quantity of phosphate fertilizer
pk:
patok(s), a Javanese land unit equal to about 0.1 ha
P(O[i]):
the decision maker's subjective probability for the occurrence of O[i]
P(R£ R*):
the probability that net return R will be less than or equal to any nominated value R*
PV:
the present value of a future lump sum or stream of payments or of an item; if A[n] is to be received n years from now, its PV is A[n]/(1+i)^n assuming an annual interest rate of i
PV[t]:
PV at time t
P(X):
probability of X
q:
number of times per year that compounding or discounting is to occur
Q[i]:
in LP, the i-th minimum planning constraint or its corresponding artificial activity
r:
interest rate per period of length 1/q years, equal to an annual interest rate i of (1+r)^q - 1
R:
depending on context, rainfall, or net return, or an annual payment amount that continues in perpetuity and thus has a PV of R/i, or the income diversity ratio, equal to (S R[i])²/S R[i]² where R[i] (i = 1 to n) is the income from the i-th activity and 1 £ R £ n for R[i]³ 0
R[i]:
income from the i-th activity
R*:
any nominated value of net return R
RN:
random number
Rp:
Rupiah; Indonesian unit of currency
Rs:
Rupee; Indian, Pakistani and Sri Lankan unit of currency
RTC:
index of relative time-concentration of annual production or income of a product, calculated as the CV of the product's production or income pattern as a fraction of the corresponding CV for a perfectly concentrated product
RTD:
index of relative time-dispersion of production or income, calculated as 1 - RTC
S:
the number of species or activities in a farm system; used in calculating the DI of a farm system
SD:
standard deviation, calculated as the positive square root of variance
SP:
simplified programming
SV:
the salvage value of a capital item
t:
depending on context, ton(s) or tonne(s)
t:
time, e.g., year t, or the time-length of an activity
TC:
total cost, calculated as the sum of total variable cost and total fixed cost
TDN:
total digestible nutrients
TFC:
total fixed cost
TGM:
depending on context, the total gross margin of an activity, of an enterprise or of the whole-farm system; equal to TGR - TVC
TGR:
total gross return or total gross revenue
TPP:
total physical product, equal to Y for Y = f(X)
TVC:
total variable cost
TVP:
total value product, equal to (TPP)p[y]
U:
a decision maker's utility function
U*:
the linear transformation of U, equal to aU + b with a > 0
UAE:
United Arab Emirates
U(X):
a decision maker's utility function specified in terms of the variable X
V:
Vt:
the depreciated value of an item at the end of year t under the declining-balance method
VC:
variable cost
vs:
versus
w:
annual rate of inflation (w > 0) or deflation (w < 0)
X:
a variable or an input factor
X[1] = h(X[2]/Y*):
isoquant equation giving the locus of all combinations of two variable inputs X[1] and X[2] to produce a fixed level of output Y*
X[i]:
depending on context, the i-th observation on a variable X, or the i-th input factor, or the level of the i-th input factor
Y:
depending on context, a product or the yield of product (or output) from a production process
Y*:
some fixed level of output Y
Y = f(X):
single-variable production or response function indicating output Y is a function of the variable input factor X
Y = f(X[1], X[2]):
production or response function indicating output Y is a function of two variable inputs X[1] and X[2]
Y = f(X[1], X[2],...X[n]):
production or response function indicating output Y is a function of n variable inputs X[1], X[2],...X[n]
Y = f(X[1]/X[2],...X[n]):
production or response function indicating output Y as a function of the variable input X[1] when inputs X are held constant
Z:
in LP, the TGM of a farm plan or the opportunity cost of including a unit of an activity in the plan
Z - p:
in LP, for an activity, when multiplied by minus one, indicates the net increase in plan TGM to be gained by adding one more unit of the activity to the plan
¶ Y/¶ X[i]:
marginal product of X[i] in Y = f(X[1], X[2],...X[n]), i = 1 to n, or the first partial derivative of Y with respect to X[i]
D (.):
a small incremental change in (.)
D X[i]:
a small incremental change in the level of the variable input X[i]
p
for a variable X, the sum of the values X[1], X[2],...X[n]
infinity
greater than, i.e., a > b indicates a is greater than b
less than, i.e., a < b indicates a is less than b
<section>4</section>
1. AGRICULTURAL AND FARM SYSTEMS - CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 SYSTEM DEFINITION AND HIERARCHY
1.2 GENERAL SYSTEMS CLASSIFICATION
1.3 AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS CLASSIFICATION AND ORDER HIERARCHY
1.4 STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF THE FARM-HOUSEHOLD SYSTEM
1.5 STRUCTURAL MODEL OF A FARM-HOUSEHOLD SYSTEM
1.6 REFERENCES
'For an understanding, not only the elements but their interrelations as well are required.'
Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1973)
The first purpose of this introductory chapter is to develop a conceptual framework for the examination of the agro-economic structure of farm-level agricultural systems. The second purpose is to sketch the relationships among these farm-level systems, and between these on the one hand and higher-level systems on the other. These considerations form the basis for the presentation in later chapters of an analytical approach to farm management from a systems perspective applied in the context of Asian agriculture.
While somewhat original in the comprehensiveness of its farm systems' schema, the analytical framework and approach taken are not in conflict with the approaches to systems theory and (agricultural) systems analysis as presented by such authors as Ackoff (1973), Ackoff and Emery (1972), Boulding (1956), Checkland (1981), Dillon (1992), Dillon and Anderson (1990, pp. 164-174), FAO (1989 and 1990), Fresco and Westphal (1988), Friedrich (1992), Kast and Rosenzweig (1974), Norman (1980), Ruthenberg (1976 and 1980), Shaner, Philipp and Schmehl (1982), Spedding (1979) and von Bertalanffy (1973).
1.1 SYSTEM DEFINITION AND HIERARCHY
An agricultural system is an assemblage of components which are united by some form of interaction and interdependence and which operate within a prescribed boundary to achieve a specified agricultural objective on behalf of the beneficiaries of the system.
This definition is analogous to the general definition of any artificial (i.e., man-made) system of which all managed agricultural systems (including specifically the farm-level systems) form one sub-division as shown in Figure 1.1.
From a practical production, administration and management point of view, as shown in Figure 1.2, 'all agriculture' can be regarded as consisting of sets of systems at 16 Order Levels or levels of generality. As discussed in Section 1.3. these 16 Order Levels largely constitute a nested hierarchy. This book is concerned with the 12 lowest-order systems, those at farm level, i.e., systems of Order Levels 1 to 12 in Figure 1.2.
1.2 GENERAL SYSTEMS CLASSIFICATION
1.2.1 Natural, social and artificial systems
1.2.2 Further sub-classification of systems
Discussion and analysis of systems can be of them as actual systems (e.g., of constituent physical processes in the case of natural physical systems) or as representational systems. Common representations or models of actual systems take such forms as written descriptions, physical models, mathematical models, flowcharts, tables of data and computer programs. In the following discussion, reference is to representational systems.
1.2.1 Natural, social and artificial systems
Systems can be classified into three broad families or divisions as either natural, social or artificial systems (Figure 1.1).
(a) Natural systems - those that exist in Nature - consist of all the materials (both physical and biological) and interrelated processes occurring to these materials which constitute the world and, inter alia, provide the physical basis for life. They exist independent of mankind. Our role in relation to natural systems is to try to understand them and, as need be, make use of them. We also (increasingly) attempt to duplicate them, in part or whole; but at this point they become, by definition, man-made or artificial systems. These fundamental natural systems remain unaffected by attempts at imitation. Those natural physical and biological systems (shown in their totality as the division of natural systems in Figure 1.1) which are relevant to agriculture will be self-apparent: rock weathering to form soil; plants sustained by such soil; animals sustained by such plants ... are examples of the outward forms of agriculturally relevant natural systems in operation.
(b) Social systems are more difficult to define. Essentially they consist of the entities forming animate populations, the institutions or social mechanisms created by such entities, and the interrelationships among/between individuals, groups, communities, expressed directly or through the medium of institutions. Social systems involve relationships between animate populations (individuals, groups, communities), not between things. Concern here is with human social systems as they relate to or impinge upon farming, and the term social system is used broadly to include institutions and relationships of an economic, social, religious or political nature. There is a certain degree of ambiguity in defining social systems. As an example, the law of property is in its essence a social system. Insofar as it is viewed as consisting of concepts, principles and rules, it is a pure social system, independent of natural systems. But its existence also presupposes the existence of
property, including natural physical things, some of which exist as systems. To this extent, as a social system the law of property is dependent on or subordinate to natural systems.
(c) Artificial systems do not exist in Nature. They are of human creation to serve human purposes. All artificial systems, including agricultural systems, are constructed from either or both of two kinds of elements: (a) elements taken from either or both of the other two higher-level orders of systems at division level, i.e., from natural and social systems, and (b) from elements which are constructed or proposed for specific use by each respective artificial system as the need for this arises.
The upper part of Figure 1.1 depicts the dependence relationship between natural and social systems on the one hand and between these and artificial systems on the other. The relevant relationships are: (i) natural systems are independent of systems of the other divisions; (ii) social systems could also be viewed as being independent, but generally a more legitimate view would be that they depend immediately or eventually on natural systems for the essentials of their material existence; and (iii) artificial systems are directly dependent on either or both natural and social systems, or indirectly on natural systems (through the dependence of social systems themselves on natural systems).
FIGURE 1.1 - Agriculture in relation to Other Systems
In Figure 1.1, agriculture is shown as comprising one of a very large number of actual or potential artificial systems at the sub-division level. Others are those relating to mining, transport, public health, education etc. What such systems at this sub-divisional level have in common is that each is artificial: each is based upon or draws elements from higher-level natural and social systems; and each also contains elements which are purposefully created by some human agency in order to meet its needs.
1.2.2 Further sub-classification of systems
As shown in Figure 1.1, systems within the three broad divisions or their multitudinous subdivisions can be further classified according to system 'type', a loose term but one which might be used to differentiate among agricultural systems according to a number of factors of which only two are shown in the sketch. As outlined below, first, the system might be either an explicit or implicit one; second, its purpose might be either descriptive or operational. Other 'type' designations could be added; e.g., operational systems could be further classified according to whether or not they are amenable to optimization.
· Explicit systems are those in which the constituent elements are more or less closely identified and defined, and the relationships among these elements are stated formally in quantitative, usually mathematical, terms. Agricultural scientists and economists who work with farmers are concerned mainly with explicit systems of Order Levels 1 to 10 as specified in Figure 1.2. But farmers themselves will seldom be concerned with explicit systems - only with systems of a simpler kind, or only with selected parts of such systems.
· Implicit systems are systems in which only the main or critical elements are acknowledged and only the major or immediately relevant interrelationships are considered. However, these elements and relationships are not formally recorded, analysed or evaluated. Farmers themselves deal primarily with implicit systems. In both traditional and more modem societies particular agricultural systems of Order Levels 1 to 10 are implied in what farmers do, or deliberately do not do. In more 'advanced' societies, farmers might formalize and work with a few explicit systems or parts of systems (farm record books, simple crop budgets, household expenditure accounts) but here also most agro-management systems will exist by implication.
The purpose in here distinguishing between explicit and implicit systems is to discourage the view that, because farmers (especially small traditional farmers) do not deal with explicit formal systems, these farmers are backward, ignorant, unsophisticated and generally inferior as resource managers. If anything, the facts generally point to a contrary conclusion. While bad farmers can be found anywhere, any close study of small traditional farmers and farming villages in the developing world will, with patience, identify implicit systems at agro-technical, enterprise, farm, farm-household and village levels which are far more complex, sophisticated, sustainable and socially efficient than most agricultural systems found in developed countries.
· Descriptive systems are usually intended to facilitate an understanding of the organization, structure or operation of a productive process. This might be their sole purpose; e.g., a farmer might construct a simple input-output budget table in order to learn the structural configurations of some potential new crop. Depending on the results of this, he or she might then proceed to construct a more detailed budget (an operational system) to find how best to fit this new crop into his or her farm plan. At higher Order Levels an organogram describing the administrative structure of a ministry of agriculture or of an extension service might be constructed or the flowchart of a commodity from farm to consumer might be drawn - these also are descriptive systems.
· Operational systems are constructed (by an analyst or manager or research worker) as a basis for taking or recommending action aimed at improving the performance of the system. Such systems are often elaborate (as exemplified in Chapters 9 and 11). However, increased precision is not infrequently achieved at the cost of decreased practical usefulness. Thus farm managers themselves work primarily with simple operational systems, although the actual physical systems which these represent may be very complex.
As outlined by Dillon (1992), it is also sometimes useful to recognize that, like other systems, agricultural systems may be categorized as:
· Purposeful or non-purposeful depending on whether or not they can select goals and the means by which to achieve them.
· Static or dynamic depending on whether or not they change over time in response to internal or external influences.
· Open or closed depending on whether or not they interact with their environment.
· Abstract or concrete depending on whether or not they are conceptual or physical in nature.
· Deterministic or stochastic depending on whether or not their behaviour exhibits randomness over time, i.e., their future behaviour is uncertain.
1.3 AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS CLASSIFICATION AND ORDER HIERARCHY
1.3.1 Nature of farm-level systems
1.3.2 Village-level farming systems
Agricultural and particularly farming systems exhibit great diversity as shown by, e.g., Duckham and Masefield (1970), Grigg (1974), Kostrowicki (1974) and Ruthenberg (1980). They have been classified in various ways as reviewed by Fresco and Westphal (1988) who also present an ecologically-based classification and typology of farm systems. The hierarchical classification of farm systems presented here is distinctly different. It is specifically oriented (i) to a farm management and farm-household perspective and (ii) to use as a framework for analysis of what are proposed as the six basic types of farms found in Asia (and elsewhere in the developing world).
Figure 1.2 is an elaboration of the lower part of Figure 1.1 and relates specifically to agricultural systems. These are listed in largely hierarchical order encompassing 16 Order Levels. Alternatively, with a few minor exceptions, the Order Levels 1 to 16 could have been depicted, reflecting their nested character, as a set of concentric circles with Order Level 1 as the innermost and Order Level 16 as the outermost circle.
In Figure 1.2, the sectoral system, 'all agriculture', is specified as being of the highest order rank, i.e., Order Level 16. Any national or regional agricultural sector, however, consists of such subordinate sub-sectors or subsystems as agricultural credit, education, research, production, transport etc. Each of these constitutes and would be analysed, administered and managed as a system of Order Level 15. Each such (sub)system may then be further disaggregated into commodity-based industry systems of Order Level 14 such as for coconuts, rubber, wheat, coffee, fish etc. If that flow-path relating to production is being followed, as depicted in Figure 1.2, this would then lead to villages or other community units where such production occurs (systems of Order Level 13); these would in turn consist of and could be disaggregated into the individual farm-household systems of Order Level 12 which comprise such villages. Further lower Order Level systems relate to the
agro-economic structure of individual farms and, in turn, their component crop and livestock enterprises and to the activities and individual agro-technical processes which underlie such enterprises.
FIGURE 1.2 - The Hierarchy of Agricultural Systems
Systems of Order Levels 1 to 12 comprise the field of farm management (as discussed in Chapter 2). But systems of Order Level 1 and 2 are also, indeed primarily, the domain of the applied agricultural sciences. A further proviso is that the 'household' components of farm-household systems of Order Level 12 remain as yet not very well understood. This component is primarily the province of workers in such fields as household economics, rural sociology and social anthropology. While these various farm family-related fields are fairly well established, they have yet to be brought together in a comprehensive and cohesive way at farm-family level to provide verified models of how rural families in the developing world think about, plan and operate the 'farm' component of their farm-household systems (Clayton 1983, Chs 4 and 5).
Figure 1.2 depicts the direction of hierarchical status as proceeding downward from sector to industry to village to farm to crop etc. But whether this direction of subordination is valid will depend on circumstances and analytical purpose. Agricultural scientists would probably reverse the order-ranking shown for the systems on the grounds that, unless the basic agro-technical processes (Order Level 1 and 2 systems) are well developed, the production of individual crops will be inefficient, total farm production will be low and the agricultural sector itself will in consequence be an impoverished one. Similarly extension workers might be inclined to place household systems at the top of the systems hierarchy on the basis that good farming practices (Order Level 1 and 2 systems) will not be adopted unless the household systems are working well, nor consequently will the 'higher'-order systems at industry and sector level operate at their full potential.
1.3.1 Nature of farm-level systems
The nature of each farm-level system (i.e., Order Levels 1 to 12) of the hierarchy presented in Figure 1.2 may be specified from a management point of view as fol