<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Twenty-ninth Session Rome, 7-18 November 1997. Report of the Conference of FAO -  Twenty-NinthSession</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Introduction
A. Twentieth McDougall memorial lecture
B. Message from his holiness Pope John Paul II
C. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1996 and 1997
D. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma award for 1996-97
E. Presentation of the Edouard Saouma award for 1996-97
F. In memoriam
A. Twentieth McDougall memorial lecture
1. The Twentieth in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by El Hadj Omar Bongo, President of the Republic of Gabon.
B. Message from his holiness Pope John Paul II
2. On 8 November, the second day of the Conference, Cardinal Angelo Sodano, Secretary of State of the Holy See, delivered a message to the Conference participants on behalf of His Holiness Pope John Paul II. He voiced the Pope's strong support for multilateral cooperation in the search for international social justice, and the importance of all individuals in alleviating world hunger.
C. Presentation of the B.R. Sen awards for 1996 and 1997
3. The awards, honouring the name of the late B.R. Sen, Director-General of FAO from 1956 to 1967, are conferred annually. Each year, the award is presented to the field officer who has made the most outstanding contribution to the country or countries to which he or she has been assigned.
4. The 1996 award was conferred to Mr. Hon Tat Tang, a national of Malaysia, in recognition of his major contribution to the work of the South Pacific Forestry Development Programme in Fiji. Under his leadership the South Pacific Forestry Development Programme had provided an effective and interactive forum that had elevated the forests and trees sector into regional prominence. Mr. Tang was unable to come to Rome to receive the award, and it was collected on his behalf by Mr. Sofara Aveau, Director of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology, Samoa.
5. The award for 1997 was conferred on Mr. Les Clark, a national of New Zealand, in recognition of his outstanding contribution to fisheries policy and planning in Namibia. During the past five years as Special Adviser to the Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources in Namibia, Mr. Clark had designed, documented and assisted in the implementation of a policy of fishing rights and quotas which had made a substantial contribution to the restructuring and strengthening of the Ministry of Fisheries.
D. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma award for 1996-97
6. The A.H. Boerma Award is presented biennially to a journalist or journalists whose work has helped to focus attention on important aspects of food problems, and has stimulated interest in, and support for, measures leading to their solution.
7. The award for 1996-97 was shared by the Association of Food and Agriculture Journalists (AFAJ) of Kenya, for its strong commitment to the coverage of food, agricultural and environmental issues with particular reference to the water hyacinth weed multi-media campaign; and to the Inter Press Service (IPS), a Third World news agency based in Rome, for its significant contribution over the past thirty years to covering sustainable agriculture and rural development issues in more than one hundred countries, thereby filling the information gap between developed and developing countries.
E. Presentation of the Edouard Saouma award for 1996-97
8. The Edouard Saouma Award is conferred biennially on a national or regional institution which has implemented with particular efficiency a project funded by the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP).
9. The Award for 1996-97 was shared by two national institutions, one from the People's Republic of Bangladesh, and the other from the Islamic Republic of Iran, for their outstanding contributions to the implementation of TCP-funded projects. The Award was received by the representatives of these two institutions.
10. The Department of Fisheries of the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock of Bangladesh, represented by Mr. Liaquat Ali, had developed a "Trickle-Down" Extension System, that was successful in disseminating an improved, appropriate, pond-fish culture technology throughout the country under a TCP project. The concerned FAO technical unit for the project was the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI) of the Fishery Resources Division.
11. The Technical Infrastructure Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran, represented by Mr. Darab Malekghasemi, had effectively contributed to improving the water management situation in the country under a TCP project. The concerned FAO technical unit for the project was the Water Resources Development and Management Service (AGLW) of the Land and Water Development Division.
12. Both projects succeeded exceptionally well due to the dedication, enthusiasm and drive of the national staff, and the commitment by their technical counterparts in FAO both in the field and at Headquarters. In their acceptance speeches, the representatives of the two national institutions briefed the Conference on the achievements and catalytic effects generated by the TCP-funded projects and thanked the Organization for the valuable assistance it had provided.
F. In memoriam
13. The Conference observed one minute of silence in memory of those staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since the Conference had last met. The names of the deceased staff members were read aloud and are contained in the Verbatim Records of the Conference.
<section>2</section>
II. Procedure of the session and review of the State of Food and Agriculture
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
C. Adoption of the agenda
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
E. Admission of observers
F. Review of the State of Food and Agriculture
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen
14. The Council nominated and the Conference elected Lyle Vanclief (Canada) as Chairman of the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference.
15. The Conference approved the appointment of the three Vice-Chairmen of the Conference recommended by the Nominations Committee, as follows:
Liu Jiang (China)
Paul Bandoma (Congo, Democratic Republic of)
Beglar Tavartkiladze (Georgia)
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
16. The Nominations Committee recommended and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Seven Members of the General Committee
Cuba Lesotho United States of America
Germany Libya 
Korea, Republic of Sweden 
Nine Members of the Credentials Committee
Haiti Malta Spain
Hungary Niger Sudan
Malaysia Nigeria United States of America
C. Adoption of the agenda
17. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this report.
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
Establishment of commissions and appointment of their chairmen, vice-chairmen, rapporteur and drafting committees
Resolutions committee of the conference
Right of reply
Verbatim records
Verification of credentials
Voting rights
18. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Hundred and Twelfth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of commissions and appointment of their chairmen, vice-chairmen, rapporteur and drafting committees
19. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and III of the Agenda.
20. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and Rule XXIV-5 (b) of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO), the Hundred and Thirteenth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions which the Conference approved:
Commission I Saeed Nouri-Naeeni (Iran, Islamic Republic of)
Commission II Anthony Beattie (United Kingdom)
Commission III Bob Francis Jalang'o (Kenya)
21. Neil Fraser (New Zealand) was elected as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee for Commission I with the following membership: Barbados, Congo (Democratic Republic of), China, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Libya, Netherlands, New Zealand, South Africa, United States of America and Venezuela.
22. Roberto Villambrosa (Argentina) was elected as Chairman of the Drafting Committee for Commission II with the following membership: Argentina, Australia, Canada, China, Egypt, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar, Netherlands, Panama, Sweden and Switzerland.
23. E.J.N. Brouwers (Netherlands) was elected as Rapporteur of Commission III.
24. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 GRO, also appointed the following Vice-Chairmen:
Commission I: Louis Dominici (France)
Atul Sinha (India)
Commission II: Paul Paredes Portella (Peru)
Igor Marincek (Switzerland)
Commission III: Ms Mariann Kóvacs (Hungary)
Mansour Mabrouk Al Seghayer (Libya )
Resolutions committee of the conference
25. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Hundred and Thirteenth Session of the Council to establish a Resolutions Committee of seven members, one from each region, and appointed the following:
Africa: Uganda
Asia: Indonesia
Europe: Netherlands
Latin America and the Caribbean: Paraguay
Near East: Kuwait
North America: United States of America
Southwest Pacific: Australia
26. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee be chaired by the Representative of the Latin America and the Caribbean Region, Oscar Cabello Sarubbi (Paraguay).
27. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as given in Appendix C of document C 97/12.
Right of reply
28. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its 15 previous sessions to the effect that, when a Member wished to reply to criticisms of its government's policy, it should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to speak.
Verbatim records
29. As provided for in Rule XVIII-1 GRO, Verbatim Records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements could be inserted in the verbatim records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking into consideration, however, the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of credentials
30. The credentials of delegations of 152 Members were found valid. Nineteen Members did not submit any credentials. Four Members had announced that they would not attend the Session. The Conference noted that the Afghanistan delegation was seated provisionally in accord with Rule III-5 (GRO). In taking note of the Third Report of the Credentials Committee, the Conference noted that the opinion expressed in paragraph 3 was not in accord with the Basic Texts of the Organization, and concluded that in the future, delegations should submit their credentials in their proper legal form at least 15 days before the opening of the Conference in accordance with Rule III-2 (GRO) and, at the latest, at the beginning of the Conference session.
31. The credentials of the representatives of the United Nations, its Specialized Agencies and related organizations were duly deposited as prescribed under Rule III-2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
Voting rights
32. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III-4 of the Constitution, at the beginning of the session 31 Member Nations had no right to vote in the Conference, since the amount of their arrears of contributions to the Organization exceeded the amount of the contribution due from them for the two preceding years. Nevertheless the Conference decided that all Member Nations in attendance be authorized to vote on Friday 14 November 1997 on Item 28 of the Agenda (Applications for Membership in the Organization).
33. Subsequently, four of these Member Nations (Bolivia, Guinea, Sudan and Seychelles) made payments sufficient to regain their voting rights.
34. The Conference also agreed that voting rights should be restored to 12 Member Nations (Armenia, Burundi, Chad, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Iraq, Liberia, Lithuania, Nicaragua, Niger, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia).
35. The following fifteen Member Nations (Antigua and Barbuda, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Central African Republic, Comoros, Cook Islands, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Togo, Yugoslavia) had no right to vote in the Conference because of arrears in contributions.
E. Admission of observers
Applicant for membership
Admission of observers from non-member nations
Liberation movements
Intergovernmental and international NGOs
Applicant for membership
36. The Director-General had provisionally invited the applicant for membership to be represented by observers until a decision has been taken on its application. The Conference approved the Director-General's invitation in respect of Kazakhstan.
Admission of observers from non-member nations
37. The Conference confirmed the invitations issued by the Director-General to the Governments of Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Monaco, Niue Islands, Palau, Russian Federation, San Marino, Tuvalu, Ukraine and Uzbekistan to attend the Session in an observer capacity.
Liberation movements
38. The Conference confirmed the invitation issued by the Director-General, at the suggestion of the Hundred and Twelfth Session of the Council, to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Intergovernmental and international NGOs
39. The Conference reviewed the list of intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Session, and confirmed the said provisional invitations.
F. Review of the State of Food and Agriculture
40. The general discussion was opened by the Director-General. The text of his statement is given in Appendix D. One hundred and twenty-seven Heads of Delegation, including sixty-six Ministers took the floor to report on the food and agricultural situations in their respective countries and to comment on the overall economic and agricultural situation and on policies and issues affecting the agricultural and rural sectors. Six observers also spoke.
41. Delegates underlined the significance of the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference that followed the historical success of the World Food Summit (WFS), and the importance of taking determined and urgent steps for moving towards the reduction of the number of undernourished to half their present level before 2015, as committed to by 186 delegations at the WFS.
42. Many delegates reported on policies followed by their Governments to promote sustainable agricultural and rural development and achieve lasting food security, in line with WFS commitments.
43. Delegates expressed appreciation for the information contained in the report on the State of Food and Agriculture. They recognized with satisfaction the positive results in world crop and livestock production achieved in 1996. They also noted the expected slowdown in agricultural production growth in 1997, and deplored the persistence of food shortage situations in 29 countries.
44. Many delegations underlined the importance of achieving technological progress under environmentally-sustainable conditions, and the need for a widespread sharing of productivity increases to improve the well-being of rural populations.
45. Several delegations stressed the need to recognize the particular constraints on Small Island Developing States (SIDS), and FAO was invited to organize an international conference on agriculture in SIDS as part of the Summit follow-up.
46. The importance of the process of reform of the international trade framework was recognized and FAO was urged to intensify its assistance to developing countries in adjusting to the new trading environment, complying with commitments under the Marrakesh Agreement and preparing for future trade negotiations.
47. Delegates welcomed the accession of the Republic of Kazakhstan as a new Member Nation of FAO.
48. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
<section>3</section>
III. Resolution 1/97
A. The conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture
B. Major trends and policies in Food and Agriculture
A. The conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering the importance given in Agenda 21 to promoting the conservation and utilization of biotic and abiotic resources for sustainable agricultural development of the world and the role of genetic resources for the promotion of sustainable agriculture and rural development,
Noting the call of the FAO Council, of the 7th Session of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, and of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) for an effective and speedy completion of the revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources,
Welcoming the outcome of the 4th International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources, in particular the Leipzig Global Plan of Action as adopted,
Recalling the World Food Summit Plan of Action committed governments with the support of international institutions to promote the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity:
1. Emphasizes that the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture is a key objective in FAO policies and relevant programme areas and is a priority issue in the 1998-99 Programme of Work and Budget;
2. Encourages FAO to collaborate closely with the Executive Secretary of the CBD;
3. Calls upon Member Nations to continue negotiations for the revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources in a constructive spirit of compromise in order to be able to report considerable results to the Fourth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and to finalize these negotiations, as early as possible;
4. Invites members to contribute extra-budgetary resources to support the convening of extraordinary meetings, if needed, necessary to finalize the negotiations;
5. Encourages FAO to facilitate and promote the implementation of the Leipzig Global Plan of Action, as adopted, by all stakeholders;
6. Recommends that FAO study the possibility of assisting developing countries in projects in conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture in collaboration with UNDP, the World Bank and UNEP.
(Adopted on 17 November 1997)
B. Major trends and policies in Food and Agriculture
The World food summit and its follow-up
49. The Conference endorsed the report prepared by the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) and submitted to it through the Council, in accordance with Resolution 2/95, on all aspects of the World Food Summit and its follow-up. It expressed appreciation for the contribution of all concerned to making the Summit a success and, stressing the importance of maintaining the momentum generated in order to permit achievement of the Summit's goals, welcomed the information provided on action already undertaken to ensure follow-up at the country, regional and international levels.
50. The Conference underlined the primary responsibility of national governments for implementing the WFS Plan of Action, and supported arrangements already made by the CFS for monitoring implementation, drawing mainly on national reports. Noting that the June 1998 session of the CFS would be crucial to establish a benchmark against which future progress would be measured, the Conference urged all countries to submit their reports on the first year of implementation of the Plan of Action by 31 January 1998, and subsequent reports in an equally timely fashion, to enable the CFS to fulfill the crucial role assigned to it by the Summit.
51. The Conference recalled that reporting on follow-up to the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) would already occur as part of the monitoring of implementation of the WFS Plan of Action. Considering the scope of the Plan of Action and its coverage of the goals and issues covered by the Programme of Action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD), the Conference considered that progress reporting could be covered in the CFS process, and therefore decided to discontinue separate progress reporting on WCARRD. It recommended that ECOSOC, which would be receiving reports on WFS follow up, adopt the same approach.
52. The Conference underlined the importance of coordination and cooperation within the UN System in the follow-up to the World Food Summit. In view of the multi-disciplinary nature of food security, the Conference encouraged other organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system, to participate actively in supporting follow-up efforts, and to provide information on their activities to the CFS. Bearing in mind the calendar of meetings in the forthcoming biennium, the Conference requested the CFS to provide, through the Council, a first report on implementation of the WFS Plan of Action to ECOSOC in 1999. It further decided to examine progress in follow-up to the World Food Summit at its Thirtieth Session in the same year.
53. During the debate many Member Nations reported on actions taken or underway at national level to implement the Summit commitments, including the preparation of national reports and action plans. Several countries also indicated that in preparing their plans or their reports to the CFS, they were making active efforts to involve all stakeholders, including civil society organizations. In this connection, it was recalled that the CFS would be considering ways of facilitating broader participation by non-governmental observers in its work. It was also noted that at the 1998 session of the CFS, the original reports to the CFS from all countries and organizations would be made available for reference. The Secretariat would provide a synthesis of these reports to facilitate the work of the Committee. With regard to the regional and subregional dimensions of the Plan of Action, the Conference noted that one full day would be devoted, by each FAO Regional Conference in 1998, to
the question of Summit follow-up, and that the results of these debates would be reported in due course to the CFS and to the Council. Mention was also made of the need to give special attention to the particular problems of Small Island Developing States (SIDS), if possible by convening a special conference at an early date.
54. The Conference welcomed the establishment of the ACC Network on Rural Development and Food Security, operated jointly by FAO and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) in close cooperation with the World Food Programme (WFP), as an important means of ensuring a multi-disciplinary input by the UN system to support national efforts to implement the Plan of Action. It was noted that the network was conceived as a two tiered mechanism, with a focus on action at the country level undertaken by inter-agency thematic groups on rural development and food security operating within the UN Resident Coordinator system. At the headquarters level, the network was to provide support for country level action and obtain feedback on experience which could be shared, as well as to facilitate dialogue between participating organizations largely through electronic means. It would also serve as a channel to mobilize reporting on follow-up to the WFS by UN System
organizations, as required by the CFS, to monitor progress on the Plan of Action.
55. The Conference noted with appreciation the initiative taken by FAO to play a catalytic role in elaboration and definition of a Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System (FIVIMS) in collaboration with concerned UN System organizations, competent national institutions and non-governmental organizations, and supported plans for its further development. It considered that accurate and timely data was fundamental to national and international response to the problem of hunger and malnutrition, and stressed the need for full participation by developing countries in the establishment of national FIVIMS to be linked within the decentralized international system. The Conference was informed that arrangements envisaged reliance to the maximum extent possible on existing data bases and mechanisms. The suggestion was made that the range of partners could be broadened to include other large-scale data bases covering themes related to food security.
56. The Conference welcomed the conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding of May 1997 between FAO and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and expressed its support for the actions being taken. It welcomed, in particular the holding by the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights of a general discussion on 1 December 1997 on the normative content of the right to food, to be followed by an expert seminar to better define and propose ways to implement the right to food, organized by the High Commissioner with support from relevant UN agencies including FAO. In this connection, one country raised a question as to the appropriateness of FAO providing technical assistance to the Committee or the High Commissioner on this matter. Some countries stressed the importance of national legislation on the right to food, with the assistance of FAO where necessary.
57. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
<section>4</section>
IV. Resolution 2/97
A. Right to food
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action, adopted by the World Food Summit in 1996, in particular Objective 7.4,
"To clarify the content of the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to he free from hunger, as stated in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and other relevant international and regional instruments, and to give particular attention to implementation and full and progressive realization of this right as a means of achieving food security for all. "
Expressing deep concern at the widespread phenomenon of chronic undernutrition, in particular among women and children in developing countries, and at the fact that more than 800 million people throughout the world, in particular in developing countries, do not have enough food to meet their basic nutritional needs,
Noting Resolution 1997/8 of the Commission on Human Rights, in which the Commission endorses the request made to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights by the World Food Summit,
Noting that the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights is committed to achieving a better definition of the rights related to food and to propose ways to implement and realize these rights,
Noting also that the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights will be holding a general debate on the normative content of the right to food in Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights at its forthcoming session, on 1 December 1997,
Recalling that the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights will be celebrated on 10 December 1998,
Recognizing the important contribution by FAO to the follow-up of Objective 7.4 of the World Food Summit Plan of Action in co-operating with the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Commission on Human Rights:
1. Welcomes the work already undertaken by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding the right to food and the cooperation in this respect with FAO;
2. Urges the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to give priority to her ongoing work on a better definition of the rights related to food in Article 11 of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and to propose ways to implement and realize these rights as a means of achieving the commitments and objectives of the World Food Summit, taking into account the possibility of formulating voluntary guidelines for food security for all;
3. Invites the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to inform the Committee on World Food Security, at its next session on the progress of her work in this regard;
4. Welcomes the intention of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to hold a general debate on the right to food and encourages it to continue paying particular attention to the right to food in its work;
5. Urges all governments, in partnership with all actors of civil society, and relevant organizations and appropriate specialized agencies of the UN, including FAO, to cooperate actively with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights with a view to achieving a better definition and to implementing and realizing the rights related to food;
6. Urges the Member Nations of FAO, at the next session of the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1998, and on the occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to reaffirm the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger.
(Adopted on 17 November 1997)
58. In referring to initiatives launched by FAO to assist countries in pursuing Summit objectives, several Members made particular reference to the FAO initiative to prepare draft documents on national strategies for agriculture and food security towards the year 2010. A number of Members supported the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS). Some Members mentioned the positive roles of the SPFS, such as the replicability of the modules, and its role as a catalyst for mobilizing investment resources and triggering policy reforms. A number of Members welcomed the South-South Cooperation Scheme, including one country where the Scheme was operational and had been successful in transferring technology, contributing to a doubling of grain yields.
59. The Conference welcomed the information provided on the first TeleFood (TeleFood 1997) which had taken place on 19 October 1997, in connection with World Food Day, with the main aim of raising awareness and mobilizing support around the globe for the fight against hunger and malnutrition. It noted that in accordance with the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.7 and the General Rules of the Organization, the Director-General would be reporting to the Finance Committee on the collection and utilization of the TeleFood proceeds. One Member Nation, concerned about possible competition with NGO activities, stated that it could not consider itself bound to promote TeleFood nationally.
60. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
<section>5</section>
V. Resolution 3/97
A. Tele food
B. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme pledging target for 1999-2000
A. Tele food
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that the Heads of State and Government, gathered at the World Food Summit, pledged their political will and commitment to achieving food security for all and to an ongoing effort to eradicate hunger in all countries, with an immediate view to reducing the number of undernourished people to half of the present level of more than 800 million people by no later than 2015,
Recalling also that to reach this objective the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the Summit's Plan of Action emphasized the need to involve all sectors of civil society as well as to mobilize all possible human, technical and financial resources to help countries fulfill their national commitment to achieve food security for all,
Welcoming the Director-General's decision to launch, within the framework of the World Food Day, the TeleFood initiative to raise public awareness of the issues underlying food security and to mobilize public support in the struggle against world hunger and malnutrition,
Acknowledging the success of the TeleFood operation in 1997 and convinced of the necessity to continue this initiative and expand its coverage in collaboration with the various components of 