<title>THE ROLE OF WOOD ENERGY IN ASIA</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Wood energy constitutes a major source of energy in most countries, both developing and developed, and its contribution is expected to grow in the future as a result of the application of stricter environmental regulations and the use of more competitive sources of locally-available energy. Although FAO collects and presents statistical data and information on fuelwood and charcoal in its Forest Products Yearbook, this data needs improvement, disaggregation and better presentation.
FAO's wood energy initiatives have included, within its current regular programme activities, the development of an improved woodfuel and wood energy data base. This initiative is being carried out through different complementary approaches, mechanisms and activities, one of which is Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow.
Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow
(WETT) collects, reviews and collates existing information and data on wood fuels and its related energy aspects at national level through the preparation of "regional studies". The main aim of these studies is to overcome the shortcomings encountered in the main wood energy databases and to fill the main data gaps. New and improved wood energy data will contribute to (a) determine how, where and how much wood fuel is used in different countries and regions; (b) describe the contribution of forests, wood lands and trees to the energy sector; (c) assess the environmental impacts; and (d) identify the main critical problem areas to be tackled for the development of sustainable wood energy systems.
It is also expected that the development of improved wood energy data will contribute to the better understanding of wood energy systems and to the planning of more sustainable production and utilization.
In addition, WETT will constitute an essential source of information for forest resource assessments, improved forest products statistics, outlook studies and the valuation of forests. Other studies are also being carried out by the FAO Forestry Department as part of the periodic assessment of the state of forest resources and for the presentation of the best available statistics on forest products world-wide which contributes to the understanding of the multidisciplinary role of forests, woodlands and trees and enables the planning of a more sustainable forest management together with the promotion of "greener" and more environmentally friendly energy systems.
This regional study presents an overview of the total wood energy consumption in 16 Asian countries based on information available in selected international organizations and makes recommendations for further improvements of Wood Energy Information Systems.
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer
Wood Energy
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1:
Introduction
1.1 Background
Many developing countries in Asia still rely on wood energy. It is estimated that more than half of the total energy consumption in many Asian countries is accounted for by wood energy. However, there is no precise information on a region-wide level and existing information are scattered in national agencies. Thus, there is a need to organize and analyze available information to serve as a basis for energy policy.
The present study is part of the regional Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) studies undertaken by the Wood Energy Programme (WEP). The results of these studies will serve as inputs to other FAO activities and studies including Wood Energy Information System (WEIS), the Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS), and the Asia-Pacific Forestry Outlook Study.
1.2 Objectives of the study
The two main objectives of the study are: (a) to assess past and present woodfuel consumption and production from forests and non-forest lands and analyse the future contribution of wood to energy in Asian countries; and (b) to present an overview of the different approaches, definitions, units and factors used by different agencies during the collection, storage, and presentation of data and information on wood energy.
The second objective is further divided into the following specific objectives:
* To present an overview of on total wood energy use in 16 Asian countries (i.e., the member countries of FAO's Regional Wood Energy development Programme in Asia) based on literature survey and on personal communication.
* To present various data sources in comparable format, including
+ Time series of total consumption
+ Disaggregation of wood energy into the main consuming
* To compare the main characteristics of these databases
* To make recommendations for future improvement of the existing wood energy databases.
1.3 Scope of the study
The study consists of the following tasks:
1. Collection and analysis of wood energy data available in the databases of FAO, UN, and AIT and presentation of the information in the same format in order to facilitate comparison. The format will follow that used for the WETT study for Europe and the OECD countries.
2. On the basis of the results of the first task, suggesting a "best estimate" of past and present consumption, production, and trade of woodfuels for all the countries according to main category of users (residential, commercial, and industrial) and areas (rural and urban) and undertaking a comparative analysis of woodfuel contribution with other sources of energy.
3. Description of how the different agencies organize their collection, collation, and presentation of wood energy data, including an overview of the main characteristics, approaches, terminologies and definitions, parameters, conversion factors, and units used. This task also includes a detailed description and comparison of the databases consulted and recommendations for future improvement of wood energy database in the region.
4. Analysis of the past and present role of wood energy in Asian countries and its interrelations with the forest and energy sectors taking into account supply sources, trade, and utilization of woodfuels.
5. Following the analysis in the preceding task, analysis of the future role of wood energy, including (i) identification and analysis of the factors affecting the utilization, trade, and production of woodfuels, and (ii) analysis of scenarios of wood energy use.
6. Taking into consideration the limitation on data and information available on woodfuel supply sources, analysis of implications for forests, woodlands, and trees of the present and projected woodfuel consumption and production patterns.
The study will cover the 16-member countries of the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia (RWEDP), which are divided into three groups. South Asia includes Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, which are also the members of South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC). South East Asia comprises Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam. These seven countries, excluding Cambodia, are also the members of Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN)^1, along with Singapore and Brunei. China is treated as a separate group for the purpose of this study.
1.4 Methodology
In order to meet the above mentioned objectives the following steps were undertaken.
* Literature survey on the available wood energy database for Asian countries
* Corresponding with various institutions, organizations, and individuals to explore existing wood energy databases for Asian countries
* Presenting the available wood energy databases in similar formats in order to facilitate their comparison
* Evaluating the available databases on wood energy for Asia identifying their merits and demerits
1.5 Overview of the report
Chapter 2 surveys three wood energy databases for Asia. The wood energy databases are described in terms of their methodology, definitions, measurements, scope. This chapter also discusses how the statistics available from these databases are tabulated in similar format to facilitate their comparison. The resulting tables, however, are presented in Appendix 1.
Chapter 3 analyzes the past and present role of wood energy based largely on the information presented in the CEERD/AIT database. This database is preferred over the two others because more information are available at the national level, although information are not adequately available for all countries under study. This chapter discusses different aspects of wood energy consumption patterns, including wood energy flow and wood energy supply, but the emphasis is on household and non-household rural/urban fuelwood consumption.
Chapter 4 examines the future role of wood energy by discussing the macro and micro factors affecting wood energy use. Towards the end of this chapter, three scenarios are developed that describe possible (not necessarily feasible) wood energy futures. Separate fuelwood consumption projections are made in each scenario, which are also compared with other existing projections to further test their validity.
Chapter 5 concludes the report by drawing the implications of the future role of wood energy for the forestry sector. Recommendations are also made with regards to the issues related to wood energy data.
^1 Myanmar and Laos have been recently acepted as members in the group. Cambodia was also expected to get a membership along with Myanmar and Laos earlier, but the decision on Cambodia was delayed due to recent political development in the country.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2:
Wood Energy Database
2.1 Introduction
Collecting and preparing a wood energy database is a complex process due to a number of reasons: diversity in consumption patterns, variation in heat contents in different species of fuelwood, differences in measurement of volume and weight, lack of regular surveys on wood energy supply and consumption, and divergence in the way wood energy data are presented. Because of this wood energy figures are likely to be different in different databases. Thus, when wood energy data are gathered either for national planning and policy purpose or for some analytical studies, confusion sets in regarding the reliability of data and statistics available from different wood energy database or statistics. It is therefore, mandatory, to explore the existing database, evaluate their reliability and consistency and to identify the most appropriate database for above mentioned purposes.
This chapter discusses the existing situation of wood energy database for 16 Asian countries which are also the members of FAO's Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP). It tries to present an overview of wood energy database at a regional level. There exists only very few databases that includes wood energy figures for Asia. The known wood energy databases on Asia are FAO Forest Products Yearbooks, UN Energy Statistics Yearbooks and CEERD/AIT Energy-Environment Database. At the national level, some countries (e.g., Bangladesh, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand) do have statistics on wood energy.
The word "fuelwood" in this part of the study represents the combination of primary fuelwood and its main derivative¾ charcoal. Fuelwood from FAO and UN databases corresponds to the fuelwood originated only from the forests (does not include wood wastes or recycled wood), whereas fuelwood from CEERD/AIT databases also includes fuelwood from other sources such as trees in home garden and agricultural land and wood wastes. The main sources of CEERD/AIT database are national statistics, which include these other sources of fuelwood.
2.2 Description of the presentation of the database
In contrast to European/OECD countries, there are only three databases on wood energy for Asian countries currently available. These are:
1. FAO forest product Yearbook [FAO 1996]
2. UN energy statistics [UN 1996]
3. CEERD/AIT energy and environmental database.
The first two are published databases whereas the last one is a compilation of data from various published/prepared national statistics, reports and other secondary sources, but the compilation itself has not been published yet. Besides these, International Energy Agency (IEA) is planning to include biomass energy consumption of Asian countries for years 1994 and 1995 in its forthcoming publication, the Energy Statistics of non -OECD Countries.
^1 However, the data from IEA are not available at present.
Wood energy consumption data from the above mentioned sources are presented in tabular form. The presentation follows the same format as that used in the study "Overview of available data on wood energy in Europe/OECD". All tables have a list of 16 Asian countries on the y- axis and data on wood energy consumption and other relevant indicators are presented in x-axis
^2 . These 16 countries are grouped into three groups: South Asia, South East Asia and China. The data in the different tables are directly taken or calculated according to the following procedures:
1. Data on wood energy Consumption in physical unit (Table A.z.1)
These tables consist of total wood energy data expressed it terms of volumetric unit (thousand cubic meter). The data for these tables compiled as follows:
FAO Forest Products Yearbook (z =1)
FAO Forests Products Yearbook
(FAO, 1994) provides domestic production, import and export of fuelwood and charcoal in volumetric unit (thousand cubic meter). Since we need wood energy consumption data, we can not directly copy the production figures as presented in the statistics. Hence, we first calculated wood energy supply data from the following relationships:
Wood energy supply = Domestic production + imports - Exports
With an assumption that there is no transportation and distribution losses of wood energy, wood energy supply equals to wood energy consumption.
UN energy statistics (z = 2)
In contrast, UN energy statistics presents fuelwood and charcoal consumption data in different units. Fuelwood consumption is presented in cubic meter, while charcoal is presented in tonne. However, domestic production and export of charcoal are already included into the domestic fuelwood production. Imported charcoal is converted into equivalent fuelwood and presented in cubic meter. Hence, total fuelwood consumption is given as:
Fuelwood[total] (cubic meter) = Fuelwood (cubic meter) + Imported charcoal (in tonne)/(eff * d)^3
where,
eff = Factor converting fuelwood to charcoal or charcoal kiln efficiency; the value taken here is 0.225^4.
d = Factor converting volume to weight of fuelwood or density of fuelwood on dry basis, the value
taken here is 0.72^5.
Only a few Asian countries import charcoal, and the imported amount is very small compared to the domestic production.
AIT energy environmental database (z = 3)
In the case of the AIT database, both fuel wood and charcoal are presented in mass unit (thousand tonne). They are converted into volume unit as follows:
Fuelwood[total] (cubic meter) = Fuelwood (tonne)/d + imported charcoal (in tonne) )/(eff * d)
where "eff" and "d" have the same values as in the UN statistics.
2. Data on wood energy share in total forest removals (Table A.z.2)
These tables present the share (in percent) of wood energy in total forest removals. Wood energy share in total forests removals represents the ratio between the amount of fuelwood production and total round wood production (both presented in volumetric units) within the country. However, round wood production data is available only in FAO forest products yearbook. Hence, the same data are used for calculating this indicator for the other two databases.
3. Total wood energy consumption in energy unit (Table A.z.3)
Data in these tables are presented in terms of energy unit (peta joule). Conversion factor from volumetric unit to energy unit for different countries and in the cases of different databases are given in Table 2.1.
4. Share of biomass energy consumption in total energy consumption
These tables present the share of biomass energy (in percent) in total energy consumption. However, biomass energy consumption data are not available from the FAO database, so these indicators are not calculated for the FAO database. Total energy consumption data for calculating these indicators in the case of the UN and AIT databases were taken from the respective databases.
5. Share of wood energy consumption in total biomass energy consumption
These tables present the share of wood energy (in percent) in total biomass energy consumption. It represents the ratio of total wood energy consumption to the total biomass energy consumption. However, as the biomass energy consumption data are not available for the FAO database, this indicator has not been calculated for the FAO database.
6. Share of wood energy consumption in total energy consumption
These tables gives the ratio of total wood energy consumption to total energy consumption. The calculation of these indicators for the FAO database uses the total energy consumption figure from UN sources.
Table 2.1: Heat value of fuelwood (TJ/Thousand Cubic Meter)
Country
FAO
Database
UN
Database
CEERD/AIT
Database
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Maldives
Myanmar
Laos
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UN and AIT.
7. Consumption of wood energy in various sector in physical unit
These tables present the wood energy consumption data at the sectoral level in physical unit (volumetric unit). The sectors considered here are Industry, Residential/commercial and others.
8. Consumption of wood energy in various sector in energy unit
These tables present wood energy consumption data at the sectoral level in energy unit (peta joule).
2.3 Description of the various databases
2.3.1. FAO Forest Products Yearbook: the data source of FAO wood energy database
FAO Forest Products Yearbook, an annual publication of FAO in Rome, contains time series data (for the past 12 years) on production and trade of products from forests. In this study, two yearbooks were used. The first (the 48th issue), published in 1996, contains data for 1983-1994 and was used for the data for this period. The second (the 45th issue), published in 1993, contains data for 1980-1991 and was used for the data for 1980-1982.
Structure of the database
The FAO yearbook presents production and trade figures of various types of forest products (e.g., roundwood, fuelwood, and wood derivatives). In the case of fuelwood, the statistics presents data for fuelwood and charcoal separately as well as jointly. This study considers data for fuelwood from "fuelwood + charcoal" category of the statistics.
Data collection methods
Data of FAO statistics are collected by means of questionnaires send to concerned departments of all countries in the world. However, in the absence of official replies of the questionnaires, data are either estimated by FAO or obtained from other sources. The data for all countries under this study are estimated data (not the real data) and are subjected to change in the next issues of FAO Forest Product Yearbook if suggested officially by the governments or new information were available from any other sources. The estimates of fuelwood production data in this statistics based on the per capita fuelwood production and population growth rate.
Definitions and terminologies
The definitions of forest products follow the classification and definitions of forest products, FAO, Rome, 1982. However, there is no explicit definitions of fuelwood. This study also follows the definitions of fuelwood as stated in van den Broek (1997). However, Broek (1997) is not clear whether the fuelwood corresponds only for the fuelwood from natural forests or from both natural and on-farm forests (e.g., trees in home garden, agricultural land etc.). This study assumes that fuelwood data from FAO statistics refers to the fuelwood from all types of forests i.e., natural, private, social or community forests. The statistics however, defines charcoal. According to which, charcoal is "wood in the rough (from trunks and branches of trees) to be used as fuel for purposes such as cooking, heating or power production. Wood for charcoal, pit kilns and portable ovens is included." But, it is amazing! this in fact, is the definition of fuelwood not of charcoal.
2.3.2. Energy Statistics Yearbook--the data source for UN wood energy database
Energy Statistics Yearbook
is an annual publication of the United Nations, published by Department of Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis. This statistics presents time series (for the past 4 years) data on production, trade and consumption of various types of energy commodities for the countries all over the world. Since this statistics presents data for past four years and the data of the earlier issues are always revised in the new issues, this study uses various issues of this statistics. For example, Energy Statistics Yearbook, 1983 (published in 1985) which presents data for years 1980-1983, was used for data for year 1980. Similarly subsequent issues were used for the data till 1991. Since the latest available issue is "Energy Statistics Yearbook, 1994 (published in 1996), data for the 1992-1994 period were also taken from this issue.
Structure of the database
This statistics includes both conventional and biomass energy commodities. The conventional commodities included in the statistics are coal (hard coal, lignite, coke, peat, hard coal briquettes and lignite and peat briquettes), petroleum (crude petroleum, LPG, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, kerosene, jet fuels, gas-diesel oils, residual fuel oil), gas (natural gas, other gas) and electricity (hydro, thermal, nuclear). The biomass fuels included in the statistics are fuelwood, charcoal and Bagasse. Data for each type of fuel and aggregate data for the total mix of conventional fuels are provided for individual countries as well as summarized into regional and world tables. There are altogether 38 tables in the statistics, of which Table 13 provides production and trade of biomass energy.
Data collection methods
The data in this statistics are compiled primarily from annual questionnaires distributed by the United Nations Statistical Division and supplemented by official national statistical publications. Where the official data are not available or are inconsistent, estimates are made by the Statistical Division based on governmental, professional or conventional materials. Estimates include, but are not limited to, extrapolated data based on partial year information, use of annual trends.
Definitions and terminologies
Fuelwood in this statistics is defined as "all wood in the rough used for fuel purpose. Fuelwood production data include the portion used for charcoal production, using a factor of 6 to convert from a weight basis to the volumetric equivalent (metric tons or cubic meters) of charcoal". Similarly, charcoal is defined as "solid residue consisting mainly of carbon obtained by the destructive distillation of wood in the absence of air". Biomass fuel in this statistics refer to fuelwood, charcoal, Bagasse, animal, vegetal and other wastes.
2.3.3. CEERD/AIT Energy-Environment Database
Center for Energy-Environment Research and Development (CEERD)^6 , a center involved in research and development activities on energy and environmental field since 1986 at Asian Institute of Technology, has established a regional database on energy and environment for Asia and pacific countries. The database currently have data on energy and environment for 22 countries. The database is managed through a fox-pro based computer software called Database Administration Variable Output and Input Data (DBA_VOID). In this database, a separate group has been created for wood energy data. Although attempts have been made to gather wood energy data and information from different countries, only a few countries (Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand) have a complete time series on wood energy data, whereas for the rest of the countries have only partial data (data for a few years).
Structure of the database
The database presents data tables in aggregated and detailed forms. Aggregated tables presents main biomass energy commodities such as fuelwood, charcoal, agricultural residues, dung, biogas, municipal wastes and wood derived liquid fuel (e.g., black liquor, ethanol, methanol) in columns and time series data in rows. Data tables are designed for each type of activities or flow like resources/reserves, production, trade (imports/exports), total supply, transformation and final consumption. Consumption data are also presented by types of economic sectors (e.g., household sector, commercial and service sector, industrial sector and others). Detailed tables are aimed to provide in-depth information of a particular type of fuel or activity. For example, fuel wood is divided into different components such as primary fuelwood, wood residues, sawdust, furthermore production of fuelwood is disaggregated according to its sources such as fuelwood from natural forests, fuelwood from
on-farm forests etc. However, the existing data mostly correspond to the aggregated tables.
Data collection methods
The main characteristics of CEERD/AIT energy-environment database is that no data based on estimation. Whatever data are available are taken from the published or prepared (but not published) statistics of national level institutions. Most of the existing data are taken from regular publications and provides time series, however, some data are taken from special studies, reports and correspond to the particular point of time. The main data sources for wood energy data in CEERD/AIT energy-environment database are summarized in Table 2.2.
Definitions and terminologies
The definition of terminologies relevant to this study used in this CEERD/AIT energy-environment database are as follows:
Biomass fuels: all the organic fuels from biological origin used for energy purposes are referred as biomass fuels. It includes all terrestrial and aquatic vegetation, its residues such as fuelwood, twigs, dead leaves, shell; cultivated crops and their residues like cereal straw, seed-husks, Bagasse; livestock products and their residues (e.g., dung).
Biomass energy: energy derived from the combustion of biomass fuels are called biomass energy.
Wood fuel: all types of lignocellulosic material derived directly and indirectly from plants, trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plant grown in forest as well as non-forest lands and used for fuel purpose. The main components of woodfuels are fuelwood, charcoal and wood derived fuels (e.g., black liquor, methanol, ethanol).
Wood energy: energy derived from woodfuels are known as wood energy.
Fuelwood: wood in rough produced from forests as well as non-forests and used solely for fuel purposes. Fuelwood includes twiggs, branches, wood chips, pellets and power derived from natural or other forest or even non forests area (e.g. home garden), industrial wood residues and recovered wood.
Charcoal: it is a solid residue derived from carbonization, distillation, pyrolysis and torrefaction of wood (from trunks and branches of trees) and wood by-products using pit, brick and metal kilns. It includes also charcoal briquettes made from wood-based charcoal.
2.4 Comparison of various databases
This section presents a comparative analysis of wood energy databases used in this study. A careful observation of data tables presented in Appendix 1, reveals that there is a big deviation from among the figures from various databases. Data on tables (Tables A.z.1, where z refers different databases) corresponding to the fuelwood consumption, indicate that the absolute value of fuelwood consumption from FAO database were increasing smoothly in all Asian countries selected under the study. However, this is not the case in other two databases. In UN databases (Table A.2.1 in Appendix 1), absolute amounts of fuelwood consumption were found to decrease in some years for Bangladesh, Bhutan, Laos, Thailand, China and Myanmar. There exist a big drop in the total fuelwood consumption from year 1982 to 1983 in Bangladesh and a big jump from year 1991 to 1992 in Thailand in UN database. The reason for this discrepancy in the case of Bangladesh may be the change of data sources of UN
energy statistics. As mentioned in the table notes of UN Energy Statistics Yearbooks, it seems that UN statistics took fuelwood consumption data from FAO Forest Products Yearbook till 1982 and took from other sources thereafter. However, the reason for the discrepancy in the case of Thailand is unknown. The same phenomenon as in the case of UN database was also observed in CREED/AIT database (see Table A.3.1 in Appendix 1). Absolute amount of fuelwood consumption was found to be decreased in some years in most of the countries with time series data.
The variation in fuelwood consumption data from various databases can be analyzed with the help of Tables A.z.2 in Appendix-1. These tables presents the ratio of fuelwood consumption from various sources to the round wood production from FAO forest products yearbook (i.e., with respect to a common denominator). Comparing the indicators given in tables A.1.2, A.2.2 and A.3.2, it can be found that, a very big deviation (more than 2 times) occurred in fuelwood consumption data from FAO and UN databases in Bangladesh during 1983-1994, Bhutan during 1980-1994, and Thailand during 1992-1994. A significant difference (more than 1.2 times) was also observed in the case Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Note that, for these countries, the sources of UN statistics are national sources rather than FAO. For the rest of the countries, the difference is not significant as UN statistics eventually took data from FAO statistics. In the case of fuelwood consumption data from FAO and CEERD/AIT
databases, a large (more than 1.5 times) difference observed in Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand (1992-1994) and Vietnam. From these deviations, one can clearly come to a conclusion that there exits a very big difference in fuelwood consumption data originated from FAO and national statistics.
On the other hand, the shares of wood energy in total energy consumption from FAO and UN databases are comparable in most countries. However, these figures differs significantly in the case of CEERD/AIT databases.
A better comparison of fuelwood consumption data from various sources is possible for year 1994, as data for more countries are available from CEERD/AIT databases in this year. As shown as in Table 2.3, total fuelwood consumption data on South Asian countries are comparable in FAO and UN databases expect on Bangladesh. However, fuelwood consumption data are higher in the case of CEERD/AIT data for the reason as mentioned above.
In South-East Asian countries, there exists only a smaller variation in total fuel wood consumption data between FAO and UN databases except in Thailand. In fact, these data are comparable among all sources except in Indonesia and Thailand (see Table 2.4).
Fuelwood consumption data from FAO and UN databases are close to each others for China, but this is not the case for data from CEERD/AIT statistics (see Table 2.5).
Although, there is a big variation in total fuelwood consumption among the data from various sources, the variation is not as big as in the case of European/OECD countries, where total fuelwood energy consumption data varies from 2 to 6 times among the various sources (van den Broek, 1997).
Table 2.2: Main sources of wood energy data in CEERD/AIT energy-environment database
Country
Data Sources (Institutions)
Bangladesh
1. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
2. Ministry of Planning
3. Forestry Department
4. Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
Bhutan
1. Department of Power
2. Forest Department
3. Ministry of Agricultural
Cambodia
1. Department of Forest and Wildlife
2. Ministry of Energy and Mines
China
1. Energy Research Institute, State planning Commissions
2. Research Institute of Tropical Forestry
3. Chinese Academic of Agricultural Research
4. Ministry of Agricultural, Animal Husbandry and Fishery
India
1. Ministry of Environment and Forests
2. Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
3. Tata Energy Research Institute
Indonesia
1. Department of Energy and Electricity
2. Institute of Technology Bangdung
Malaysia
1. Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment
2. Economic Planning Unit, Ministry of Prime Minister
3. Forest Research Institute Malaysia
Maldives
1. Ministry of Fisheries and Agricultural
2. Ministry of Planning
Myanmar
1. Ministry of Energy
2. Forest Department
3. Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development
Laos
1. State Pl