<title>Drylands development and combating desertification: Bibliographic study of </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
It is a well known fact that China has been very active in developing technologies for the rehabilitation of dry lands and combating land degradation and desertification. FAO has been using the Chinese experience especially since the seventies when many visits of experts from developing countries were organized to learn from the country's experience in forestry. The examples have been particularly useful in disseminating technology and illustrating activities for involving communities in plantation, water control work and various approaches to production activities for enhancing food security at local level.
After conducting the same exercise and gaining experience in European countries in transition, the Sub-group on desertification of the former FAO Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Sustainable Development has undertaken a new initiative to document experience in land degradation and desertification control in China. The results of this work which was entrusted to the China National Bureau to Combat Desertification, constitute the substance of the present book. It highlights through 148 entries, the major characteristics of the work that has been done in the country in dry land research and development and in Desertification control. Because it is based on a large and diversified range of technologies, the experience of China is relevant to many countries especially developing countries or countries in transition. It is also relevant to cold as well as warm regions. The range of applicability then warrants the efforts that have been spent to collect and
collate the information. The efforts of Professor Ci Longjun, Director General of the China National Bureau to Combat Desertification to coordinate this task and edit the final product are hereby recognized and appreciated.
The Sub-Group on Desertification is indebted to Mr. Jean Paul Lanly who, as chair of that Sub-group, at that moment, did personally put much effort in developing the initiative. It also extends thanks to the China National Secretariat on the Convention to Combat Desertification who helped make the necessary contacts in the development of the document. We thank the authors who have made valuable efforts to identify sources and collect these important and interesting cases. We are sure that this publication will inspire the work of many colleagues and will contribute to the aim of the Sub-group and FAO as a whole, including technology advancement, development and exchange as well as furthering experimentation and practices to combat land degradation and restore food security.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Editorial notes
The authors' names are given in Chinese order; the first or given name follows the surname or family name. Although this order differs from that of western counties, it is now widely recognized and accepted. In most cases the address given applies to the first author listed.
China is divided into three administrative levels: provinces, which include autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government; countries, which include cities and industrial-agricultural and forestry districts; and towns or townships.
<section>3</section>
1. Overview of land desertification issues and activities in the people's republic of China
A. The extent of land desertification
B. China's initial achievements in combating desertification
C. Mechanisms for combating desertification
1.1 China is a developing country with a large population and scarce arable land, which feeds 22 percent of the world's population on seven percent of the world's tillable land. China is one of the countries most severely impacted by desertification which encompasses over 30 percent of the total land territory (approximately 3 327 million km^2) and adversely affects 400 million people. Given the scale of the problem and insufficient national financing, combating desertification remains an arduous task. Even with the government's long-standing commitment and numerous successful model projects, land desertification in China is worsening.
A. The extent of land desertification
1.2 Land desertification occurs mainly in the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas in the western part of northeast China, the north part of northern China and most parts of northwest China. Desertification caused by wind erosion totals 1 533 million km^2 and is distributed in barren and dry grasslands east of the Helan Mountains and Wushiaoling Ridges. It is most serious in the transitional and marginal agriculture and animal husbandry zones of 11 provinces and autonomous regions: Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang and Hebei. Land desertification caused by water erosion totals 1 794 million km^2 and is concentrated on the Loess Plateau (which is the most severely eroded area in China and even the world) and middle and upper reaches of the Yangtze River. Physical, chemical and biological processes of soil degradation and related economic activities are responsible for desertification near oases or other sandy
areas with poor drainage. This is most pronounced in arid regions of the northwest and areas surrounding irrigated oases in Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia. Climate change, human activities and other factors are accelerating the desertification process along this vast 5 000 km-long arid stretch in northern China. The annual of expansion of land desertification increased from 1 600 km^2 in the 1970s to 2 100 km^2 during the 1980s.
1.3 Ecological degradation and restricted economic development in the affected areas are severe. In the wield-impacted sandy area of northern China the annual number of days of wind greater than force eight is 30 to 100, with sandstorms occurring in some areas. On the Loess Plateau the average erosion model records between 5 000 to 8 000 t/km^2/yr with 20 000 t/km^2/yr as maximum. The annual quantity of silt flowing into the Yellow River now totals 1.6 billion tons (t) which raises the river bed in the lower reaches by ten centimetres (cm) each year. Desertification threatens two million hectare (ha) of farmland and 4.93 million ha of pasture land. Estimated direct economic losses from low and unstable productivity in agriculture, forestry and animal husbandry total 4.5 billion RMB yuan. China's most underdeveloped counties are located in decertified areas.
1.4 The major causes of land desertification in China are climate change and human economic activities. Climate variation and desertification are contributing factors to the phenomena of global climate change. Since the 1970s China's semi-arid and dry sub-humid zones simultaneously experienced increases in temperature and decreases in precipitation. Given current industrial energy usage, China is projected to loose 959 000 km^2 in the humid areas and gain 843 000 km^2 in arid and semi-arid areas by 2030. Sandstorms demonstrate the harmful and destructive impact of climate change. In May 1993 a sandstorm attacked over ten counties in four provinces including Xinjiang and Gansu. Soil loss due to wind erosion was ten to 15 cm, and sand loss, 20 to 150 cm for a total economic damage of 560 million RMB yuan.
1.5 Human activities are a direct cause of land desertification in modern times. Rapid population increases have lead to over utilization of land resources. These include intensification of agriculture and animal husbandry, agricultural reclamation on pasture land, deforestation, overgrazing, destruction of vegetation, misuse of water resources and the lack of environmental protection and scientific management in traffic, mining, energy development, tourism and city building. In the transitional and marginal zones of agriculture and animal husbandry reclamation of sandy land accounts for 25.4 percent of modern decertified areas; overgrazing, 28.3 percent; fuelwood harvesting, 31.1 percent; and other activities. 15 percent.
B. China's initial achievements in combating desertification
1.6 The Chinese government and the Chinese people are pioneers in combating desertification. During previous decades of concentrated work, innovative sand control techniques were developed and significant research results accumulated. Examples include fixation techniques for mobile sand dunes along the Baotou-Lanzhou Railway, aero-seeding over shifting sand dunes, narrow strip planting, straw checkerboard networks, windbreaks and shelterbelts of grass, shrubs and trees for farmland protection and agroforestry ecosystems. Integrated management plans for erosion control that include hills, watersheds, ['vests and roads have been developed. The Three-North Afforestation Bureau won UNEP's 1987 Global Environment Protection Award.
1.7 By 1988 plantations established mainly for desertification control covered ten million ha. Forest coverage in northern China rose to 12 percent from seven percent in the 1970s, with ten percent of the decertified land under control. The sheltering effect of these plantations helped open up 1.3 million ha of new farmland; 11 million ha of desert-affected farmland and nine million ha of desertified or degraded grazing land were protected; grain production increased ten to 20 percent and grass fodder production increased 20 percent. During this period degraded forests and grasslands were closed to harvesting or grazing to enable natural rehabilitation to occur. Over eight million ha of fuelwood plantations were established to meet the daily needs of five million local households; wind mills and solar energy were also used as fuel supplements. The result was rapid development of the economy and improved environmental conditions. Erosion was reduced over a 570 000 km^2 area.
Within four years of initiating the National Programme for Combating Desertification, 2 445 million ha had been controlled, including 401 000 ha covered with artificial plantations, 271 000 ha afforested by aero-seeding and 1 47 million ha protected for natural rehabilitation. One hundred thousand ha of seriously decertified land have been converted into farmland.
C. Mechanisms for combating desertification
1.8 Legislation and institutions: Desertification issues are covered under national resource management and conservation laws through the government's promulgation of related legislative acts; examples include the Forest Law Water Law Grassland Law Land Management Law Environment Protection Law and the Family Planning Decree. In 1991 the government formulated policies on Desertification control and rational use of sandy deserts to facilitate enforcement of these laws. The Ministry of Forestry auctioned use rights to sandy wasteland and barren hills for farmers to rehabilitate for private gain.
1.8.1 Combating Desertification is an essential element of the Chinese Government's national economic and social development master plan. The National Desertification Combating Coordinating Group includes representatives from the National Economic Commission Ministry of Forestry Ministry of Water Resources Ministry of Agriculture Chinese Academy of Sciences State Planning Commission Ministry of Finance Ministry of Energy Ministry of Railways and the Poverty Alleviation Office of the State Council. The National Desertification Control Office is located in the Ministry of Forestry in order to coordinate regular programmes and activities; coordination points have been created at different levels of local government. The China National Monitoring Centre for Desertification formed within the same ministry provides information on the changing dynamics of desertification and the results of combating measures.
1.8.2 The Chinese government recognizes that scientific and technological skills to combat Desertification are built over generations and for this purpose has established departments of soil and water conservation and desert control in universities colleges and other national academies. Mid-level professional schools have been set up and educational networks improved; enhanced research institutes and experimental stations serve as focal points for case studies pilot projects and technical extension services.
1.9 Integrated Planning and Management Approaches: Desertified lands in China are vast and varied. At the planning level China integrates the policy. technical and scientific sectors responsible for land resources and Desertification issues giving due consideration to local conditions. An integrated management approach for decertified land water farmland forests and roads promotes the balanced development of agriculture. forestry animal husbandry and water resources. In arid areas affected by wind erosion green shelterbelts are established water resource management improved and activities to protect vegetation and expand oases encouraged. To address wind erosion issues in the semi-arid transitional and marginal ['arming and grazing areas agriculture forestry and animal husbandry are developed in proportion to the carrying capacity of the resource base using techniques such as intensive ['arming tillage systems for dry seasons shelterbelt and fuel forests fodder plantations
and artificial grazing land. In sub-humid areas road planning is incorporated so that industry may contribute to overall development. Integrated small-scale watershed management is applied in areas subject to water erosion. Biological approaches which take advantage of legume. shrub and medicine plants with high economical value are integrated with engineering solutions suitable to the local needs.
1.9.1 Large-scale regional protective forest which are promoted as key national projects to combat Desertification offer additional opportunities for integrated planning and management. These include the Three Northern protective forest system covering forests along the middle and upper reaches of Yangtze River protective forest systems along seacoasts and agroforest systems in plains' areas. The Three Northern Programme crosses 13 provinces and 551 counties in northeast north and northwest China and covers 4 069 million km^2 or 42.4 percent of China's land.
1.10 China's National Action Programme under the Convention to Combat Desertification: China has a strong commitment to implementing the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. A secretariat (China National Bureau to Combat Desertification 18 HePingLi Dongjie Street Beijing 100714; P.R. China Fax: +86 10 6423 4699) and group of senior advisers have been established. The advisory body is composed of 16 academicians and authoritative experts from different disciplines and sectors recommended by the ministries concerned.
1.10.2 A Ten Year National Plan for Combating Desertification (1990-2000) and a National Plan for Water and Soil Conservation (1991-2000) have been prepared based on the Ten Year China National Plan for Economic and Social Development. The Desertification Plan has the following targets:
a. To reclaim 6 66 million ha of decertified land through
- tree/shrub planting and grass growing
- enclosing land for natural revegetation
- aero-seeding of tree and grass seeds
- improving low-yield farmland and pasture
- cultivating cash crops
- maximizing utilization of run-off water
b. To implement 20 greening projects in 20 key counties under nine different Desertification conditions. Each project will demonstrate an integrated approach described above.
c. To increase the percentage of converted decertified land from the present 10 percent to 32 percent by the year 2000.
d. To annually control the negative impact of water erosion on 40 000 km^2 of land.
e. To decrease the farmland areas subject to shifting sand dunes by 25 percent by the year 2000.
<section>4</section>
2. The natural of arid, semi-arid zones and desertification in the people's republic of China
2.1 Arid semi-arid and dry sub-humid zones cover 2 976 000 km^2 in northern China; extreme arid areas cover 697 000 km^2. This totals 3 673 000 km^2 or 38.3 percent of China's total land mass including 2 080 000 km^2 of decertified land (cf. bibl. entry 26). In Xinjiang province alone there are 423 000 km^2 of desert-China's largest. Gradual invasion of moving sand is decreasing the size of oasis areas (cf. bibl. entry 8).
2.2 Land degradation caused by poor management has long plagued northern China. Desertification-prone land covers 334 000 km^2 176 000 km^2 are already decertified lands and 158 000 km^2 are at risk. From aerial-surveyed topographic maps desertification-prone land increased by 390 000 km' between 1950 and 1970 (cf. bibl. entry 145). The area of degraded land expanded by 1 560 km^2 annually from the end of the 1950s to the mid-1970s and reached 2 100 km^2 in northern China during the last decade. The total area of degraded land approximates 197 000 to 226 000 km^2 Forty-five thousand km^2 of desertification-prone lands were rationally utilized and 2 250 km^2 rehabilitated. (cf. bibl. entries 15 144).
2.3 In the "three-north" region the ratio between greening velocity and desertification velocity is one to eight indicating that rehabilitation of decertified land in China is slow (cf. bibl. entry 111).
2.4 There are 818 000 km^2 of saline land; 173 300 km^2 are threatened with salinisation. To achieve sustainable agriculture in China this vast area of saline land must be improved and utilized (cf. bibl. entry 7).
2.5 China's arid environments have been divided into two types three patterns and 15 zones based on annual aridity coefficients rainfall and accumulated temperature (cf. bibl. entry 106). Regional management strategies and detailed natural resource development utilization and protection measures have been suggested for each area (cf. bibl. entry 1).
2.6 Based upon differences in the desertification process China's decertified lands have been divided into 20 regions' eight showed slight desertification e.g. central plain of northeast China; seven moderate desertification e.g. Bashang in Hebei province; and five severe desertification e.g. northern Shaanxi province (cf. bibl. entry 32).
2.7 Studies on the spatial characteristics of natural disasters divide China into tour Disaster Action territories and 14 Disaster Action regions (cf. bibl. entry 93). Disaster distribution is controlled near the Qingling-Huai He line (34° N). The areas of most frequent disaster action (droughts floods landslides and earthquakes) are located in northern China's Hu line zone. Other disaster centres are Huang He Huai He Hai He the area between Zhengzhou and Wuhan-Dong Ting Lake and the Yunnan-Sichuan-Guangxi border region.
2.8 According to Wu Zheng (cf. bibl. entry 97) desertification patterns and sand deserts in North China have been changing since the glacial activity of the Quaternary period. Between the Quaternary and modern times a sand desert in the broad semi-desert and steppe area of the east part of North China existed intermittently experiencing stable, expansive and retroactive phases. Since 1949 dry climatic conditions, population increases and adverse economic development activities have caused desertification in North China to worsen.
2.9 Trends in desert evolution are determined by climate variation and global climate change. Precipitation in the eastern part of China may increase, thereby alleviating or reversing the desertification process. On the contrary, drought in the western desert region may intensify (cf. bibl. entry 98). If CO' concentrations double and mean annual temperatures increase to 4°C, China's arid zones will expand to 4 630 000 km^2 or 48.3 percent of China's total area, including 2 670 000 km^2 of desertified land. The rate of land desertification will increase to 6 941 km^2 per year (cf. bibl. entry 26).
2.10 Over the past 40 years and particularly during the last decade, China has made great progress in research related to arid zones; certain fields rank among the world's most highly advanced (cf. bibl. entry 130). Topics include:
(a) Inventory and evaluation of land, water, climatic, biological, mineral and other natural resources.
(b) Monitoring and control of natural disasters, including drought, sandstorms and salinisation. It is noteworthy that sandstorm control has been successful.
(c) Evaluation and predictions of geographical and environmental change.
(d) Productivity allocations for industry, agriculture and transportation.
(e) Human population dynamics including national minorities population growth, the population and economy of mountain areas, population and environment relationships and migration.
(f) Regional research and regional development.
<section>5</section>
3. Definitions and methodologies
A. Definitions
B. Theories and hypotheses
C. Methodologies
D. Studies on the natural environment of arid and semi-arid zones
A. Definitions
3.1 The most widely accepted definition in China for desertification is given by Zhu Zhenda (cf. bibl. entry 145). Zhu describes desertification as the degradation process in environments similar to that of deserts consisting of blown and undulating sand sheets and mobile dunes which occurs when fragile ecosystems such as those with loose sandy surfaces in arid semi-arid and sub-humid zones are exposed to drought and frequent wind. This process reduces biomass productivity and arable land. The environmental changes caused by desertification produce desert-like landscapes in aboriginal non-desert areas or steppes.
3.2 Wu Zheng (cf. bibl. entry 97) has offered another definition: desertification is the environmental formation or development of a sand desert-a deterioration process. A desert is the last or terminal result of the process and reflects a distinct geographical environment. Desertification can occur not only in "unoriginal sand desert areas" hut also in original sand desert areas when sand desert conditions are intensifying.
3.3 During the period 1977 to 1994 the word "desertification" was translated into the Chinese word "sand desertification" (cf. bibl. entry 145).
B. Theories and hypotheses
3.4 Since desertification is an ecological issue studies must address the entire process in a holistic and systematic manner: historical and modern processes physical degradation and rehabilitation. In desertification-prone areas rehabilitation should focus on rational development and adjustment of resource uses; for severely decertified areas supplementary and artificial energy and other material inputs are required (cf. bibl. entry 145).
3.5 Desertification in geological periods was determined by climatic changes a pure or natural process (cf. bibl. entries 32 33 42). In recent times human activities have intensified natural environmental degradation. The development speed of man-made desertification is ten times greater than natural processes (cf. bibl. entries 31 46 97 98 100 144).
3.6 On the basis of feature analysis pattern divisions dating and petrofeature/petrofacies comparisons of paleoeolian sand strata a striate graphical sequence for the desert areas of northern China was developed and the curliness and evolution of desert formations in the early or late Tertiary and Quaternary periods reconstructed (cf. bibl. entry 28).
3.7 During the Neogene period an aeolian sand land formation process existed in the southeastern Tengger Desert that is similar to today's sand transport and accumulation process (cf. bibl. entry 107). The Qinwangchuan basin in Lanzhou consists of' typical aeolian sand eroded from nearby alluvial sand and Malan loess during the last glacial period (cf. bibl. entry 14). A comparative study of the surface texture of quartz sand in inland deserts to that of coastal dunes shows them both to have developed from an aeolian environment (cf. bibl. entry 96).
3.8 In the Taklimakan Desert the instant fluid and impact threshold velocities are 6.05 metres per second (m/s) for naturally mixed sands at a height of two metres (m) above the surface which is equivalent to one minute averages of 5.2 and 4.3 m/s. For ten minute durations fluid and impact average threshold velocities are 5.7 and 4.7 m/s respectively. When fluid and impact thresholds are adjusted for the height of the anemometer tower (11.4 m) the instant velocities are 7.8 and 6.63 m/s respectively equivalent to 7.4 and 5.97 m/s for ten minute durations (cf. bibl. entry 20).
3.9 The black storm over part of Gansu and Ningxia during the late afternoon and early evening of 5 May 1993 was caused by a mesoscale connective system combined with a squall line in advance of a cold front. It moved eastward to consort with a 700-500 hPa mean flow (cf. bibl. entry 49). Using samples collected in Yulin Yan'an Taiyuan Hohhot and Beijing trajectories for a sandstorm that occurred in April 1990 were calculated. During periods of sandstorm activity total suspended particle (TSP) concentrations are several times higher than normal. Aerosols of sandstorms consist mainly of natural lithosphere elements from the earth's crust; their enrichment factors are sharply reduced during sandstorm activity (cf. bibl. entry 108).
3.10 The Basic Theory of Desertification Assessment considers natural and artificial factors influencing desertification historical and recent processes of desertification development trends and ecological and reversing processes. A complete set of assessment criteria and degrees must be established before making an evaluation (cf. bibl. entry 65).
3.10.1 The site classification and evaluation techniques for desert regions in China are adopted from sample studies e.g. the Mu Us Desert region (cf. bibl. entries 12 148) and the shelterbelt systems (cf. bibl. entry 9). The quantitative site evaluation method using multiple shrub species or tree species for desert sites were first applied to site assessments in the Mu Us Desert region (cf. bibl. entry 12).
3.10.2 The aridisoils of Xinjiang form a vast aridisoil zone in central Asia including Kazakstan Uzbecksitan and Turkinenstan. A systematic classification of aridisols in Xinjiang has been revised to include tour newly-recognized sub-orders (cf. bibl.. entry 61).
3.10.3 The climate of the Taklimakan Desert is a complex of basin and desert climates and extreme dry continental climate. Between 1785 and 1986 tour periods can be defined. The general trend was towards a warmer and drier climate (cf. bibl. entry 66).
3.10.4 In the loess area of North China the agricultural landscape is a mosaic of natural and "human-managed" zones that vary in size shape and use. Farmland and forest zones have increased and show a tendency to change shape from simple to complex. The shapes of grassland zones vary at random (cf. bibl. entry 37).
3.10.5 Research on the heat balance of artificial vegetation and bare sand dunes in the Shapotou area showed that in the artificial vegetation regions of the dunes 70 percent of net radiation disperses as latent flux 15 percent as sensible heat flux and 15 percent is stored in the soil. Sixty percent of net radiation disperses as latent heat flux 15 percent as sensible heat flux and 25 percent is stored in the soil in the bare dunes. Water vapour content is higher compared to other dry areas in the Shapotou region (cf. bibl. entry 68).
3.11 A semi-cement medium-fine sand sediment of brown-red colour known as "Old Red Sediment" is intermittently distributed southwards along the coast of South China from Pingtan Island in Fujian province. It belongs to the coastal aeolian deposit formed in the last glacial period of the late Pleistocene. The "Old Red Sandy Sediment" developed in two stages-the coastal aeolian deposition stage and the weathering (oxidization) stage. Time of laterization is no more than 10 000 years (cf. bibl. entry 95).
3.12 Based on analyses of chronological sedimentological geochemical and mineral factors in the lacustrine area of Xiaoshazhi Lake Hobq Sandy Land in Tibet (the highest sandy land in China) did not form during construction of the lacustrine section but after 600 yr.B.P. (cf. bibl. entry 60).
3.13 Future studies of China's shelf sedimentary environment may include the following: (a) the relationship between formation of the great Qinghai-Xizang ice sheet and the Yangtze River delta deposits; (b) the relationship between loess and deserts (loess is always accompanied by deserts); (c) further development of new evidence on desertification of shelf deposits in the last stage of the late Pleistocene (cf. bibl. entry 131).
3.14 By studying the characteristics of grain composition of heavy minerals and surface micro-structure of quartz it can be concluded that Songhua Jiang Nen Jiang Sandy Land came from alluvial sand of Songhua Jiang and the Nen Jiang Plain through wind erosion transportation and deposition. Sandy Land experienced four fixed periods and four shifting periods after formation in the early Holocene (cf. bibl. entry 57). Similar climatic changes have been found in the Hulun Buir Sandy Land since the Holocene (cf. bibl. entry 88).
3.15 Arid and semi-arid land in West China covers one-third of the national land area. Studies on new forms of sustainable natural resource exploitation and utilization are underway to help realize the region's agricultural and forestry potential (cf. bibl. entry 1).
3.15.1 New land use planning techniques can improve desertification control. Land evaluation programs have been completed for Mu Us Sandy Land and Inner Mongolia using the automated land evaluation system (ALES) and geographical information system (GIS) in accordance with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) framework for land evaluation (cf. bibl. entry 25).
3.15.2 Experiments in hilly loess areas of South Ningxia have shown that rotations between grain and bean (i.e. spring pea-spring wheat-spring wheat-broom corn-millet) can adjust maintain and balance soil moisture within the rotation period; alfalfa can be included in grass-crop rotations (cf. bibl. entry 74).
3.15.3 Belt-shaped inter-cropping of sunflower and soybean in arid plains produces remarkable soil and water conservation and economic benefits. Higher yield objectives could be obtained by popularizing improved techniques for saving spreading and utilizing manure (cf. bibl. entry 69).
3.15.4 Agroecosystem components can be readjusted to optimize yields i.e. revising land use ratios between agriculture forestry animal husbandry extending crop varieties and rotation techniques constructing water conservation projects and increasing material inputs such as fertilizer. Using this approach the average grain yield per ha increased by 2 017 kilograms (kg) on semi-arid blowing sand land in northwest Hebei province (cf. bibl. entry 110).
3.15.5 Based on analysis of energy and material flows agroecosystem functions for decertified areas in central Horqin Sandy Land are characterized as follows: the level and amount of energy and material flow are small; energy and material passages are few. It is a low-input low-output. low-benefit agroecosystem (cf. bibl. entry 30).
3.15.6 Desertification is serious in exploited sandy steppe land near coal mines in North China. A number of measures for land conservation have proven to be feasible however and the desertification process has been effectively controlled (cf. bibl. entry 144).
3.15.7 Oases in the arid inland watershed of the mid-West Bank of the Yellow River are high quality agricultural production systems while benefits of oases at the end of the lower reaches are minimal (cf. bibl. entry 122).
3.15.8 It is difficult to eliminate wind and sand disasters in the oases of Xinjiang. Exploiting rich oil and natural gas resources in desert areas and constructing wind power stations in pastoral areas lessens artificial pressures on desert vegetation and of protects desert vegetation in the peripheral areas of oases (cf. bibl. entry 140).
3.15.9 Artificial factors now have a greater impact on the degradation process in the Taklimakan Desert than natural ones. Human activities must be revised and adjusted to help remake the natural environment rather that destroy it (cf. bibl. entry 46).
3.16 Site classification and evaluation systems for shelterbelts have been established for sandy land in semi-arid steppes. Shelterbelt networks on rangeland help increase the amount of warm moist wind and solar radiation; grass yield and quality were both increased. Sand fixation forests help stabilize flowing sand and reduce sand-bearing amounts in the wind. Plant and animal populations improved in extended forest protection areas (cf. bibl. entry 9).
3.17 