<title>Wildlife and food security in Africa. Wildlife utilization and food security in Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The gathering, compiling and dissemination of information on wildlife utilisation and economics have always been basic activities of the FAO Forestry Department. In the African region such endeavours have been encouraged and supported by the Working Party on Wildlife Management and National Parks of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission at a number of its sessions. As a result, FAO commissioned Professor S.S. Ajayi to compile the document Utilisation of Forest Wildlife in West Africa, which was completed in 1979.
Subsequently Dr E.O.A. Asibey prepared, in 1986, a document entitled Wildlife and Food Security, which furnished the basis for the keynote address he delivered at the Symposium on Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa hosted by Zimbabwe (Harare 1987), with technical support from FAO.
The present study was initially intended to edit the document compiled by Dr Asibey for publication. However, on examination of the document recently, it was realised that most of the data it contained were rather outdated, and that the document drew heavily on data from other parts of the world which were not necessarily applicable to the African situation. It therefore became necessary to prepare a completely new document, focusing mainly on potential contribution of wildlife to food security in Africa.
FAO is grateful to the author, Yaa Ntiamoa-Baidu, for the considerable effort she has put into this exercise which has resulted in a well-documented and informative work. The FAO Forest Resources Division, Rome, Italy and the FAO Regional Office for Africa, Accra, Ghana would welcome comments and suggestions on this document for an eventual updated edition.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
I wish to express my sincere thanks to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for the opportunity provided for me to develop the ideas expressed in this document. My sincere thanks go to El Hadji Sène, Chief, FORC, Forestry Department. FAO Rome, and Mr C. de Greling, FAO, Rome, for the excellent support and encouragement given to me during the preparation of the document, particularly during the two weeks spent in the FAO library in Rome.
El Hadji Sène's contribution m helping to access most pertinent FAO documentation, especially on food security, is also gratefully acknowledged. My special thanks go to my husband and colleague, Dr Chris Gordon, for his immense assistance in the literature search and for making the figures. Lastly, but not the least, acknowledge the support of Dr Emmanuel Asibey, former head of the Ghana Forestry Commission, who introduced me to this area of study and who encouraged me to take on this particular assignment. v
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Definitions and scope of the study
Food security is defined as physical and economic access to food for all people at all times (Hoskins, 1990). Food security is therefore primarily concerned with food availability; and lack of food security ultimately reflects on the nutritional status of individuals. However, although the nutritional well-being of an individual is primarily determined by food availability, food security is influenced by a range of factors other than food availability, including economic and social status, health (physical/spiritual/mental), education and cultural biases (see Box 1). In looking at the role of wildlife in food security in Africa. we are concerned not only with the direct contribution of wildlife as a food resource, but also with the influence of wildlife on access to food through employment and income generation, its influence on physical, spiritual and cultural well-being of people. as well as its positive and negative influences on food production capabilities (see Box 2).
In less-developed countries, particularly in Africa, famine and malnutrition are serious perennial problems that nations have to grapple with. It is estimated that by the end of 1989. approximately 552 million people went to bed hungry each day. The situation does not appear to be improving; the current trend is that of increasing human populations, and inequity in resource distribution and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, which is leading to large scale destruction of the world's productive systems. The predictions are that without concerted efforts to reverse these trends, the world will experience increasing under-nutrition and will witness starvation on a yet unknown scale in times of periodic drought or crop failures. According to a recent analysis by the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations (FAO, 1995), the situation in Africa is becoming increasingly critical as conventional agriculture fails to meet expectations and the capacity of
countries to import food is low due to scarcity of foreign exchange resources. As a consequence, one third of the population in Africa is chronically undernourished, and rural populations in many areas of Africa are already compelled by socio-economic stresses to use all the natural resources available. Thus, species which were not normally exploited for food or were eaten only by children as snacks are now important items in the family diet and/or trade
To achieve food security under the current food situation and nutritional problems in Africa, a holistic and integrated approach to agricultural development is crucial. One path to solving the food security problem is to broaden the spectrum of crops cultivated and animals husbanded on the continent to include non-traditional species such as wildlife, and to develop new and innovative production systems to complement the conventional systems.
Box 1 FOOD SECURlTY: DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT
The concept of food security used in its most general form essentially means a state of affairs where all people at all times: have access to safe and nutritious food so as to maintain a healthy and active:: life. This: is the definition endorsed by a number of authorities (see em, FAO/WHO, 1992; USAID, 1992; Petit and Gnaegy, 1994). FAO) has operationalized the Concept within its mandate: by stressing those aspects of the phenomenon that are related to the availability and stability of food: supplies at the national level,: through both time and space and access to food supplies at the household: and individual, as well as national level. The latter considerations are expressed in the definition of household food security accepted by the Committee on World Food Security as "physical and economic access to adequate food for all household members without undue risk of losing such access."
Although the Consequences of food insecurity flare reflected ultimately on the individuals nutritional status, it must be born in mind that the nutritional status of an individual is: also influenced by processes that determine the allocation of: food within the household, its intake by the individual: end its subsequent physiological utilisation. In other words, health, 'sanitary, educational, economic, social, gender and cultural factors all play a part in influencing what is essentially the nutritional well-being of the individual. Ideally? Therefore? measures of food security should contain information having a bearing on the nutritional status of individuals, while somehow controlling for the effects of other factors that may also influence nutritional status.
Traditionally, information on the: availability of food at some aggregate level and on the structure of its distribution among households has been used for measuring and monitoring the status of food security. Despite problems related to their accuracy, national food balance sheets and nutritional and/for consumption surveys are the most readily available sources for such in formation. In fact, FAO estimates* of the prevalence of under-nutrition in developing countries and of the Aggregate Household Food Security lndex (AHFSI) which are essentially based on them, make direct use of such data (FAO 1992). In these food security measurements, the most important component of these measurements are the annual estimates of per caput food availability in terms of caIories, from both domestic production and net imports (including food aid), obtained from national food balance sheets (FAO 1993).
*The estimates reflect the number of chronically undernourished, who, on average in the course of a year, have food intake below that required to maintain body weight and support light activity. The threshold level is assumed to be equal to 1.54 times the Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR).
Box 2 FACTORS RELATED TO FOOD SECURITY AND THE POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION FROM WILDLIFE RESOURCES.
The need to develop the value of African wildlife was recognised as far back as the 1950s and 1960s. The development of wildlife as a natural resource in Africa featured on the agenda of meetings of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) at Athens in 1958, at Warsaw in 196O, at Arusha in 1961 and at Nairobi in 1963; and a decision to incorporate wildlife conservation in the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation's regular activities was taken in 1959 (Riney 1964, 1970). Unfortunately, despite all these concerns, very little investment and research effort have gone into the development of wildlife as a food resource as compared with inputs into conventional agriculture.
Bushmeat was one of main sources of food and virtually the sole source of animal protein far people in pre-historic times. Civilisation and agricultural development over millennia has drastically reduced people's dependence on bushmeat as a source of food in many parts of the world. In Africa, however, bushmeat continues to contribute substantially to the total animal protein supply. In countries such as Botswana and Zaire, much of the meat consumed is bushmeat and in the majority of West African states, bushmeat is the preferred meat and has a higher retail value than domestic meat in urban markets. In addition to being a highly preferred food item in many areas of Africa, wild animal foods are life-saving reserves in times of food shortage and hunger. The importance of caterpillars, beetles and termites as key sources of food in times of famine is particularly well documented for communities in the Central African sub-region (see e.g. Wilson, 1990; McGregor, 1991; Takeda &
Sato, 1993).
Wildlife also contributes significantly to household incomes in both rural and urban communities through hunting, crafts and trade based on wildlife products; and to national economies through tourism and sale of wild animal products.
The contribution of wildlife to food security and nutritional well-being in Africa is also manifested in the spiritual, cultural and medicinal values placed on wild animals by rural African communities. Many such communities still depend on wild animals and their products, used alone or with herbs, for medication and the treatment of a wide variety of ailments ranging from mental and physical illnesses to ante-natal care, while a wide range of wild animal species have spiritual and cultural associations (Ntiamoa-Baidu, 1987; 1992)
Despite the obvious contribution of wildlife to the socio-economic life in Africa, there are currently no comprehensive and reliable estimates on total supply, trade and consumption of wildlife in any African country. Studies on bushmeat exploitation and consumption are restricted by logistics to specific areas or groups of people in a particular country (e.g. Lahm, 1993 in Gabon; Ichikawa, 1993 and Takeda & Sato, 1993 in Zaire; Dei, 1989; 1991 in Ghana); and available data on bushmeat trade are limited to a few market centres (e. g. Asibey. 1978 and Falconer, 1992 in Ghana, Martin, 1983 in Nigeria). Hunters also often conceal their catch to evade tax and/or wildlife laws. Outputs and services like those related to enhancement of the spiritual well-being, medication and cultural values are even more difficult to quantify e.g. the total number of people dependent on traditional medicine for health care and annual cost of such treatment is not known precisely for any African
country
Definitions and scope of the study
"Wildlife", as used in this work is defined in the narrow sense to mean "wild animals" and includes both invertebrate and vertebrate animals, but excludes fish (which is being covered under a separate exercise commissioned by FAO to look at the role fisheries in food security); reference is made to fish in this work only where it is necessary to illustrate a point. Traditionally, "game" is used to refer to large mammals hunted for food, trophy or sport. In Africa, all species of wild animals, ranging from insects through reptiles, rodents to large mammals, are acceptable as a food resource. Therefore the word "Bushmeat" (which originated from West Africa and refers to meat of wild animals) is used in this work to refer to wild animals hunted/collected for food, while "game" is used in reference to animals hunted for sport or trophy. The work covers sub-Saharan Africa but excludes Madagascar and other islands geographically associated with Africa.
In chapters 2 and 3 of the document. we present data and evidence to illustrate the direct and indirect contribution of wildlife to food security in Africa through wildlife use as a food resource and as a source of income and other human needs (see Box 3?. In chapter 4. the present wildlife production systems are examined; and finally in chapter 5 we argue the case for more investment and long term commitment from African governments and multilateral aid agencies to the development of Africa's wildlife resources to complement conventional agricultural production.
Box 3 THE ROLE OF WILDLIFE IN FOOD SECURITY IN AFRICA
DIRECT CONTRIBUTION
INDIRECT CONTRIBUTION
Food from wild animals Household income
Bushmeat smoked
fresh
salted
biltong Employment Hunters Traders; Helpers
Chop bar workers
Services linked to the tourist
industry
Craft workers
Wildlife officers
Eggs birds, turtles Macro-economy
Tourist Industry
Sport hunting, game viewing
Local (hunting permits/taxes)
Export trade (live animals)
Export trade (skins, hides, trophy)
Insects:,
adults; larvae
roasted
dried
boiled
Honey Influence on Health
Flavourings Wild animals parts/products medicines
Use of wild animals in drug development
Spiritual & mental health
Cultural & religious values
Influence on Agricultural systems
Seed dispersal, pollination, manure
Pests, pathogen reservoirs
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2 - Direct contribution of wildlife to food security
2.1 Wildlife as a food resource
2.2 Species and varieties of wild animals eaten
2.3 Nutritional value meat from wild animals
2.1 Wildlife as a food resource
2.1.1 Bushmeat
2.1.2 Other wild animal products
2.1.1 Bushmeat
Bushmeat is an important source of animal protein in both rural and urban households throughout Africa (see Box 4). The magnitude of exploitation and consumption, however varies from country to country and is determined primarily by its availability, but is also influenced by governmental controls on hunting, socio-economic status and cultural prohibitions. In areas where wildlife still exists people collect, hunt or purchase and eat bushmeat for a variety of reasons. Some people depend on bushmeat for their animal protein supply because they have no other source or cannot afford alternative sources; others eat bushmeat as a matter of preference or as a luxury item/delicacy to be eaten on special occasions. For the former group, all species of wild animals are accepted as comestible. while the latter group will go to great lengths and are willing to pay high prices for their choice species. The reality in Africa, is that for the greater majority of rural people, bushmeat
represents a vital dietary item for a complex combination of reasons dictated by lack of alternate sources. financial limitations, preference and cultural values. For such people, wild animals constitute a valuable food resource which cannot be easily withdrawn or replaced without causing wide-ranging socio-economic imbalances.
Within the West African sub-region where utilization of wild animals and their products is particularly well documented ( see e.g. Asibey, 1965; 1966a; 1974; 1977; 1978; Ajayi, 1973; 1974; 1979; Sale, 1981; Martin, 1983; Jeffery, 1977; Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987) bushmeat is eaten by all classes of people and is preferred to domestic meat. In southern Africa, the Bushmen do not keep any domestic stocks and rely heavily on wild animals for their protein (Maliehe, 1993). Most of the meat eaten in Botswana is bushmeat, although the proportion of wild to domestic meat in people's diets varies within the country. For instance all the meat eaten by the hunting and gathering groups such as the San is bushmeat, whereas the cattle-ranching, tribesmen may get about 80% of their meat from wild animals and the rest from livestock (Butynski & Richter, 1972; Prescott-Allen & Prescott-Allen, 1982). A study of the diet of Kwango-Kwilu villages in Zaire (Kukwikila et al., 1993) showed that the main
source of protein was forest game, freshwater fish and insects especially caterpillars and grasshoppers which were particularly abundant in the period of food shortage (December-January). Among the Zairian Ntomba people. the first meat introduced to a baby is fat and liver from hoofed game species such as the blue duiker Cephalophus monticola and bushpig Potamochoerus porcus, which were introduced when the baby is between 4-9 months, with caterpillars being introduced from 12 to 14 months of age (Pagezy, 1993). In Tanzania, people living around forests and grasslands are provided with food security in the form of cheap bushmeat (Chihongo, 1992) and in all regions of Malawi, wild animal food such as caterpillars, honey, termites and meat of large mammals are exploited for food (Nyirenda, 1993)
A considerable amount of work was done in the 1970s and early 1980s to document bushmeat consumption. particularly in West Africa. The data on consumption however, were mostly based on estimates of the number of people who eat bushmeat or on estimates of bushmeat contribution to national protein supply. Some of the earlier studies in the region gave annual wild animal consumption figures ranging from 20% of the animal protein among rural people living in Nigeria's rain forest areas as compared with 13% in the whole country, to 75 % in rural Ghana compared to 9.2% nationally, 70-80 % in Cameroon's forest zone compared with 2.8 % for the entire country and as much as 80-90 % in Liberia (Ajayi, 1979; Asibey, 1977). The basis for these estimates were often questionable and some authors have attributed the high figures to "over-enthusiastic advocacy of the value of bushmeat".
Some more recent data are available on bushmeat consumption in individual households and communities in a few areas within Africa e.g., a survey conducted in 1987 in Bukavu, Zaire indicated that 72% of the population in the town consumed bushmeat regularly and the yearly bushmeat consumption of the town was estimated at 400 tons (Keita, 1993). Bushmeat consumption in Côte d'Ivoire was estimated at 83,000 tons in 1990, valued at US$117,000,000 (Feer, 1993) and in Liberia, it is estimated that three quarters of the country's meat production comes from bushmeat, with subsistence hunting yielding as much as 105,000 tons of meat annually (Anstey, 1991). Estimates of meat consumption in Cameroon in 1981 was 33.1 kg per person per year or 9 gm per day, of which bushmeat accounted for 8.8 %, with 34.1 % coming from fish and the rest from domestic sources (beef, 27.5%; pigs, 9%; sheep and goats, 6.2 %; dairy products, eggs and imported animal products, 10.4) The proportion supplied
by bushmeat represented 28,500 tons of bushmeat per year (Gartlan, 1987). Among village communities, Infield (1988) estimated bushmeat consumption of 100 kg per person per year in villages around the Korup National Park (Cameroon) as compared to a consumption of 250 gm per adult per week in a Ghanaian village, Akyem Ayirebi (Del, 1991). Consumption levels ranging from 67333 g (modal class 100- 150 g) per person per meal were recorded at chop bars in the city of Accra (Tutu et al.., 1993). The minimum quantity eaten per person at one sitting (i.e. 67 g) was 175% of the per caput daily protein intake in Ghana (FAO, 1986) and 120% of the daily nutritional requirement.
Studies on volume of bushmeat production in Africa tend to be restricted to small areas and the only indication of volume of bushmeat produced by countries are the estimates published by the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). These estimates based on the limited records reported to Wildlife Departments or on food consumption surveys such as those reported by FAO. The limitation of such data is that they neither capture the actual volume of bushmeat exploited nor cover the entire range of species taken. Species such as rodents, snails and insects, which are often consumed by the hunter and his family, hardly appear in the markets and therefore do not appear in the statistics. The situation is amply described by Prescott-Allen & Prescott-Allen (1982) in the statement "when a hunter sells his catch to a neighbour or pops it into the family pot, he rarely tells a statistician."
A number of factors contribute to the scarcity and incompleteness of data on wildlife consumption. These include:
o the widely dispersed nature of bushmeat supply sources in Africa and the fact that supply sources are mostly in remote areas far from the city centres where the government statistician or wildlife officer is based;
o the fact that a large proportion of the bushmeat taken is either used to feed the family or is sold locally;
o illiteracy, most hunters are illiterate and do not keep records of their catch;
o the limited infrastructure: facilities for recording bushmeat off-take and sales are often undeveloped or at best inadequate.
Bushmeat production estimates published by FAO for selected countries are reproduced in Table 2.1, which also gives the contribution of bushmeat to daily protein intake. These estimates are based on very limited data and have value for comparisons between different countries rather than as absolute production figures. In the same vein, the figures for bushmeat consumption do not reflect the real situation that pertains in many rural African communities. The need for more studies in this area cannot be over-emphasised.
Table 2.1 Bushmeat production and consumption in selected African countries
(Source. FAO, 1995)
Country
Estimated Bushmeat production
Protein consumption (g/day)
Total Protein
Animal Protein
Bushmeat
Angola 
Botswana 
Cameroon 
Congo 
Ethiopia 
Gambia 
Gabon 
Ghana 
Guinea 
Côte d'Ivoire
Kenya 
Liberia 
Malawi 
Namibia 
Nigeria 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
South Africa 
Sudan 
Tanzania 
Togo 
Uganda 
Zaire 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
Box 4. WILDLIFE AS FOOD RESOURCE IN AFRICA
Country West Africa
Use of Bushmeat as a food resource
Benin Bushmeat is commonly sold in markets and is preferred to meat of domestic animals. The grasscutter (cane rat), Thryonomys swinderianus is the favourite species for most people (Baptist & Mensah; 1986). Bushmeat production was estimated at 20,000 tonnes valued at 40 million F CFA in 1989.
Cameroon Bushmeat is an important part of the diet of many urban and rural Cameroonians providing an estimated 70-80 % of animal protein consumed in the southern areas (Ajayi, 1979; Belisle, 1987). Species consumed include snails, caterpillars and other insects. 8.8% of the estimated 33.1 kg of meat consumed annually by each Cameroonian was contributed by bushmeat (Gartlan; 1987).
Ghana All species of wild animal are accepted as food resource. Asibey (1977) estimated that 70 % of Ghanaians ate bushmeat and wild animals constituted the main source of animal protein for rural communities. Recent surveys of meat consumption indicated that bushmeat is still popular, over 90 % of people interviewed would eat bushmeat if it were available (Falconer, 1992, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1992, Tutu et al.., 1996). A total of 3,682 bushmeat carcasses weighing 13,884.6 kg were recorded in three bushmeat market centres in Kumasi over a 27 day period in 1991 (Falconer, 1992)
Liberia Popular species exploited as bushmeat were antelopes and various species of monkeys (Jeffrey, 1977; Verschuren, 1983). Estimates in the 1970s indicated that bushmeat contributed between 60-90 % of the animal protein consumed (Ajayi, 1979; Sale, 1981). A more recent survey estimates that three quarters of the country's meat production comes from wild animals. Subsistence hunting yielded 105 tonnes of meat valued at US$42 m (Anstey, 1991)
Nigeria Wildlife is typically viewed as bushmeat. Bushmeat is popular with both urban and city dwellers and provides 20 % of animal protein in southern Nigeria. The most commonly consumed species are small mammals including squirrels, grasscutters, giant rats, brush-tailed porcupines and bats (Ajayi, 1979; Martin, 1983; 1984; Anadu, 1987). An estimated total of 1,320,000 metric tonnes of bushmeat was hunted by farmers in three ecological zones, within a six month period (Adeola & Decker 1987)
Senegal Consumption of bushmeat was estimated at 373,600 metric tonnes per year (Cremoux, 1963). A more recent survey in the Sine region gave consumption among the Sereer of 12.9 g per person per day as compared with 24 g domestic meat/person/day. Most common species consumed were birds and the greatest quantities were consumed by children (Vincke et al., 1987)
Sierra Leone Bushmeat was once a staple food in many Sierra Leonean's diets. Despite the increasing scarcity of wildlife throughout the country, bushmeat is available in most rural and urban markets and 55% of all households regularly consume bushmeat (Smith' 1979; Teleki et al: 1981)
Eastern and Central Africa :
CAR For the Aka Pygmies, bunting is an essential way of life (Motte-Florac, Bushmeat is not only the main source of protein, but also provides income and an item to barter for carbohydrate food items.
Gabon Game is sold or consumed depending on the size, personal and public appeal. Small pangolins and rodents are eaten locally white porcupines, duikers, lizards and crocodiles are more popular on the bushmeat markets (Lahm, 1993
Tanzania Game meat is a source of cheaper protein for rural as well as urban populations and is of vital importance particularly for people living around parks and reserves (Chihongo, 1992)
Zaire 72% of the population in the town of Bukavu consume bushmeat regularly and the annual bushmeat consumption in the town was estimated at 400 tons in 1987 (Keita, 1993). Hunter-gatherers living in the forest areas obtain all their animal protein Ironic the forest and up to 200 animal species ranging from large and medium sized animal, to birds, reptile and insects are exploited for food (lchikawa, 1993)
Southern Africa 
Botswana The majority of animal protein comes from wild animals of every kind and size including not only what is traditionally considered as game but meat of all mammal including predators, birds and their eggs, bats and insects virtually every animal is edible (Richter, 1970; Butynski & Richter, 1972). Over 50 species of wild animals are hunted for food, providing 90.7 kg per annum per person in some areas, equivalent to 40% of the diet. (Child, 1970)
Malawi In all regions of Malawi wild animal food such as caterpillars, honey' termites and game meat are exploited for food (Nyirenda, 1993)
South Africa For rural communities living in the vicinity of forests, natural woodlands and forest,. fallow areas, wild animals often play a significant role in local diets; in some case, they provide tile single largest source of animal protein. Hunting of large game animals is legally forbidden but various species including genets, field mice, rock hyrax, porcupines, bush pigs and hares are hunted for food. Monkeys are particularly relished by the Zulus. Reptiles and amphibians suck as lizards, leguaans (Varanus sp.) tortoises, a number of snakes including venomous ones like the puff adder (Bitis sp.) frogs and toads are regarded as delicacies (Maliehe, 1993)
Zimbabwe In addition to large mammals which are hunted Illegally, rodents and birds are used extensively in all small scale farming areas. Honey and insects are collected and eaten by almost all households important edible insects include termites, caterpillars and some grasshoppers (McGregor, 1991; Wilson, 1990)
An attempt to estimate bushmeat production over a wider area was made by Adeola & Decker (1987) who conducted a survey on utilisation of bushmeat by farmers and hunters in three ecological regions (rain forest, deciduous forest and Savannah) in Nigeria. Bushbucks and duikers were found to be the main large mammal species harvested in all three ecological regions and provided 6.1 animals per month in the Savannah zone as compared with 4.9 in the deciduous forest and 3.6 in the rain forest. Small mammals formed the bulk of animals exploited. Of the small mammals, three rodents, the grasscutter (cane rat), giant rat and squirrels were the most abundant providing 41.7 animals per month in the savannah, 27.5 in the deciduous forest and 26.2 in the rain forest (Table 2.2). The study estimated that a total of 1.263,000 metric tons of bushmeat, comprising small and large mammals but excluding elephants, were harvested by the farmers per month during the rainy season. This was made
up of 696,000 metric tons from the savannah region, 183,000 from the deciduous forest region and 385,000 tons from the rain forest region.
Despite the lack of precise estimates on bushmeat consumption and total production, the fact remains that bushmeat is one of the most valued and preferred animal protein items in both rural and urban diets in many parts of Africa. Recent studies in Ghana (e.g., Falconer, 1990; 1992, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1992) showed that over 90% of the people interviewed in both urban and rural areas would eat bushmeat if it were available and for approximately 40-70% of the people, bushmeat was the preferred meat (Fig.1). The popularity of bushmeat was confirmed by the results of a survey of the meat preference of customers visiting chop bars (traditional restaurants) in Accra, where they had a choice of various types of meat and fish dishes (Tutu et. al., 1993); 65% of the 374 visitors to the chop bars selected bushmeat dishes
Unlike areas in Central Africa where bushmeat is still relatively abundant and accounts for the greater proportion of household animal protein consumption, the actual contribution to total protein intake in West Africa is presently very low. Bushmeat was not a regular part of the diet of over 70 % of the people interviewed in the Ghana study by Tutu et al., (1993) and bushmeat contributed less than 5% of the total animal protein intake in both rural and urban communities. Fish accounted for the greatest proportion of animal protein intake (Fig. 2). The current low contribution of bushmeat to the protein intake in the region was attributed to scarcity, relatively high prices and the unavailability in small affordable pieces, particularly in the rural areas' since most of the hunters catch were sold as whole animals to be retailed in city markets. Thus, whereas in the past bushmeat was the most common source of animal protein, it is currently a luxury item, eaten only
occasionally in most homes, and for those who relish bushmeat but cannot afford the cost of purchasing it for use in their homes, the chop bars remain their main source of bushmeat dishes. The scarcity of bushmeat has resulted in a situation where any wild animal is acceptable as comestible and people have resorted to exploiting and marketing whatever they can find including a variety of small animals which in the past were not eaten at all or were only eaten by children.
Fig. 1 Meat preferences of people interviewed in three localities in Ghana, Doryum (a village); Mankesim (small urban); Accra (large urban)
<section>5</section>
2.1.2 Other wild animal products
In addition to the contribution of bushmeat to food security through direct consumption, wild animals and their products are used as condiments to make meals more palatable, thereby improving the capacity of people to eat sufficient quantities of staple foods which are often bland and monotonous. Honey, produced by honey-bees, is regarded as valuable product worldwide. It may be used as a source of food, as a sweet