<title>FAO technical assistance and the Uruguay Round Agreements</title>
<section>1</section>
w7638e02.gif (8923 bytes)
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Rome, 1998
Editing, design, graphics and desktop publishing:
Publishing Management Group,
FAO Information Division
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
M-70
ISBN 92-5-104106-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
© FAO 1998
PREFACE
The Uruguay Round Agreements represent a milestone in the multilateral trading system: for the first time, agriculture has been incorporated under operationally effective rules and disciplines. The Uruguay Round commitments in agriculture, forestry and fisheries cover improved market access and disciplines on domestic support and export subsidies. The commitments regarding market access are central to the broader package of interrelated liberalizing commitments aimed at significantly improving conditions of competition and opportunities for trade in agricultural products. The Uruguay Round Agreements also provide for limiting the scope for circumvention of the new commitments.
The Uruguay Round Agreements present opportunities for all countries to benefit from greater access to world markets by curbing past production- and trade-distorting practices and by facilitating more competitive and fairer trade. Signatories to the Agreements also assume the obligation of complying with their provisions. In order to fulfil this obligation and take advantage of the new opportunities, it is essential that countries develop their own capacity to examine, assess and evaluate their national circumstances in the context of the Agreements.
There are considerable differences in countries' ability to assess their specific circumstances, meet their Uruguay Round commitments in agriculture, forestry and fisheries and subsequently benefit from the results, and many will require technical assistance before they can do so. Because of its specialist expertise and unique position in international agricultural, forestry and fisheries affairs, FAO is well placed to provide that assistance.
The principal purpose of this booklet is to provide information on the technical assistance that FAO is able to provide member countries in building their capacity to deal with trade-related issues. This includes assistance not only in areas related to implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements but also in preparing developing countries to participate as equal partners in multilateral trade negotiations, on which discussions should begin in 1999.
Whereas the first edition of the booklet addressed agricultural trade in the narrow sense, this second edition also includes specific sections on FAO's trade-related technical assistance in forestry and fisheries.
<section>2</section>
The Uruguay Round Agreements and FAO
WHAT THE URUGUAY ROUND ACHIEVED FOR AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES
The Uruguay Round has been described as a turning point in the evolution of agricultural policy. For the first time ever, a large majority of countries agreed a set of principles and disciplines that will help to harmonize both national and international agricultural policies in the future.
The Uruguay Round achievement is contained in a series of agreements and ministerial decisions and declarations annexed to the Marrakesh Agreement, which established the World Trade Organization (WTO). The annexes
include the:
* Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods;
* General Agreement on Trade in Services;
* Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights;
* Plurilateral Trade Agreements; and
* Ministerial Decisions and Declarations.
The Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods include 13 individual agreements, three of which have particular relevance to FAO's technical activities.
They are the:
* Agreement on Agriculture;
* Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures; and
* Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
FAO's technical activities also have relevance to the:
* Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights; and
* Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries.
Agreement on Agriculture (AoA)
The Agreement on Agriculture is of great significance, as it has brought agriculture into the mainstream of international trade rules.
The three main provisions of the Agreement are aimed at:
* improving market access;
* reducing domestic support; and
* reducing export subsidies.
In all three areas the main thrust is to remove past production- and trade-distorting practices and to facilitate a fair and market-oriented agricultural trading system.
A number of agricultural commodities (e.g. rubber) as well as fish and fish products and forest products were not covered by this Agreement.
Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform
Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries
Ministers of countries taking part in the Uruguay Round recognized that the overall results would generate increasing opportunities for trade expansion and economic growth for all participants. They also recognized that, during the reform programme leading to the liberalization of agriculture, the least-developed and net food-importing developing countries might experience negative effects with respect to the availability of adequate supplies of basic foodstuffs from external suppliers on reasonable terms.
The Ministers agreed to establish appropriate mechanisms to ensure that the implementation of the Uruguay Round in the area of trade in agriculture would not prevent food aid being available at a level sufficient to assist in meeting the food needs of developing countries, especially the least-developed and net food-importing developing countries. To this end, the Ministers agreed to review the level of food aid under the Food Aid Convention; to ensure that an increasing proportion of basic foodstuffs is given to affected countries in fully grant form and/or on appropriate concessional terms; and, in the context of their countries' aid programmes, to give full consideration to requests for the provision of technical and financial assistance to least-developed and net food-importing developing countries so as to improve their agricultural productivity and infrastructure. This last point is of particular relevance to FAO's technical assistance programme.
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS)
The SPS Agreement concerns the application of measures associated with the protection of human, animal and plant health in such a way that they are not a disguised restriction on international trade. This Agreement has particular relevance to plant and animal quarantine measures and to measures taken to ensure food safety.
Trade in agricultural, forest and fishery products
Trade flow
World exports (US$ billion)
Exports by developing countries (US$ billion)
Developing countries' share of world exports (%)
Source: FAO.
It recognizes that governments have the right to adopt sanitary and phytosanitary measures but that they should be applied only to the extent necessary to achieve the required level of protection. Governments should not discriminate between members without sufficient scientific evidence, or arbitrarily when identical or similar conditions prevail.
The SPS Agreement encourages countries to adopt international standards.
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT)
The TBT Agreement seeks to ensure that technical regulations and standards, including packaging, marking and labelling requirements, and procedures for assessing conformity with technical regulations and standards do not create unnecessary obstacles to international trade.
It recognizes that a country has the right to take necessary measures, at a level it considers appropriate, to ensure the quality of its exports; the protection of human health or safety, animal or plant life or health and the environment; and to prevent deceptive practices. A country may also take the necessary steps to ensure that those levels of protection are met, as long as the measures, or action taken to implement them, do not create unnecessary obstacles to international trade.
The provisions of the TBT Agreement do not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures subject to the SPS Agreement, which includes measures to protect human, animal and plant life or health from pests and diseases and food-borne health hazards.
The TBT Agreement encourages countries to adopt international standards.
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
The TRIPS Agreement recognizes that widely varying national standards in the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights and the lack of a multilateral framework of principles, rules and disciplines dealing with international trade in counterfeit goods have been a growing source of tension in international trade relations.
Accordingly, it encompasses relevant international intellectual property agreements, provides for adequate intellectual property rights and includes effective enforcement measures to protect those rights.
w7638e05.jpg (44911 bytes)
<section>3</section>
The FAO-WTO relationship
There are important synergies between FAO and WTO in the area of trade. In many specialized fields FAO has expertise that can be drawn on by WTO and its members, most of whom are also members of FAO. WTO's competence in trade-related matters is a valuable resource for assisting FAO in strengthening its programmes.
One of FAO's key strengths is in its continual monitoring of the global food supply and demand situation. The Organization's Global Information and Early Warning System (GIEWS) is a unique source of current information that is useful for implementing the Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries.
FAO's Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal administers the Organization's Principles of Surplus Disposal, which are included in the disciplines in the Agreement on Agriculture. It is also in a position to provide statistics and to assess the food security situation in connection with provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture relating to export prohibitions and restrictions. All of these subjects are of direct concern to the WTO Committee on Agriculture.
FAO and WTO have a close and expanding working relationship in matters related to sanitary, phytosanitary and food standards. The Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) and the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), for which FAO provides the secretariats, are specifically required to collaborate with the SPS and TBT Committees.
FAO plays an important role in addressing environmental matters that have significant implications for trade in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors.
WTO bodies relevant to FAO activities
· General Council
· Council for Trade in Goods
· Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
· Committee on Agriculture
· Committee on Trade and Development
· Committee on Trade and Environment
· Committee on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
· Committee on Market Access
· Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
· Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
FAO has observer status in these bodies and actively collaborates with WTO.
FAO expertise relevant to WTO
· Global up-to-date data and information on agriculture, forestry and fisheries
· Food standards (Codex), quality and safety
· Food and agricultural policy analysis
· Commodity market analysis and outlook
· Food security assessments
· Safe use of pesticides and fertilizers
· Conservation of plant and animal genetic resources
· Plant and animal protection
· Sustainable fishery and forestry management
· Land and water conservation
· Environmental impact assessment
· Legal and regulatory matters
FAO is equipped to provide technical assistance to member countries to strengthen their institutional capacity for meeting obligations under the Uruguay Round Agreements and for maximizing the resultant benefits.
Within the UN, FAO is the principal source of scientific expertise on a range of environmental matters, including biodiversity which is a subject of paramount concern to the WTO Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and is reflected
in the international Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) which entered into force in December 1993. FAO's intergovernmental Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture is a key body involved in setting priorities and guiding programme activities related to biodiversity and other areas concerning plant and animal
genetic resources.
Almost all current multilateral environmental agreements with trade provisions involve plants and animals (either domesticated or from wild sources). FAO is the repository for a number of those agreements and is
also responsible for related accords
such as the:
* International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources;
* International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides;
* Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries; and
* Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice.
FAO is also one of the international organizations from which countries request information regarding the extent to which species of flora and fauna are threatened, particularly timber and farm animal species. Safe food processing and production methods as well as ecolabelling are other topics in which FAO has a comparative advantage.
w7638e06.jpg (53128 bytes)
<section>4</section>
The Uruguay Round and FAO technical assistance
FAO is experienced in providing its members with technical assistance concerning a wide range of WTO-related issues. The Organization's assistance in trade issues dates back to well before the Marrakesh Agreement, and requests have intensified since the Agreement was signed in 1994.
In the area of agricultural and food policy, developing countries are vitally concerned with the implications of the Agreement on Agriculture. Increasingly, FAO is being asked for assistance in capacity building for agricultural policy analysis concerning trade issues. More detailed advice is sought about specific policies, analytical methodologies and ways in which policies might be implemented so that countries can take advantage of trade opportunities and make necessary adjustments to domestic food and agricultural policies. Some FAO members that are not members of WTO have been assisted in policy preparation before formal entry negotiations have taken place.
The obligations of WTO members associated with the SPS and TBT Agreements have resulted in a significant upturn in requests for FAO technical assistance. The adoption by the SPS of Codex Alimentarius standards, guidelines and recommendations as benchmark standards for the international food trade has created a burgeoning interest among developed and developing countries in Codex activities and associated food control matters.
There is a particular interest in strengthening national food control systems, reformulating national food regulations to bring them into conformity with international standards and establishing import/export food inspection and certification programmes to ensure compliance with SPS and TBT requirements.
Training is being sought in relation to SPS and TBT requirements associated with food safety issues, including risk analysis, inspection techniques, analytical methods and food laboratory management. There has also been a growing demand for the capacity of national veterinary services to be strengthened in the field of quantitative import risk analysis techniques. This is a direct response to the SPS Agreement, which stipulates that protective measures must be based on the assessed risk to human, animal or plant health.
To facilitate trade in the context of the SPS, member countries are also seeking FAO's assistance in strengthening their meat import and export inspection programmes. Similarly, in the area of plant protection, assistance has been sought in strengthening and updating the national quarantine programmes of member countries to enable them to meet the demands of plant quarantine developments relating to international trade.
In the area of forestry, FAO provides assistance and support related to technical forestry issues of relevance to the obligations of WTO members under a number of Uruguay Round agreements. Work includes strengthening trade and identifying the consequences of changes in trade restrictions. Long-term outlook studies are conducted to guide policy development, and assessments are made of the implications of trade policies for forest management and vice versa. FAO advises governments on appropriate forest policies both through normative and field project assistance. In particular, by supporting national forest programme processes, it assists many countries in developing appropriate and effective sectoral policies.
World Food Summit
Rome, November 1996
The Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action provided an additional impetus to FAO's technical assistance programme on Uruguay Round-related matters. Objective 4.3 of the Plan of Action commits FAO and other organizations to continue assisting developing countries in preparing for future multilateral trade negotiations so that they become "well informed" and equal partners in the [negotiation] process, thus enabling them to benefit fully from their participation and not be disadvantaged.
Further, FAO assists in capacity building in a wide range of areas that have linkages with forestry trade and, therefore, with the Uruguay Round Agreements. It has helped in the development of country staff through its training courses on production, consumption and trade statistics collection and usage, aimed at improving countries' own capabilities in these areas, and it has provided member countries with legal advice in the drafting of forest policies, covering aspects of significance to trade development.
In fisheries, FAO's assistance activities for developing countries have intensified considerably over the last five to seven years, mainly because of the increasing importance of international trade in fishery products and as a result of the strict new sanitary rules imposed by major importing countries. The form of assistance that is most necessary and most often requested is the training of government and industry personnel in inspection and quality assurance of fish and fishery products, including those from aquaculture. The strengthening of national fish inspection systems is also an area where assistance is being sought.
With regard to TRIPS, FAO's technical expertise relates to intellectual property rights in respect of plant varieties, animal breeds, related technology and germplasm. The TRIPS Agreement requires all WTO members to provide plant varietal protection (PVP) either by patents, a sui generis system or a mixture of both. International concern about this matter is increasing rapidly, and many developing countries are seeking technical assistance from FAO with regard to the establishment and implementation of a PVP mechanism. The Organization is also providing technical assistance relating to plant breeding, including forest trees, seed and propagating material production, the safe movement of germplasm, associated legislation, regulations and systems.
FAO's work in the fields of legal advice and legislative drafting undertaken in collaboration with national authorities includes the review and analysis of current statutory instruments governing intellectual property protection and seed production, and the elaboration of draft acts and regulations as well as amendments to existing legislation, including laws governing food control and trade in agricultural, forest and fishery products.
There has been an increase in the number of developing country members of WTO, and several more are in the process of joining. In view of the resultant openness of developing countries' economies, which makes them more dependent on trade developments, there is a growing need to understand the forces that influence such developments. However, most developing countries, especially the least-developed, have neither the capacity nor the resources to face the challenges or take advantage of the opportunities flowing from the Uruguay Round while also preparing themselves for the next round of multilateral trade negotiations. Therefore, arrangements will be necessary to ensure that they receive technical assistance to enable them to prepare adequately for the negotiations ahead.
w7638e07.jpg (35025 bytes)
<section>5</section>
Agreement on Agriculture
A number of FAO divisions, including the Policy Assistance Division, the Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division and the Commodities and Trade Division, have extensive experience in advising countries on agricultural sector and commodity policy. In general their activities include assisting with integrating trade policy into an overall agricultural policy; assessing the implications of the provisions of the bilateral and multilateral policy reforms for world prices, production, consumption and trade in agricultural commodities; and identifying options available for modifying developing countries' trade and domestic policies so that they are compatible with multilateral commitments under the Agreement on Agriculture.
FAO technical assistance in relation to the Agreement on Agriculture falls into two main categories. The first, commodity market assessments and analyses of special issues, especially those of interest to developing countries, includes:
* assessment of the impact of the Agreement on Agriculture on world prices, production, consumption and trade of major food commodities and commodities of export interest to developing countries;
* studies on the impact of world price changes on the food import bills of the least-developed and net food-importing developing countries;
* the identification of export opportunities that may arise for developing country exports as a result of changes in the tariff structure of major developed country markets, including the examination of changes in tariff escalation and prospects for the diversification of agricultural exports; and
* the analysis of issues relating to changes in market fundamentals, namely the composition, ownership
and geographical distribution of commodity stocks, especially stocks of basic foodstuffs and the related issue of changes in world price instability and alternative options available to countries for dealing with price uncertainty.
Food and agricultural policy options for developing countries
Production, consumption and stabilization policies are the three main options available to developing countries for supporting domestic food and agricultural production in a way that is consistent with their commitments under the Agreement on Agriculture.
For production policies, there are two broad instruments available to a country wishing to promote domestic production, namely maintaining tariff levels within the bounds of its commitment under WTO's border measures and providing price and non-price support to farmers within the bounds of its commitment to WTO's domestic support measures. In combination, these instruments allow a considerable degree of flexibility in a country's support to domestic production.
In the case of consumption, the Agreement on Agriculture is relatively permissive regarding policies that are aimed at supporting consumers, especially for developing countries. It allows them to provide foodstuffs at subsidized prices with the objective of meeting food requirements of urban and rural poor in developing countries on a regular basis and at reasonable prices. In some circumstances there is a need to reconcile producer and consumer options.
Regarding stabilization policies, developing countries are concerned about the effect that a more open trade regime might have on domestic price stability, especially that of sensitive food commodities.
The Agreement on Agriculture and general WTO provisions contain a number of options that a developing country may use to mitigate against the full brunt of market instability originating outside its borders. These options include the special safeguards clause of the Agreement on Agriculture, providing for the imposition of additional tariffs in certain circumstances, the variation of tariffs within set bounds, general WTO safeguards, the use of food security stocks, the introduction of export prohibitions under certain circumstances and the use of risk management instruments.
FAO provides advice and guidance to developing countries on the adoption and implementation of the foregoing options in the context of their national food and agricultural policies.
The second category, assessments of the Agreement's implications for trade and domestic food and agricultural policies (on occasions undertaken in collaboration with the World Bank, WTO and regional organizations), includes:
* assessing the implications of Uruguay Round Agreements for export commodities and domestic agricultural markets;
* reviewing current food and agricultural policies in developing countries and the changes that may be required to bring such policies in line with the Agreement on Agriculture;
* examining the implications for regions of a changing external trade environment, including questions of regional integration and preferential schemes;
* assisting in the incorporation of trade policy concerns in the formulation of domestic agricultural policy;
* strengthening national capabilities in policy analysis through training programmes; and
* training farmers' organizations in WTO-related matters.
FAO technical assistance in food and agricultural policy is being delivered at global, regional and country levels.
A manual entitled The implications of the Uruguay Agreement on Agriculture for developing countries has been prepared for training purposes. Workshops on a variety of Uruguay Round-related subjects, some of a policy nature and some product-specific, have been conducted for all regions (Asia and the Pacific, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and the Near East and North Africa). Training courses have been and are being conducted and round-table discussions have been organized in several countries, including Pakistan, the Sudan, Ethiopia, Zambia and the Syrian Arab Republic.
Forestry and the Agreement on Agriculture
Most forest products were addressed as industrial products in the Uruguay Round negotiations and are therefore not covered by the Agreement on Agriculture. However, in addition to wood products, forestry is concerned with non-wood forest products such as rattan, mushrooms, spices, colourings, gums, sago, fruits, nuts and medicinal plants, many of which enter trade under categories covered by agricultural and food products. Certain forest products, therefore, relate directly to the Agreement on Agriculture and its provisions.
Much of the assistance being provided to least-developed and net food-importing developing countries was also being given before the Marrakesh Agreement.
While FAO has done much to increase its member countries' awareness of the new policy framework introduced by the Uruguay Round, more assistance needs to be given, and indeed is being sought. It is apparent that, in the future, developing countries in particular will require assistance in building and strengthening their capacities to analyse policy options, monitor developments in the world trading system, integrate trade issues in domestic policy formulation and assess the relationship between the multilateral trading system and their commitments to regional trading arrangements.
Fisheries and the Agreement on Agriculture
Fish and fishery products had initially been discussed in the group of natural resource-based products and were later addressed as agricultural products. However, since it was not possible to reach a compromise between certain divergent negotiating positions, to avoid jeopardizing the conclusion of the Agreement on Agriculture, fish and fishery products were excluded from this Agreement. Nevertheless, FAO provides technical assistance and information on international trade in fish and fishery products, including regular assessments of the market situation and outlook for main fishery commodities as well as analyses of pertinent issues. The implications and impact of the Uruguay Round Agreements that are relevant for fisheries have been the subject of several regional seminars and workshops organized by FAO and they are duly taken into account in the Organization's country policy assistance in the fisheries sector.
w7638e08.jpg (40765 bytes)
<section>6</section>
The Agreements on the Application of
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and
Technical Barriers to Trade
The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) applies to all measures that countries put in place to protect their human, animal and plant life or health, and which may directly or indirectly affect international trade. Essentially, SPS measures are food safety and animal and plant quarantine measures.
The TBT Agreement was developed principally for the purpose of ensuring that technical standards, and procedures for assessing the conformity of those technical standards as well as related regulations, do not create unnecessary obstacles to international trade.
A number of FAO divisions, including the Animal Production and Health Division, the Food and Nutrition Division, the Plant Production and Protection Division and the Research, Extension and Training Division, have extensive experience in assisting member countries with all aspects of the technical and scientific areas of animal health and production, food standards and plant protection embraced by the SPS and TBT Agreements. In general, their activities include providing assistance in:
* the strengthening of national veterinary services to provide them with the capacity and skills to adopt and apply risk analysis techniques effectively;
* the development of national food legislation, taking into account the SPS and TBT Agreements;
* the establishment and strengthening of national food control systems for both imports and exports;
* the formulation of food standards and related measures; and
* the updating of national plant and animal quarantine programmes, taking into consideration the SPS and TBT Agreements and international trade requirements.
CODEX ALIMENTARIUS AND INTERNATIONAL PLANT PROTECTION CONVENTION STANDARDS IN
THE APPLICATION OF THE SPS AND TBT AGREEMENTS
It is noteworthy that the SPS and TBT Agreements both acknowledge the importance of harmonizing standards internationally so as to minimize or eliminate the risk of sanitary, phytosanitary and other technical standards becoming barriers to trade.
Article 3.1 of the SPS Agreement states:
"To harmonize sanitary and phytosanitary measures on as wide a basis as possible, Members shall base their sanitary and phytosanitary measures on international standards, guidelines or recommendations, where they exist, except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, ..."
In its pursuance of harmonization, the SPS Agreement has chosen the international standards, guidelines and recommendations of three organizations as the preferred measures for adoption by WTO members. The secretariats of two of those organizations, the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission and the International Plant Protection Convention, are located within FAO. The former is in the Food and