<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: In-Depth Country Study - India. In-depth Country Report - India</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Senior Forestry Officer
Regional Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Forestry Department
Maliwan Mansion
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Phra Atit Road
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Bangkok 10200
Rome, 00100, ITALY
THAILAND
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org>
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Writing this document gave an opportunity to the author to scan through several reference books, reports and papers and in the process enriched his knowledge. Therefore, this assignment by FAO and Ministry of Environment and Forests is gratefully acknowledged.
The author has the pleasure to acknowledge his indebtedness and gratitude to Sri. C.S. Vedant IFS, Sri. Kishore Rao IFS, Dr. P. Ahmed IFS, all Dy.I.G. Forests and Sri. R.K. Srivastava IFS, A.I.G. Forests for their willing help and assistance in formulating and drafting various sections of the text without which it would not have been possible to prepare this paper in a very short period in spite of their very busy schedule in the ministry. This is in view of the fact that the foresters in the Ministry of Environment and Forests are overworked much beyond their share which is hardly recognised. Thanks are also due to many others who have contributed their innovative and generous ideas for formulating the text.
The neat and exclusive computers job performed by Manoj Kumar and Geeta Nagvanshi at Bobby Computers, Katwaria Sarai, New Delhi, is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due to my wife and son for their unstinted support given during this work and also helping in writing.
<section>3</section>
VERSES OF WISDOM
"This universe is the creation of the Supreme Power meant for benefit of all His creations. Individual species must, therefore, learn to enjoy its benefits for forming a part of the system in close relation with other species. Let not any one species encroach upon others rights".
Indian Scripture
The best way to pray to God is to love His creation.
Anon
All things near and far,
Hidden to each other Linked are,
That thou cannot pluck a flower,
Without troubling a star,
Francis Thompson
You loose a lot more than trees when you loose a forest.
Anonymous
Varied and Plentiful,
Birds and deer. Hares,
Elephants, lions, tigers, bears,
Buffaloes and gaur
All roam in gay abandon
To the beat of cascading rapids and
Mirthful trumpeting elephants,
Joyfully sing the cuckoos, parakeets,
Koel and pretty geese.
Ram Chant
As long as there is wildlife in the forests, earth will provide shelter to man and his generations.
- Old Sanskrit sayings
(Karanth 1985)
Common persons need wood for fuel. They will continue to cut trees till the forest is destroyed. But, wise person (Muni) thinks about the importance of forests in relation to Nature. He thinks about the balance of natural agencies. He thinks of relationship of Forests and Climate.
- Bhagwad Gita
(Chapter 3, Sloka 29 - Sanskrit verse translated into English)
"A tree is equal to ten sons. The ten gifts of the tree are - Oxygen, Water, Soil, Food, Cloth, Energy, Shelter, Medicine, Fodder and Shade.
And What a son; he wants care and water but for five years, and wants no milk, no nurse."
Upanishads
We invoke the Earth upon which foliage and trees are firmly held, unthreatened, the Earth which is equipped with all good things in a stable environment of harmony.
Atharvaveda
As between the soul and the body, there is a bond, so are the body and its environment linked together.
Kamil Gibran
<section>4</section>
INTRODUCTION
This report is at the request of FAO through MOEF to prepare an in-depth study of Forestry situation in India visualising a projected scenario for 2010.
There has been growing awareness of the environmental concerns in which forests play a very vital and critical role in maintaining health and stability of the country, the region and the world. Forestry is among the most difficult of all environmental issues and is certainly linked with India's long range ecological and economic security. But unfortunately there is a lack of acknowledgement of the role of the forest in human life even though everyone knows about it. Environmental challenge is threatening the survival of mankind and the globe. Man's thoughtless action for decades by ruthless exploitation of nature and unfettered consumption of resources has scarred the planet and defiled the environment. There is global realisation of impending crisis to the earth more so the approaching gloom in 21st century. Human intelligence and ingenuity made our earlier generations live in harmony with nature, then why not the present and future generations?
Forests constitute primary and renewable natural resource particularly in developing countries, contributing considerably to national economy, socio-economic developments and rural life support system.
Life styles of Indian people traditionally and philosophically have been environment friendly and conducive to protection and conservation of forests and wildlife. The customs and heritage of nature worship, trees and animal worship, sacred groves, several festivals and folklores related to nature and seasons bear testimony to the fact that paths shown by our religious and social leaders have been all along environment friendly. The sacred groves formed in olden times was a kind of reverence and tribute to nature. Our ancient sages realised the primary and ideal relationship between man and nature. The earlier reverence to nature prevented people from causing any harm to nature being consider as divine and god given ecological symbols. Nature was maintained as it is in inviolate and untouched form. Due to multiple value and use of forest people in the past lived in synergy with nature (forest). India has the wisdom and legacy of veneration and conservation of forests.
India fortunately has a tradition of scientific forest management for over 130 years. Over the years with passage of time the forest scenarios are fast changing. The initial forest policies and thereafter have been quite pragmatic in spite of criticism by cynics and pseudo-environmentalists. The forest polices have been modified from time to time, in keeping with changing times, to address to the ongoing current situations.
Forests in India as well as in Asia Pacific Region at the moment are under tremendous pressure from several sides and are in a crucible of changing situations. Last few years of this millennium and as well as first few years of 21^st century will have very many situations that would affect forests to a great extent. The Rio conference 1992 gave forestry a boost in shape of Forest Principles. Agenda 21 while addressing the current pressing problems, aims at preparing the world for the challenges of the next century. It also reflected global consensus and political commitment at the highest level of development and environment co-operation. Since then and even before that Government of India has taken several initiatives in implementation of the forest principles.
Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests are engaged in formulating the National Forest Action Plan (NFAP) which will be a vision document forward looking for next 20-25 years. The exercise is on for last few years and now perhaps in final stages of completion. It envisages protection and conservation of natural forests, eco-fragile areas and wildlife habitats; massive afforestation programme both in Government and private land through peoples participation (including women); regenerating degraded natural forests through J.F.M. which empowers people; improving skills and motivation of forestry personnel through specialised training; increasing forest productivity to meet growing demand by intensive need based research and development programmes and providing adequate financial resources to forestry.
An intensive and detailed study over a fairly long time would actually be needed to arrive at the emerging forestry scenario in first decade and quarter century of the next century on a realistic basis. In a way this paper attempts to project the situation concisely on which NFAP is dealing with at great length. Further the time available for report writing is very little compared to expanse and coverage of the subject matter. Considering all these limitations a very sincere and genuine effort has been made to cover all aspects of forestry situation in India - 2010. Opinions, views and observations expressed herein belong to the author. In retrospect many comments can be made, which is but natural and the present document expresses the best possible that could be done under prevailing limitations of time and other resource constraints. There is always scope of improvement but this is the best at that point of time. In hindsight or as afterthought it can be said something
better could have been done but to philosophise the fact of life is "of all the good and bad words the worst are if it would have been". This paper is based on the informed judgement and assessment of current situations, trends and likely developments, in all probability, to arrive at a realistic forestry scenario in India in 2010 with as far correct as possible. In such a paper repetition of certain matters are unavoidable and inevitable. Having tried to cover the entire gamut of subject matters and issues there might have been some inadvertent gaps or omissions and inaccuracies or discrepancies in figures and statistics in the text for which the author offers sincere apologies. However it is hoped that all such aberrations would be erased with NFAP document which would present a detailed scenario of the future in an elaborate and authentic manner with more clarity.
The topics as per terms of reference have been described in three chapters with specified sub-headings. Chapter 1 deals with the context in which the forestry sector is developing. Chapter 2 narrates the state of forestry in the country and major trends therein. Chapter 3 projects the future prospects. Tables and Annexes have been furnished to illustrate the concerned issues and facilitate understanding. References are placed at the end.
<section>5</section>
1. CONTEXT IN WHICH THE FORESTRY SECTOR IS DEVELOPING
1.1 Highlights of Social and Economic Situation
1.2 Highlights of Long-term Objectives and Goals
1.3 Role of Country in Regional Context
1.4 Summary of Major Issues
1.1 Highlights of Social and Economic Situation
Forest is a biological entity in the fascinating web of nature and always in a state of dynamic equilibrium. Forestry sector is an important ingredient in the economic and social fabrics of a country. The importance of this sector is more pronounced in developing countries of tropics. Forest in tropics play very significant role in regulating water cycle and in conserving soils. The demand for forest products and services in tropical countries increased rapidly in the recent past with the growth of population and rural economy. This increasing demand of forest produce and land hunger by the growing population and poverty in tropics are the main causes of deterioration in forest cover. The deterioration is the result of disproportionate withdrawals of forest produce as compared to its carrying capacity and regenerative capacity.
The requirements of timber, pastures, fuelwood and diversion of forest lands for agriculture and various development projects in India have put enormous pressure on forests. The apparent alternative of afforestation on non-forest lands under social forestry and agroforestry activities has not picked up well in many parts of the country to the desirable extent.
India, the seventh largest country, covers about 2% of total global land about 1% forest area and about 0.5% pasture land of the world, but supports about 16% of human and about 15% of cattle population of the world and this population is always in the process of increase. India is one of the 12 mega diversity countries commanding 7% of world biodiversity and supports 16 major forest types varying from alpine pastures in Himalayas to temperate, sub-tropical, tropical forests and mangroves in coastal areas. But nearly half of the country's area are degraded, affected with the problems of soil degradation and erosion.
The population of the country has increased from 360 million in 1947 to about 950 million at present. Cattle population also increased from 250 million to about 450 million during the same period. The per capita forests in India is only 0.08 hectare against the global average of about 1.0 hectare. The average density of population increased from 208 per sq. km. in 1981 to 250 in 1991 and 290 at present. The population density is not uniform. It varies from 653 per sq. km. in Kerala State to 58 in Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh in north eastern regions. Rate of growth of population in last decade (1981-1991) was 2.3%. But the growth rate of scheduled castes (16.3% of population) and scheduled tribes (8.0% of population) has been 3.0% and 2.6% respectively. Livelihood of more than 90% of these communities directly depend upon forests and obviously put enormous pressure on forests. Rapid increase in population led to unsustainable withdrawals of forest produce resulting in
degradation. Tribals have a symbiotic relationship with forests and they are conscious of the contribution of the forests for their sustenance and survival. But in many instances their immediate needs have overtaken the future requirements and broader aspects of conservation of their own posterity.
India has agriculture dominant economy. About 43% of land is under agriculture but the productivity is far below in comparison with developed countries because only one third of cultivated areas in the country is under irrigation. About 23% of land area is forest lands having productivity less than one cubic metre per hectare per year against the potential of eight to ten cubic metres per hectare per year. The present low productivity is due to growing biotic pressure and inadequate resources for scientific forest management. Nearly 4.6% area are culturable waste and 7.1% fallow land available for tree planting and pasture development.
As per one estimation, more than half (about 53%) of country's lands are under various types of land degradation. The most common form of degradation is from wind and water erosion and salinity. About 146 million ha. area is affected with wind and water erosion and 7 million ha. has become degraded due to excessive salts. 8.5 million ha. is under water logging and about 10 million ha is affected with shifting cultivation.
Nearly 23% (76 million ha.) of country's land has been recorded as forests but only 19.5% (64 million ha.) of total area has forest or tree cover which is much less to the goal of 33% set by the National Forest Policy, 1988. About 65% of forest cover has dense forest with crown density more than 40% and rest 35% are badly degraded. The crown density of dense forests is continuously depleting due to overuse of forest resources by the people and their cattle living in and around the forests those have been depending on forest from the past. Another 6 million hectares recorded forest areas is virtually blank, even bereft of any root stock due to excess biotic pressure.
Forests are not uniformly distributed in India. Some regions have quite considerable forest cover, while others have nothing as forests. Fuelwood is the most important form of household energy in both rural and urban areas (mostly poor people) and represents about 90% of the total demand of wood. Many poor people living in and around the forests depend heavily on fuelwood and fodder for subsistence needs and income from gathered forest produce. In rural areas fuelwood provides 70% of fuel for cooking, 5% comes from commercial fuel, and rest from cow dung and agricultural residues. Only 15% of fuelwood are purchased, 62% are collected from forest and public lands, and the remaining 23% are collected from private lands.
The initiation of rapid development after independence in 1947, led to the establishment of large number of paper and pulp mills, saw mills and plywood industries as well as growing rural and urban housing needs gave a quantum jump to the demand for forest products. India's forests have a growing stock of 4.75 billion cu.m. with an annual increment of around 57.6 million cu.m. Only 12 million cu.m. of timber and 40 million tonnes of fuelwood are being officially extracted from the forest areas leaving, 10 million ha. of good forests, falling under National Parks and Sanctuaries, since no commercial extraction is permitted there. The unrecorded extraction for meeting local needs under the existing rights and concessions is many times more. The current requirements of timber and fuelwood. are 30 million cu.m. and 280 million tonnes respectively. The fuelwood deficit is large but according to estimation about 200 million tonnes of fuelwood are withdrawn from the forests every
year. Besides, 280 million tonnes of fodder and countless non-timber forest products are also withdrawn every year.
Out of the current demand of 30 million cu.m. timber, 8.3 million cu.m. is needed for paper, pulp and panel products and 15.4 million cu.m. for saw milling i.e. housing, packaging, furniture etc. Though some of the shortages in timber is being supplemented by liberalising the export policy, the forest industries are still facing raw material shortages and are operating well below their rated capacity.
A large number of India's livestock population, unproportionate to the carrying capacity of forests have been grazing in forests causing serious damage to regeneration and productivity. Since the number of livestock population is not likely to be reduced due to social compulsions, a realistic grazing management alternative has to be evolved. Forests are also the only remaining source for agriculture land, encroachments and shifting cultivation. The over exploitation of forest products to meet the various demands, including unrecorded removals, overgrazing and encroachments have led to the poor productivity and degradation of forests.
While the literacy rate in the country increased from 16.7% in 1951 to 52.1% in 1991, the per capita income increased from Rs. 1,127 to RS. 4974 (at 1990-91 price index) during the same period. It shows that India has taken rapid stride in economic development after independence, which consequently increased consumerism and the requirements of forest products for local as well as industrial use. The total value of forest products have never been reflected in calculation of the Gross National Product (GNP). Only recorded commercial sale value (Rs. 76.650 million in 1990-91) has been taken into consideration which contributes only 1.8% to GNP whereas the agricultural sector contributes 31.6% to the GNP taking entire products into account for calculation. Now with the India's new policy provision for conservation of forests and meeting the requirements of tribals and local people as welfare measure and also with increasing unaccounted withdrawals of large quantity of forest
products, the contribution of forest products in GNP is not likely to increase in future. According to FAO assessment (1996) India uses fuelwood worth US$ 9,080 million. Given the deteriorating environmental situation, it is essential that current economic theory and practice in India must here-in-after stress the need to increase the contribution of forest to Gross Natural Product rather than the traditional economic Gross National Product.
A holistic view of investment for forest development do not give even a ray of hope of any marked improvement in rehabilitation of forests. More so, the withdrawals from forests are likely to increase at exponential rate with increasing population. It was estimated some time back that different types of monetized and non-monetized forest products worth Rs 300,000 million are withdrawn annually from India's forests. However, the corresponding investment in forestry development at present is only Rs. 8,000 million annually which is about 2.67% of total estimated withdrawal and less than 1 % of total plan outlay of the country.
The National Forest Policy, 1988 marks a watershed in Indian forestry by recognising the role of community in land use of degraded forests mainly in development and protection. Accordingly, a mechanism of Joint Forest Management (JFM) on the benefit sharing basis has been legalised in 1990. Its principal aim is to ensure environmental stability and maintenance of ecological balance through preservation and rehabilitation of forests, while providing for fuelwood, fodder, minor forest produce and small timber needs of the rural and tribal population. The JFM has since been institutionalised by most of the States. The emphasis has been on the formation of Village Forest Committees (VFCs) and empowering them for participatory management of degraded forests on benefit sharing basis sans ownership of forest lands.
With policy preferring conservation on derivation of economic benefit, thrust has been given on massive need-based and timebound plantation activities on waste lands alongside of roads, railway lines, river, streams and canals, and on all other unutilized lands, under social forestry and agroforestry programmes to meet the demands of people and industries as well.
The practice of supply of forest produce to industries at concessional prices have been ceased. Industries are required to raise the raw material needed, preferably by establishing of a direct relationship between them and the individuals/institutions/communities who can grow the raw material and by supporting the individuals with inputs including credit facility, regular technical advice and finally harvesting and transport services.
1.2 Highlights of Long-term Objectives and Goals
Forests are not only important for providing fuel, fodder, timber and some food to rural people, but also in maintaining the agricultural stability by protecting watersheds and rendering environmental services. The contribution of forests to GNP is meagre as non-monetized withdrawals are not taken into account in GNP. Forest is the foster mother to agriculture and is crucial for maintaining and improving the productivity of agricultural land. Further expansion in agriculture land to feed growing population also destroys some forest. This expansion includes also shifting cultivation areas. Unless the forest ecosystem is maintained, the future of agriculture itself would be at stake. Agriculture, the main source of India's rural economy, contributes more than 30% to GNP, 60% of employment and is primary source of 75% of country's population living in rural areas.
Forests have a significant role in ameliorating climate particularly drought conditions. Substantial area of India, particularly in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa and Rajasthan regularly face drought. Drought prone regions represent 19% of the entire geographical area of the country and affect nearly 12% of the population. Two third of the cropped lands in the country are rainfed. These areas depend entirely on monsoon and the natural hydrological systems. Both climatic condition and sub-soil moisture status are regulated by forest cover in the region. Forests, in rainfed agricultural areas, play important role for the livelihood of local communities.
Large demand of fuelwood, pasture, land for agriculture are the main constraints in the improvement of forests in India. According to India's UNCED submission 70% of rural people and 50% of urban people use fuelwood for cooking purposes. While, commercial fuels make up the difference in urban areas, agricultural waste and cow dung are used in rural areas where fuelwood is scarce. Many industries and kilns in smaller cities still use fuelwood as their primary source of energy. In medium size and smaller cities about 25% of household collect fuelwood free as compared to 76% in rural areas. Most of the rural population are likely to continue to depend on gathered fuelwood. Local people collect fuelwood to meet their domestic needs and for sale to rural elites and to middlemen who transport it to smaller and larger cities nearby.
Gathering fuelwood (headloading) from forest for sale provides one of the biggest employment to the rural people. It is an important source of income to many poor living in and around forests, specially women. According to estimation by the Centre for Science and Environment in 1982, about 3 million people work as headloaders. At present it has exceeded about 5 million. The contribution of Forest does not find place in the employment data at National level.
Role of forests is significant in maintaining ecological balance. An ecosystem consists essentially of living organisms - both flora and fauna - their environment and their interrelationship. Forests, with their phyto- and zoo-mass components and the land supporting them, constitute the most important parts of any ecosystem. The linear retrogression of ecosystems caused by human activities, from historical times, are being mitigated by forests. The major ecological function of forests are to restore and secure the hydrological regime of land, water availability, control run-off, soil fertility and provide much needed oxygen. Forests also patronise the biodiversity and the habitat of wild flora and fauna in the form of National Parks, Sanctuaries and other protected natural areas. In India 4.5% of total land area of country are reserved as protected areas for maintaining biodiversity. Biodiversity includes integration of plants and animals to increase symbiosis with
agriculture. Biodiversity is an important source of rebuilding ecological balance and sustainability in agriculture. The protected area network is very essential for a country like India and has an intrinsic link with human welfare. Lush green hills throbbing with wildlife and genetic diversity and myriad's of colours are very much needed for modern man. Destruction of forest with its wilderness rocks the very foundation of human survival.
Forests are the main source of raw material for wood based industries. According to an estimation, about 15% wood harvested from forests are consumed by industries. As per figures of 1991 there are 276 medium and large scale wood based industries. These are paper mills, newsprint, rayon pulp, plywood, and match industries. Besides, there are about 23,000 saw mills including small units. With emphasis on conservation policy and stopping the practice of selling forest raw material at concessional prices to industries, the Government has liberalised the import policy for wood and wood products. The industries are to establish direct relationship with farmers for meeting their requirement of raw material from farm forestry and private plantations. This policy has clear cut intention to develop farm forestry through institutions and industries which has not been favourably taken by the industries as they have to expand their marketing infrastructures for buying raw material from
thousands of small producers which is more complex than buying from the government. But then the extension services of industries and institutions have to be strengthened by a suitable mechanism of infrastructure and pricing of forest produce from farm lands and waste lands to reduce the increasing pressure on forests.
The protective and productive role of forests in the national economy entitles them to lay claim to an adequate share of the land. National Forest Policy, 1952, for the first time set the goal to bring 1/3rd of total land area of the country under forest and tree cover and the same was adopted in the Forest Policy, 1988. To achieve this goal, it is imperative to plan for annual plantations of about 3 million ha. degraded forests and scrub areas, all available wastelands and marginal lands and plantation in farm lands under social forestry and suitable agroforestry systems. The National Forest Policy, 1988 lays emphasis on massive need based and time bound programme of afforestation on degraded forests, waste lands, community lands and the lands of individuals including agricultural lands, with particular emphasis on the production of fuelwood and fodder. Policy also provides that the land laws should be so modified wherever necessary so as to facilitate and motivate to
undertake tree farming and grow fodder plants, grasses and legumes on their own land. It is essential to develop large scale woodlots for fuelwood, and industrial wood and timber to meet local and national needs with full involvement of all stake holders. Though it is difficult to increase forest cover in the present scenario of land hunger, it is possible to bring all possible categories of available waste lands under tree cover.
With the realisation that the demand for fuelwood, fodder and non-timber forest produce for local use by communities and tribals was rising rapidly with growing population, it was decided that the old custodial and timber oriented system of forest management needed to be changed. As a result, the new National Policy of 1988 redefined the priorities. The main thrust areas in the Policy are:
路 Maintenance of environmental stability through preservation and restoration of ecological balance and protecting the vast genetic resource. Derivation of economic benefit must be subordinated to this principal aim.
路 Meeting basic needs of the rural and tribal people, especially of fuelwood, fodder, non-timer forest products and small timber in keeping with the carrying capacity of forests.
路 Raising the productivity of forests and achieving the policy goal of having 33% of country's area under tree cover (66% in hill areas).
路 Industry to be encouraged to develop its raw material by interacting with the local people and communities for use of the manpower and 