<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Decentralization and Devolution of Forest Management in Asia and the Pacific</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Senior Forestry Officer
Regional Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the
Forestry Department
Pacific
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
Maliwan Mansion
United Nations
Phra Atit Road
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Bangkok 10200
Rome, 00100, ITALY
THAILAND
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org>
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Decentralization as a generic concept is considered from time immemorial to the present as a more congenial form of human clustering. This is not only true in societal governance but also in the realm of families. As early as 200 B.C., the Greeks found city states as more democratically manageable and administratively effective. An example in the recent past is the breaking away of the states from the erstwhile USSR. In the realm of families, we are all aware of the gradual movement from the large to nuclear families.
In spite of this natural human tendency to decentralization, society has not been consistently trying to achieve it. Different countries at their different periods of history had sometimes decentralized but after a certain while reversed the process. This happens as decentralization is accompanied by establishment of a state hierarchy in which higher officials gradually usurp the power of the smaller units and thus undo the development.
Leaving aside the dawn of the history of the human civilization when small clustered units were natural, decentralization or its reverse namely centralization has been superimposed from the top and when resisted, it was forced. Or else the people coerced the state to accept decentralization. In other words, decentralization or otherwise has a turbulent history.
Decentralization has often been mixed up, albeit wrongly, with the concept of geographical division. Most people mistakenly consider division of a state into provinces and provinces into districts and so on down the ladder as decentralization because the area under each of the lower divisions is less than that of the next higher. This is one of the reasons why a number of other words have now been coined by specialists to distinguish different facets of decentralization. These include deconcentration, delegation, devolution and privatization (Hye, 1985). In this paper, we will stick to two of these: deconcentration and devolution which we believe can cover what all these words refer to. To avoid unnecessary misunderstandings about the meaning of words, we define deconcentration to include all concepts where the large has been subdivided into small units including the geographical subdivision in its domain without transferring any special authority. The devolution will refer
to only cases of deconcentration where some form of authority of the centre has been passed to the decentralized units in the hierarchy. We will continue to use the word decentralization in the generic sense.
It is necessary however to distinguish between administrative and financial devolution. In the former, certain administrative authority is only delegated to the lower echelons while in financial delegation, the authority to earn, collect and spend revenue is also transferred.
One important consideration in a study of decentralization is to be clear about who administers the decentralized units. They may be government officials, both central and provincial. It may also be the legislative arms of the parliament such as the panchayats in India or District Political Authority of Sri Lanka, village leader and party chief together in China or a combination of NGO, elected representatives and government officials as Uphoff (1985) recommends. The other important consideration is how far down the hierarchy of the society is the decentralization carried out. Is it up to the region, district, block, village or hamlet level?
The devolution of authority to the deconcentrated units also have diverse manifestations. The nature and degree of authorization to the smaller units is really the major point of departure from centralization. It may be fiscal by which the deconcentrated unit may be authorized to decide sources of revenue and collect revenue from these sources. Along with it or even without it, the authority may also be given singly or in combination, of developmental planning, implementation, administration and management.
The objectives of decentralization may be many but the more laudable ones are to mobilize local resources, improve implementation, promote participation of the local people and the last but not the least to encourage equity in regard to distribution of wealth. Decentralization however is often introduced by the central government to consolidate its hold in the countryside. The obvious result is that participation is restricted to the people who accept the political philosophy of the centre while others are left out. Equity thus becomes the victim.
In this paper, we will first describe the progress of administrative decentralization over time and then follow it up with a discussion on decentralization in respect of forest management particularly the relevant policies, legal aspects, associated rules and regulations and some recently introduced new initiatives and their implementation. We will then discuss the impact of the policies, legislations and the new initiatives on the people and the forests including the lessons learnt therefrom. We will then construct a scenario in respect of some countries of the Asia Pacific the fate of the forests if the present forest policies in respect of centralization continue. Finally we will propose some changes, the problems, prospects and methods of implementation of these proposed changes.
There are thirty countries included in the Asia- Pacific region. They are diverse in many respects. In size, American Samoa island in the Pacific is 20 sq. km. while India extends over 297 319 and China 932 641 sq. km. As of 1990, the density of population is as low as 1.4 inhabitants per sq. km. in Mongolia and as high as 122 in China, 209 in Philippines, 287 in India, 888 in Bangladesh and 4445 in Singapore. The difference in GNP per capita as an indicator of economic progress is equally striking. The average GNP for the whole region is US$ 602 per capita, the least in the world sans Africa. But the Continental SE Asia has a GNP of $1195 while that of Cambodia is 170, Bhutan 190, Bangladesh 210 and India 360. The annual GNP growth is 0% in Cambodia, 3.3% in India and 6.8% in Bhutan (FAO, 1990). Politically also the countries have different structures. Some of them like India are democratic and federal, others such as Indonesia, China are more centralized. Some countries
such as Bhutan continue to have monarchy.
Under these differing circumstances, each country certainly has a different past history and would have differing futures of decentralization and devolution. In respect of the forests however there are some common characteristics between countries which allow a form of grouping as indicated below:
Group 1:
Countries with high population and low or dwindling forest cover: e.g. Bangladesh, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka
Group 2:
Timber exporting countries with large forests: e.g. Indonesia, Malaysia
Group 3:
Timber exporting countries recently changed to importing countries due to severe forest loss in the recent past: e.g. Philippines, Thailand
Group 4:
Island countries with large forests and traditional pattern of forest ownership e.g. Papua New Guinea, South Pacific Islands
In the paper, we have chosen India from the Group 1 countries, Indonesia from Group 2, Thailand from Group 3 and Papua New Guinea from Group 4 countries for detailed discussion on some topics. We will however consider other countries as well, where necessary, to provide a wider perspective.
<section>3</section>
2. STATE OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECENTRALIZATION AND DEVOLUTION IN ASIA PACIFIC COUNTRIES
2.1 Bangladesh
2.2 India
2.3 Nepal
2.4 Sri Lanka
2.5 Philippines
Many of the countries in the region (for example, India, Indonesia, Malaysia) had colonial past and had been subjected to decisions made by a handful of colonial administrators in the centre. For convenience, the colonial administration had carried out deconcentration without or with devolution within very narrow limits. Some countries such as Thailand and Nepal were not under colonial rules but they have histories of centralization not much different from the colonial countries. In the region, however, there are some other countries which had a long history with traditional authority enjoyed by the decentralized units such as Papua New Guinea where 90-97 % of the land resources is owned by groups of families although used by individual households (Talbott and Lynch, 1995).
In the post- colonial period, a general feature valid for the countries with centralized administration was to promote decentralization in the 1950s and early 1960s, waning of interest in it in the late 1960s and renewed interest from early 1970 onwards in some of them (Hye, 1985).
Whatever be the degree of interest, deconcentration was the only important element. The other important element of decentralization namely the development of devolution had been very slow and disappointing. On top of it, in most countries, there has been hardly any structural change to the administrative organization so that within a short period the deconcentrated units became more cosmetic than substantial.
2.1 Bangladesh
The story of Bangladesh is a typical one namely one of progress and retraction. When the region became independent from Pakistan in 1947, there were moribund administrative institutions at the union and district levels. In the period 1958-1968, two more echelons namely the thana and divisional levels were introduced. In addition, government service institutions were established in the thana levels. Besides, for the first time a thana council composed of the government officials and the elected people of the unions was formed with some devolution of powers and allotment of funds for development. This institution was suspended after Bangladesh became independent of Pakistan. In 1976, for the first time, decentralization to the village level namely gram sabha and gram sarkar (local government) was brought into being. In 1982, with the change of the government, gram sarkar was abolished and instead upgradation of thana into upazila with some powers was done. This means that the
decentralization to the village level was curtailed in favour of a higher level namely sub-district level (upzila). Overall, the upazila did not also function well because of weak financial base, stranglehold by the government officials, unrepresentative character of the upazila parishad, and the development of a nexus between the traditional elites and the local administration.
2.2 India
In India, the real process of decentralization was started with the establishment of Panchayati Raj in the 1950s. Over time the Panchayat became a three tier system, one at the district, the second at the block and the third at the cluster of village level. The members constituting the different levels were elected. While the intention was excellent, the effectiveness of the system broke down substantially because of delay in (some states, discontinuance of) regular elections, entrenchment of vested interests of the elites in the Panchayats, disassociation of panchayats in many development projects, failure to garner resources, bureaucratic resistance and lack of government will (Muttalib, 1985). Only recently, the central government has made it mandatory of the state governments to have elections at regular intervals. In some states such as West Bengal, the Panchayats have started to function well as a decentralized unit in development work. However, they still are
dependent mostly on the resource grants from the state or the centre.
2.3 Nepal
Nepal introduced partyless Panchayati system in 1959. This consisted of a hierarchy of councils from the village to the central level. This is a return to the traditional system of governance ruled by elites. Popular participation was negligible. In 1982, the government enacted the Decentralization Act, which made the District Panchayat as the focal point of development headed by an elected person (Pradhan, 1985). However, the Act has not made things much different as the government departments continue to act as the major player in most activities.
2.4 Sri Lanka
In Sri Lanka, in 1973, the district administration was restructured with a district political authority. The process of devolution was further improved with district ministership in 1977, the use of decentralized budget in 1974 and establishment of the development councils composed of parliament members, locally elected representatives and the local administrators in 1982. However centralism, failure to promote local participation and the politicians' continued attempt to keep the decision making to themselves rather than share with the people have made the attempt to bring about administrative decentralization substantially ineffective (Gunawardena, 1985).
2.5 Philippines
Philippines, the decentralized government units below the central government are: barangay, municipality, city, province, and the regional government in the national capital region at Manila and regional autonomous governments in regions IX (Western Mindanao) and XII (Southern Mindanao) (Guzman and Padilla, 1985).
The criteria used to make these subdivisions is population, average estimated annual income for the last 3 years, land area and approval of the majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite. For example the required population for qualifying are 1,000, 10,000, 100,000, 150,000, and 500,000 respectively for the five decentralized units levels.
The constitution of 1973 gives the powers to the subdivisions to create their own resources and to levy taxes. But in fact, the smallest unit namely the barangays do not have any significant income and are therefore totally dependent on the other units. The other units, although able to impose some taxes to earn revenue, also have to depend on about 60-80% of its total income from the central government.
The participation of the different units in planning, implementation, supervision, and monitoring is variable. The barangays are too small and unviable while the provinces too big for personal attention to individual citizens. The intermediate units between the barangays and the provinces namely the city/municipality are centre dependent but do deliver services to the people within its jurisdiction.
It is not necessary to go on detailing the history of administrative decentralization for each country of the Asia Pacific region to understand the process. But it will be worthwhile to analyze a little on what led to deconcentration. Lutz and Caldecott (1996) believes decentralization as a means of redistribution of property rights and bargaining power of different levels of society by three distinct processes namely the educational or self discovery process, empowerment process and the process of communication and negotiation. In self discovery process, each level of society perceives the oppressive elements of reality which include harmful environmental problems and act against them. In the empowerment process, each level acquires its bargaining power. The communication and negotiation process is self explanatory. While these three processes cover a lot of ground, they fail to explain some common features of decentralization. For example, why in most countries,
deconcentration has been aggressively promoted but devolution has been left unattended. Another interesting element is promotion of deconcentration by the centre although there was no bargaining for it (for example that of introduction of panchayati raj in India). Still another element is plethora of bargaining for decentralization only by a handful of people. These demands often political in nature are sought and sometimes acquired for themselves and not for the people. It is also often noticed that decentralization is often a facade to defuse or pre-empt the rising democratic aspirations of the people. It may also be a method to keep a political tab in the far reaches of the country.
We therefore believe that a more realistic way to divide the factors that bring about decentralization are as follows:
1. State coercion: Superimposition by the top Administration/political authority of the society: The administrative/political authority on its own distributes its officials to geographically decentralized units for local supervision and management.
2. Political Democratization: The political authority promotes deconcentration through popular elections at different levels.
3. Peoples' power: Wrenching of power by the lower echelons of the society: This amounts to political unrest and eventual devolution to the revolting group.
4. Popular Pressure: Reluctant deconcentration due to popular pressure exerted by environmental lobby, social activists, judicial courts etc.
5. Traditional: Decentralization existed in the past and have continued to exist at present.
6. The above processes may have acted singly or in combination to influence decentralization noticed in different countries.
We will see in the next section different forms of decentralization in forest management and how they relate to the classification made above.
<section>4</section>
3. HISTORY OF FOREST CONTROL AND FOREST POLICIES
3.1 Pre Colonial Times
3.2 Colonial Times
3.3 Post Colonial time
In the case of Forest Management, the history of deconcentration parallels the deconcentration noticed in the case of general administration but with some significant variation. For example, in India, around 1927, the forest management, so long a central matter, was transferred as a part of the revenue department to become a provincial subject. Soon the forest section became independent of the revenue department. The forest organization since then consisted of a Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) located at the provincial headquarters, his deputies called Conservators of Forests, at regional levels. The next layer of Divisional Forest Officers usually at the district headquarters and his deputies Forest Rangers at the block levels. The set-up is almost similar to the general administration but with some basic differences. The most important variation is that deconcentration in forestry never went down to the village cluster level as it did in general administration and in
legislative wings. Sometimes, a forest guard was entrusted with an independent responsibility of a small forest block but the forest guard was simply a watch and ward man and had no proper authority in any other forest duties. The most important variation however was that the forest department had always taken the stand of doing away with the private or communal ownership of land containing the forest in contrast to general administration which has championed the cause of private agriculture. In other words, in spite of an apparent deconcentration, the forest management continued to be a centralized system, which was mainly the result of state coercion. The local revolts were not powerful enough to confront or force a change of the policy of coercion.
The logic presented behind this centralization in forestry have been many. First, it was believed that the forest is a national resource which should therefore be utilized for the nation/state. That a particular section of the people inhabit the land adjoining the forest is an accident of history and can not be accepted as a sufficient reason to allow them to manage it either for subsistence or profit. The analogy presented is that of mining. Coal, gold, petroleum etc. belongs to the state which exploits it, no matter where they are found. Forests can not be an exception. Secondly, forests have effects that transcends the local environs. The local people will manage a resource keeping in mind its own local interests which may have disastrous effects on the outside areas. For example, the local interests may like to use it for fuelwood production while the particular forest may be a storehouse of biodiversity. Similarly, the people may use a forest area for grazing when it
may be required to be protected from all uses being a catchment of a dam reservoir. Thirdly, the colonials and later the national government wanted the forest areas to be a source of revenue. For example, teak was extensively exploited by the British colonial government for ship construction, sal and pine in India for railway sleepers and so on. The revenue earned by the Indonesian government annually is second to the money earned by the country from petroleum, which is the largest money earner. In parts of India, the forest contracts, such as that of biri pata (leaves of Diospyros melanoxylon), earns so much revenue that it is often used by the people involved in this business as a leverage for political power. Fourthly, some forests were earmarked by the government or the rulers with the sole purpose of using them for hunting and rest for the royalty and the colonial officials. Fifthly, the control of such large forest areas provided political power to the centre. And last
but not the least, the government thought wrongly, an idea still held by many, that the local people are ignorant of forests, their indigenous forest management unsustainable and unscientific. Thus the forest management should continue to pursue a policy of centralization. Only in the recent past, a number of initiatives in several countries have been taken more as an adjunct to the main policy of centralization. These initiatives however are certainly significant departures from centralization worth separate discussion.
3.1 Pre Colonial Times
Before the advent of the colonial powers in different parts of Asia and the Pacific, which happened around the beginning of the 16th century, the forest land was mostly under the use of the local communities. The nature of use to which the forest land was put varied from place to place, depending on the characteristics of the people who inhabited the local areas. Some used it as the hunting and gathering ground for subsistence. The gathering included fruits, vegetables, cereals for food, fibre for clothing, timber, fibre and grasses for homes and materials for daily use and medicine. Some other groups who have already been initiated into agriculture practiced shifting cultivation, which developed different forms in different areas (Banerjee, 1995). But there are some commonalties between them. An individual household chooses a certain area of a forest, cuts it down, burns the wood for the ash to add nutrients to the soil, cultivates the area for a year or two and then moves
to another forest leaving the first one to fallow and thus to naturally reforest. The household comes back to the first area after a fallow period for recultivation. The fallow time used to be around 15-20 years, now in places diminished to 3-5 years. Besides the hunting and gathering and shifting cultivation categories, there were two other forms of forest use. In one, the forests were permanently felled for sedentary agriculture. In the other, home gardens were introduced. In home gardens, the original forest vegetation near the home was disturbed and replaced by species of trees more useful to the householders. The garden simulated the forest in having a number of artificially grown canopies of trees, shrubs, herbs and grasses.
Whatever the form of use, the forest area was under the control of one or a group of households, except in the case of hunting and gathering where the entire community was in control of the whole forest. The households did not have the ownership of the land which vested with the community or sometimes in a very vague manner with the sovereign. The management however rested with the household/s. In other words, the forest administration was deconcentrated to the household or a group of households or to the community level but the authority lay with the community. It has to be kept in mind that this devolution is not an introduced or imposed process but is a step in the naturally developing human society, which we have classified as traditional.
3.2 Colonial Times
Except in a few countries, the equation between households, groups of households and community and the forest land changed dramatically with the advent of the colonial powers and consolidation of their hold on the countries concerned. The change was towards concentration i.e. the ownership was usurped by the colonial powers which took over as the sovereign power.
One of the earliest of such a change happened in Sri Lanka. In 1840, the British Administration promulgated an ordinance called Crown Land (Encroachment) Ordinance by which all forests, wastes, unoccupied and uncultivated lands were vested in the crown. The shifting cultivation land was considered as uncultivated and therefore came under the aegis of the ordinance. In Java of Indonesia, the proprietary rights of land in Java were vested to the sovereign by the British Administrator in 1811. By the Agrarian Act of 1870, the government accepted the local ownership only of continuously cultivated land which by implication excluded all shifting cultivation lands as not owned by the local community and thus subject to acquisition. In India, by the Forest Act of 1878, the British Administration acquired the sovereignty of all wastelands which by definition included forests. This Act also enabled the administration to demarcate reserved and protected forests. In the former, all
local rights were abolished while in the latter some existing rights were accepted as a privilege offered by the government to the local people which can be taken away if necessary (Lynch and Talbot, 1995). Similar stories can be told of Nepal, Philippines, Malaysia and other countries.
The net outcome of the changed circumstances during the colonial period was that the forests came under the sovereignty of the state, which means a move towards centralization. The de facto situation was however different. Where the forest produces were immediately useful and valuable such as Teak in India, Burma or Thailand or Pine (for railway sleepers) in Garhwal Himalayas, the arm of the administration reached the forest for exploitation. Where however the forests were distant, needing large investment or the products were not marketable or the area was malarial, (e.g. Nepal terai) the local people, continued to use the forests as they used to do traditionally. For such areas therefore the de facto and the de jure situation were different which created a lot of tension between the people and the sovereign at a later stage of history. The perception of the users were that the forests belonged to them while the government functionaries believed that the forests were
allowed to be used by the people either by default or as a gesture of goodwill. As the countryside opened up, as the demand of all types of timber developed in the local and in the international markets, and as the state realized the potential monetary and other values of the forests, stricter rules were enforced by coercion to bring all these forests under the state control.
3.3 Post Colonial time
3.3.1 India
3.3.2 Indonesia
3.3.3 Thailand
3.3.4 Papua New Guinea
With the departure of the colonial administration and attainment of independence, the noose of state control around the forests were further tightened and the traditional users were more and more left out. Only around 1970s and thereafter some initiatives in devolution were taken.
3.3.1 India
In 1953, which is a few years after the attainment of independence, the government took over the forests which were earlier with the zaminders. Even as late as 1980, the Conservation Act stipulated that the central permission is required to change the legal status of any forest, which is a concurrent subject. It has been ensured in the Act that even the practice of agro-forestry in a forest area will need central permission or else attract punishment. The moves towards centralization was intended amongst others, to keep deforestation under check, to earn revenue from the forests for using it in the country's developmental work, to conserve certain areas for ecological purposes such as biodiversity and soil and water conservation, to put a break to the fast dwindling animal life and so on. However, the intention was not matched by performance. Whether by design, inefficiency, lack of political will or centralization being a wrong policy, none of the intended objectives was
attained in a significant manner. The states had faced obstacles to indiscriminately dereserve forests for ostensible development work, but overall deforestation went on increasing, the animal life dwindled further and the erosion of the forest land accentuated to clog the river valleys with more sediments.
3.3.2 Indonesia
Based on the provisions of the Indonesian Constitution, Basic Forestry Law enacted in 1967 empowered the central government to control all relations between the people and the corporations and the forests over about 143 million ha of Indonesian forests. Article 5 of this Law says, "All forests within the territory of Indonesia, including the natural resources contained therein, are controlled by the state". This includes private forests as well. The Central government used this law to take away gradually the adat (traditional) rights of the local people of the outer islands and to lease the forests for specific periods to the concessionaires for timber harvesting. Much of forest land was declared as terrestrial parks and reserves and permanent protection forest respectively (World Bank, 1993). In 1990, another scheme that impinges on the adat rights was introduced - namely timber plantation rights. By this the private, corporate and other bodies are allowed a tenure of 35
years a