<section>a</section>
9. NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
The diversity in climate conditions prevailing in this country has favoured the occurrence and good growth of a wide range of plant species giving produces of high value at local/international market places. Formerly they were regarded as minor forest products, but due to their importance for the life of local forest people under the present setting, they are renamed as "Special Forest Products" (or dac san) in Vietnam. Some of the non-wood forest products are:
· Cinnamon: Its bark and oil can be sold at high prices at market places, in particular at foreign ones, to which about 2,600 tons of cinnamon bark are delivered annually.
· Anise: Anise stars and oil are produced mainly for export; the exports annually amount to 600 tons of anise stars and 50 tons of anise oil.
· Pine resin: tapped from "resinous pine" (Pinus merkusii) and three-needle pine (Pinus khasya). Total amount of crude pine resin per year is about 2,500 tons. From this, rosin (about 1,500 tons) and turpentine oil (100 ton/year) are prepared. Rosin is exclusively used at local paper mills.
· Bamboos: Bamboos occur everywhere in Vietnam, in both forests and villages, showing a wide range of botanical varieties and giving a total supply of over 6.3 billion calms. They are used as building materials, for the making of many tolls and commodities in the countryside and for the manufacturing of some goods for export such as joss-sticks, chopsticks, skewers... During these last years, bamboos are used as the main raw materials for the production of paper in Vietnam in more than one paper mills. They annual production includes 100 million calms for commercial uses and about 600,000 tons for paper-making.
· Rattan: in particular the thicker ones are used in furniture making and interiors decoration. The export of rattan and bamboo articles has gone escalating from US$ 12 million in 1991 to 24 million in 1995.
· Besides, there are a lot of other non-wood products such as:
* Essential oils: cajeput oil, eucalyptus oil, citronella oil, Litsea oderata oil:
* Gums and resins: young oil, lacquers; and
* Pharmaceutical products: over 1,800 plant and grass species are giving high valued pharmaceutical products in Vietnam.
Towards the year 2000, the production of non-wood forest products, in particular those of high commercial values is to be developed through plantations, as shown below:
Area (in ha)
Production (in tons)
Cinnamon
25,000 (bark)
Anise
10,000-15,000 (stars)
Pine
120,000 (resin)
Tang oil
35,000 (seeds)
Rattans
150,000 (rattan, dry weight)
Bamboos
150,000-200,000 (culms)
Total
The main measures planned to reach these targets are:
· To continue allocating forest lands to people;
· To allocate adequate resources (to state-owned forest enterprises);
· To sign contracts with and call for capital (from national and foreign donors);
· To make policies on taxation for forest plantations; and
· To issue policies on special interest for credit supply.
<section>b</section>
10. ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND POLICY MAKING AND STRENGTHENING
10.1. Organizational development
10.2. Policy making and strengthening
10.1. Organizational development
Through administrative reforms, the Government has recently restructured its organizational set-up at the central and provincial levels. There is new the merging of agencies dealing with state administration with emphasis being laid upon the role of the ministries and sectors in state administration and a better definition of responsibilities of the central and provincial (or municipal) authorities under the present process of decentralization.
Based on the above, the former three ministries of Agriculture, Forestry, And Water Conservancy are combined into a Ministry of Agriculture and Rural development (MARD), which began to function as such in 1996.
At the provincial level, the three formed separate services of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Conservancy have been also combined into a Department of Agriculture and Rural Development.
The new MARD in Hanoi is headed by one (1) Minister and seven (7) Vice Ministers in charge of the administrative and the technical development functions of the ministry. MARD office now comprises two (2) groups: (1) the group of department in charge of state administrative responsibilities and (2) the group of specialized departments in charge of agricultural forestry and water conservancy activities. In the latter, there are two departments in charge of forestry activities:
· The Forestry Development Department acting as-an advisory body to help the Minister in his task of technical administration for the establishment, restoration, use and development of forest resources.
· The Forest Protection Department helping the Minister implement his administrative function for forest protection, the department at the same time is acting as a central technical and legal agency to enforce the low and to prevent forest low breaking over the whole country.
The re-structuring process does not only improve the efficiency of state administration by the former ministries but also creates conditions for a better coordination of activities for agricultural and rural development (see also the chart showing the organization of MARD).
10.2. Policy making and strengthening
Since 1986, with the policy of open-door to the outside world and that of encouraging all sectors of the national economy to develop their business the Government has enacted a number of relevant policies: some of them have had a strong impact on forestry development; they are:
a. Land policy
Forest lands are to be allocated to economic entities, not excepting farmer' households and individuals for long term farming following formal procedures and issuing of landuse certificates. After land reception. Local farmers are urged to carry out their land farming with the assistance of a number of other policies related to capital investments by state agencies loans and credit supply under favourable conditions agriculture-forestry extension and not the least taxation (for instance, water used for hydroelectric power generation is subject to a tax, the proceeds, of which is to be invested for watershed management and development).
For the most critical areas, in particular those in which extensive shifting cultivation is still the role, resettlement and sedentarization projects/programmes are being implemented thus helping local farmers to improve their farming system and their living conditions before the clearing of forested area can be made to reduce.
b. Forestry development
The guidelines for development are to shift from resource exploitation to its development from an exploitative forestry by State to a social forestry, using a number of appropriate agroforestry systems. Based upon these guidelines, relevant forest policies have been in force, implemented and then gained impetus.
c. Agricultural and forestry extension
The new approach and practice is being helped to come into existence development, allowing better extension of forestry technologies and agroforestry technologies. New methods and tools at the same time are adopted in agriculture-forestry extension activities/projects: two way communication, exchange of know-how and field experience, participatory approaches in solving problems, thus leading to active adoption of the introduced technologies, effective inputs of labour and resources by farmers and finally to successful establishment of forest plantations, and of agroforest systems. In particular, the state-owned forest enterprises, besides their work of direct management, now have had to carry out technical services to help farmers, establish their agroforest systems, maintain and protect natural forests, and more importantly to market their products, thus cresting conditions for the development of a forestry that looks quite different from that of the 70s.
d. Credit policy
Low interest loans can be grated to farmers for them to establish forest plantations (lower interest rates than those of loans of other kinds).
e. Taxation
Products from forest plantations are liable to landuse tax emanating to only 4% of their values (while products from natural forests can be taxed at 15-40% ad valorum) with tax exemption being granted to products from plantations established by farmer own funds.
However it is time to perfect the incentives and policies mentioned above for the advancement of forestry business.
· The system of combining forest land allocation and forest contracting functions quite well in practice, but the form and contents of the component related to forest contracting should be emended so to better link the benefits from forest and environment conservation with the long-term economic interest of farmers in particular in terms of their incomes.
· Some amendment to the taxation system should be made so that the proceeds from "landuse tax" (also called "resource-use" tax) can be ploughed back to better protect, manage and develop the forest resources.
· The credit policy, in particular the term and conditions of which for new forest establishment should be reshaped to make it more interesting to entrepreneurs.
· Incentives should be crested to be better link products processing units and industries with their stabilized raw materials area.
· Study should be made to "close the access to natural forests" in particular those of low standing volume as required by the Government, and draft on the matter should be submitted by MARD as soon as possible not later than the 2nd quarter of 1997 year.
· The law and by laws governing the extraction and transportation of timber from plantations by local farmers themselves should be improved so not to cause much trouble to those involved.
· The policies for the mobilization of people's resources, motivation of local farmers to obtain the necessary resources (capital, labour, technical supplies... are to be thought of and then shaped out).
With the above, it is to be hoped that the way to social forestry and a brighter prospect in forestry development in which landuse in forestry is stabilized and forest management is sustainable, can be opened up.
<section>c</section>
11. ASSESSMENT OF FUTURE SUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR FOREST PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
Economic growth in Vietnam recently have been developing quite rapidly at about rate 8,2% during 1991-1995. In 1997 that rate is estimated at about 9.5%. The future^6 supply and demand for forest products are estimated as follows:
6 Assume year 2010 for all projections.
a. Wood, timber and fuel-wood
Demand
· Timber for production of wood-base panels:
4.00 million m^3
· Timber for furniture making:
· Timber for construction:
· Wood and timber for paper making
· Timber for mine production
· Total:
23.67 million m^3
· Fuelwood
35 million m^3
Supply
Possible supply is planned to be taken from:
· Natural forests (of high standing volume):
0.6 million m^3
· Man-made forest plantations:
· Bamboos as substitutes:
· Total:
7 There is a major gap between this supply potential and projected demand. To import such large volumes presents major challenges for a significant time before significant areas of plantations mature (Editor).
The remaining demands are to be extracted from newly established forests. Vietnam is going to planted from 1996-1997 about 5 million hectares^8 of forest plantations. Other alternative is import of round timber. The supply for fuelwood for domestic and industrial uses from scattered trees planting and use of logging residues from industrial plantations and natural forests.
8 Till year 2003 as indicated later in report (Editor).
b. Non-wood forest products
These products are meant mainly for export. Estimated for export capacity as below.
* Cinnamon bark:
25,000 tons
* Anise and its products:
15,000 tons
* Pipe resin:
120,000 tons
* Rattan:
150,000 tons
* Bamboo:
120,000 tons
* Tung oil:
40,000 tons
<section>d</section>
12. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
The guidelines for development for the years to comes are an integrated development of agriculture, forestry and fishery. With regard to forestry the main points are: forestry development going hand in hand with the stabilization and improvement of living conditions for local people, speed-up regreening of denuded hills and bare lands, forest protection to encourage natural regeneration and restoration, all contributing to cresting better improved conditions for higher forestry development in the mountainous area. The main policies, strategies and activities are: the intensification of the process of forest lands and forest allocation to people the strengthening of forestry extension activities for long-term protection of forest resources ecosystems and genetic resources and for better wildlife control, improve land farming, careful timber extraction..., and not the least adequate planning and efficient establishment and running of wood-based industries.
It is also essential to improve the forest cover over the whole country to 40-50% and to create new jobs for at least 1 million to 2 million young farmers living in the mountain rural area.
A number of national programmes and projects have been operating to attain the above-mentioned objectives/goals.
- The programme 327. It was shaped out following the Decision 327 of the Government and has been implemented since September 1992. In September 1996 the programme was amended to become a national programme dealing with the establishment of protection forests and special-use forests (or protected area). The programme is to be implemented using agroforest technologies and specific projects, in which the driving force comes from farmers' households. The component projects should work for strengthening the protective role of national forests, for the conservation of the ecological environment, for alleviating the impacts of natural calamities for bettering landuse and the living conditions of local farmers, thus linking the interests of the country with the immediate benefits of local participants.
Projects within the programme are funded by the state, with contribution of local people and communities being provided under the form of labour for the establishment the protection and maintain of forests as stipulated in specific contracts.
- The Resettlement and Sedentarization Programme. Two (2)million people of ethnic minorities living in remote mountain area are said to still practice shifting cultivation or slash and burn methods of land farming. Their living conditions are far from being stabilized, but the environmental conditions in the areas they are living get deteriorated very seriously. Facing the problem of extensive shifting cultivation, the Government has developed a programme known as the resettlement and sedentarization programme to develop and introduce more sedentary methods of land farming and to improve the economic conditions in these areas.
Based upon the demand of local farmer' households and communities, the Government has allocated and delivered resources to develop and improve the marginal sloping agriculture lands through the establishment and consolidation of terraces, alley cropping for the cultivation of rice, other food, cash, fruit and tree crops and even medicinal plants, and also to protect the existing forests for better soil and water conservation, the programme has also invested capital for the development of infrastructure in these areas: developing the irrigation network, the road network, building more schools and health stations there.
The programme is going to expand its beneficial effects on economic development and on forestry development as planned: and as a result, the Government has paid much attention to programme development and implementation.
- Foreign-assisted forestry projects.
The most important ones are:
· The Vietnam-Sweden Mountain Rural development Programme funded by SIDA, new being implemented at 5 provinces in forestry development area of the north;
· The Technical Cooperation programme between Vietnam and Germany (GTZ): with a project dealing with social forestry development at Song Da in the two provinces of the North West;
· The Financial cooperation programme between Vietnam and Germany: dealing with forest plantation in the two northern provinces of Bac Giang and Lang Son and in three (3) provinces in central Vietnam of Ha Tinh, Quang Binh, Quang Tri;
· The WFP plantation programme now being implemented in 13 coastal provinces and other 5 provinces in the North;
· The EU project: for establishment and running of the nature reserve of Pu Mat Nghe An;
· The JICA project: providing equipment for the establishment of agroforest systems in Son la and Lai Chau provinces.
Other projects supported by UNDP, FAO and international NGOs have been also implemented for biodiversity conservation, sustainable land use and social forestry development.
- Industry plantation programme Under the current conditions of economic development in Vietnam, the demands in forest products (fuelwood and timber, non-wood forest products, et.) are going to increase dramatically (and under the conditions of some natural forests going to be closed for exploitation, that situation might get worse). Therefore, it is necessary to create intensively managed industrial plantations, in particular in specific areas. A plan to establish 5 million hectares of plantations of that category from now to the year 2003 have been approved for execution^9.
9 At an average of about 833,300 ha/year, the proposed plantation rate is of above average scale even for the Asia-Pacific region other than China and India (Editor).
The main measures to be adopted for successful in implementation of that programme by all sectors of the economy are:
· Landuse planning: a necessary step is to have a clear demarcation line between protection forest and production forests. For production forest lands already allocated to households, now having legal land-use certificates, these should be motivation and incentives so to encourage farmers do their farming as planned.
· Much more appropriate allocation of resources for forest plantation from national budgets, parallel with more intensive mobilization of funds within the country capital calling from foreign countries, improves joint ventures and limited companies establishment.
· Creation of credit/funds for money lending at favourably low interest rates for forest plantation;
· Greeting of tax holiday to encourage entrepreneurs to get involved in the different business of tree planting and wood production;
· Strengthening forestry extension to help farmers carry their plantations for profit; and
· Training of technical and managers for effective and efficient management to cope with different task of developing a large scale forest plantation programme.
<section>e</section>
ANNEX - STRUCTURE OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
· Minister (Supported by The Office; The Inspectorate)
· 1st Vice Minister
(Forestry Development Planning, Scientific Technology, International Cooperation, Investigation and Training)
· 6 Vice Ministers:
Forest Production, Forest Protection, Fixed Cultivation, Mountain Working Programme Management 556 (327), 773
Water Development Planning, Basic Construction, Agriculture and Forest Product Processing
Flood and Storm Protection, Dyke Management, Water Management (Hydro Power)
Agriculture and Forest Product Processing, Food Import/Export; State Enterprises; Sugar Cane Programme
Agriculture Production; Rural Development; Establishment Cooperatives; Clear Water Programme
Agriculture & Rural Development and Cooperatives in the South
· 16 Departments:
General State Management
Planning and Programming Dept.,
Capital Construction Investment Dept.,
Science, Technology & Product Quality Dept.,
Agriculture & Rural Development Policies Dept.,
International Cooperation Dept.,
Finance-Accountancy Dept.,
Organization & Personnel Dept.,
Specialized State Management
Forestry Development Dept.,
Ranger Department.,
Plant Protection Dept.,
Veterinary Dept.,
Agriculture & Forestry Promotion Dept.,
Agricultural & Forest Products Processing and Rural Occupation Dept.,
Water & Irrigation Projects Management Dept.,
Prevention & Fight against Floods and Storms, and Dyke Management Dept.,
Sedentarization and New Economic Zones Dept.
<section>f</section>
List of Working Papers already released
APFSOS/WP/01
Regional Study - The South Pacific
APFSOS/WP/02
Pacific Rim Demand and Supply Situation, Trends and Prospects: Implications for Forest Products Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/03
The Implications of the GATT Uruguay Round and other Trade Arrangements for the Asia-Pacific Forest Products Trade
APFSOS/WP/04
Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/05
In-Depth Country Study - New Zealand
APFSOS/WP/06
In-Depth Country Study - Republic of Korea
APFSOS/WP/07
Country Report - Malaysia
APFSOS/WP/08
Country Report - Union of Myanmar
APFSOS/WP/09
Challenges and Opportunities: Policy options for the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/10
Sources of Non-wood Fibre for Paper, Board and Panels Production: Status, Trends and Prospects for India
APFSOS/WP/11
Country Report - Pakistan
APFSOS/WP/12
Trends and Outlook for Forest Products Consumption, Production and Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/13
Country Report - Australia
APFSOS/WP/14
Country Report - China
APFSOS/WP/15
Country Report - Japan: Basic Plan on Forest Resources and Long-Term Perspective on Demand and Supply of Important
Forestry Products
APFSOS/WP/16
Country Report - Sri Lanka
APFSOS/WP/17
Forest Resources and Roundwood Supply in the Asia Pacific Countries: Situation and Outlook to Year 2010
APFSOS/WP/18
Country Report - Cambodia
APFSOS/WP/19
Wood Materials from Non-Forest Areas
APFSOS/WP/20
Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010
APFSOS/WP/21
Decentralization and Devolution of Forest Management in Asia and the Pacific
APFSOS/WP/22
Commentary on Forest Policy in the Asia-Pacific Region (A Review for Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua-New Guinea, Philippines, Thailand, And Western Samoa
APFSOS/WP/23
Asia Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook: Focus On Coconut Wood
APFSOS/WP/24
Ecotourism And Other Services Derived From Forests In The Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010
APFSOS/WP/25
Technology Scenarios in the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector
APFSOS/WP/26
In-Depth Country Report - India
APFSOS/WP/27
People and Forests: Situation and Prospects
APFSOS/WP/28
Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study for Asia and The Pacific: Towards 2010
APFSOS/WP/29
Opportunities for Forestry Investment in Asia and the Pacific Through Carbon Offset Initiatives
APFSOS/WP/30
Country Report - The Maldives
APFSOS/WP/31
Country Report - Vietnam
<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Country Report - Vietnam</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies.
Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome, 00100, ITALY
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Regional Forestry Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200 THAILAND
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: < Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org >
<section>2</section>
1. CURRENT ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS
1.1. Vietnam: the country and its population
1.2. Economic aspects
1.1. Vietnam: the country and its population
Located at the eastern part of the Indochinese Peninsula, Vietnam is in the centre of South East Asia and a tropical country of the northern hemisphere. The country is bounded on its northern side by Chine, on its western side by Lao and Cambodia, and on its eastern and southern sides by the East Vietnam Sea. Its coastline extends over 3,260 km, between the following geographical coordinates:
Latitude: 8°02' - 23° 23' N
Longitude: 102°08' - 109°28' E.
Its territory comprises a total land mass of 330,991 square kilometres, surrounding at its eastern side by an immense area of waters. Its territorial waters including its 12 - nautical miles area and its 200 - mile exclusive economic zone account for one million sq. km.
The pattern of landuse^1 and its coverage read as follows:
^1 Where year is not specified, "around 1995" should be assumed (Editor).
Description
Area (in sq. km.)
Percentage
Total land area
1. Farmland
2. Forest land
3. Special landuse
4. Residential area
5. Lands not under use
The topography of the country is complex, carved with many mountains rivers high plateaux and plains of different sizes; nearly three-fourth of its lands are under mountains, hills and high plateaux and carved by a dense network of watercourses, among which the two biggest ones are the Red River and the Mekong.
The climatic conditions of the country bear the monsoon characteristics of South East Asia with: the prevailing North East and South East winds an average temperature of 24-27°C (the highest temperature being found only in southern provinces of the country), and an average annual rainfall of 1,500-2,500 mm falling very often exclusively in the local rainy season from May to October.
Population density in Vietnam is found to be the highest in South East Asia reaching up to 1,000 people per square kilometre in the Red River Delta (the average figure being 232 people per square kilometre). In 1995, the population size of Vietnam reached 74 million people, ranking second in South East Asia, seventh in Asia-Pacific Region and twelfth the world over.
According to statistics, the rate of population growth from 1989 to 1994 was 2.15%, causing an increase by 1,6 million people to happen at Vietnam annually 80% of this population are living in the countryside, and 75% of same are practising agriculture and forestry, living with lands and forests.
Assuming that the above mentioned situation is still going on more or less up to the year 2000, that from the years 2000-2005, the population growth rate will be 1.8%, and that from 2000-2010, the same will be 1.7%, the population of Vietnam will ranch: 83 million people in the year 2000, 87 million people in the year 2005, and 95 million people in the year 2010.
Rapid population growth has caused economic development to meet with difficulties in particular in dealing with social problems, in stabilizing and enhancing the living and educational standards of people, in providing employment opportunities to local people who are acutely suffering now from full- and part-time unemployment.
In spite of the fact that the Government has paid much attention to the running of a number of birth control programmes. The active female population affected by the way of thinking prevailing in the decades 50-70 of this century, in which birth control was not applied, has responded quite weakly, as a result the population growth rate in this country up to the year 2010 will slow down to only 1.6-1.7%.
1.2. Economic aspects
Referring to its GDP per person, Vietnam is regarded as a poor country. However, since 1986 when "dot moi"^2 at last came to this country, its economic recovery and development has been strongly accelerated. The main features of that economic development during the period 1986-1995 are: the commercial production of goods and commodities by all sectors of the national economy, and the functioning of a market economy macro-economically managed by the state following socialist principles. Ten years of "dot moi", the national economy has been developing at a quite high rate allowing the living standards of local people to improve the national income to increase not only to meet national outlays but also to promote further accumulation of capital. In spite of weaknesses, the recent economic and social crisis of the 50s is said to have gone.
^2 The "doi moi" philosophy encompasses the combination of policy and institutional adaptations associated with liberalization, opening up and reform. Its adoption is generally given credit for the spurt in economic performance of Vietnam in recent years (Editor).
This is quite apparent through an examination of GDPs During the period 1991-1995, the cumulative increase in GDP accounts for 48.3% with an average of 8.2% per year and annual increases described as follows: 6% in 1991, 8.6% in 1992, 8.1% in 1993, 8.8% in 1994 and about 9.5% in 1995.
A general description of the Vietnamese economic conditions in 1995 is given below:
Description
Unit
1. Population size
Million people
1. GDP
Billion US$
- Farm
- Non-farm
- Services
2. Increase in National Income
- Farm
- Non-farm
- Services
3. Export Earnings
million US$
4. Imports
million US$
5. Food production (equivalent paddy)
million tons
6. Electric power generation
million KWH
7. GDP per person
US$
8. Population growth rate
Source: Yearbook 1995-SRV Central Statistical Office.
The contribution to GDP from farm industries (including those based on forests) amounted in 1994 to 35%, in 1995 to 28%. With the on-going process of industrialization and modernization of the national economy, that contribution to national GDP in the year 2005 will be only 20% and in the year 2010, it will be more or less the same as above.
Looking at the Forestry Sector, one can find that the forested land area of Vietnam amounts to 9.3 million hectares and its non-forested land area to 10 million hectares. Out of 9.3 million hectares of forests, there are 8.3 million hectares of natural forests, others being man-made ones. Based upon forest landuse, the forests of Vietnam are categorized into special-use forests, protection forests and production forests with their area being estimated as follows: Special-use forests: 0.9 million hectares; Protection forests: 3.5 million hectares; and Production forests: 4.9 million hectares (Source - Forest Inventory 1995.)
Main forest products and their values in 1995
Description
unit
Values/Amount in 1995
1. Values of forest products (at constant prices of 1989)
Million US$
- Forest establishment