<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Country Report: Nepal</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects. Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing
the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome, 00100, ITALY
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Regional Forestry Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200
THAILAND
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org>
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Nepal is a small, landlocked country situated between China and India, at 80° 04' E to 88° 12' E longitude and 26° 22' N to 30° 27' N latitudes. It has a total area of about 14.7 million hectares and a rectangular shape extending from east to west. Rugged terrain makes up more than 80% of Nepal. In the south there is a belt of almost level land known as the Terai, which is an extension of the Gangetic plain of India.
Within a horizontal distance of about 150 km there is a climatic range from the sub-tropics of the Terai to the upper tree limit and perennial snow. The number of ecosystems per unit area is probably greater than in any other country in the world. Due to the wide range of climatic and topographic conditions across the country, almost every known forest type (except for tropical rain forest) is found in Nepal.
Most of Nepal lies within the sub-tropical monsoon climatic region, but because of its varied topography and elevation, it experiences a wide range of climates. Precipitation varies greatly from one place to another: the average, however, ranges from 250 to 4,500 mm.
This report attempts to assess the status, trends and outlook for Nepal's forestry sector to 2010. It will serve as an input to the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector - Towards 2010 being prepared by the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. The report tries to summarize the available forestry statistics and information together with an informed judgement and assessment of trends of Nepal's forestry sector. Most of the projections given here are based on the Master Plan for the Forestry Sector Nepal (MPFS, 1988) which spells out the forestry policy and programmes of Nepal. Up to date departmental reports and records have also been rigorously consulted. Comments from forestry officials on the draft version have also been incorporated in this report.
<section>3</section>
2. CONTEXT IN WHICH THE FORESTRY SECTOR IS DEVELOPING
2.1. Highlights of social and economic situation
2.2. Objectives
2.3. Role of Nepal in the regional context
2.4. Major issues
2.1. Highlights of social and economic situation
The people of Nepal have traditionally depended on forests for the supply of fuelwood, fodder, timber and other forest products. This heavy pressure on forests together with the land use practices that are not compatible with the terrain of the country, has resulted in serious environmental problems. The country's economy largely depends on the use of its natural resources, but the growth has been hampered by the lack of economic opportunities and infrastructures. The problems have been further exacerbated by rising poverty and environmental degradation.
Nepal has largely a subsistence economy. The GDP of Nepal is US$ 3,063 million and the per capita income is US$ 180. Together with agriculture, forestry plays a central role in the economic and social life of the rural people. The share of agriculture, forestry and fishery in the GDP is about 60% with forestry contributing about 15%. According to the data compiled by the Central Bureau of Statistics in 1993/94 forestry sector earned US$ 4.4 million for the treasury (CBS, 1996).
Livestock raising is an essential component of the rural farming system. It is the second major economic activity in rural areas accounting for about a quarter of the annual farm income. Grazing in the forest by the livestock is heavy and goes on all round the year. Over-grazing is one of the primary factors responsible for the rapid depletion of the forests. This in turn has resulted in acute shortage of feed and fodder for livestock. Although most farmers have private fodder trees and some possess private forest land, these are rarely sufficient to meet the year-round feed requirements of the increasing numbers of livestock.
According to 1991 census, the population of Nepal was 18,491,097 (9,220,974 males and 9,270,123 females). Population density was 125/km^2 and more than 90% live in rural areas. The population growth rate is estimated at 2.1%. The main reason for the fast growth in recent years is that the birth rate remains high whereas the death rate has declined. Figure 1 shows the estimated population 1991-2010.
Figure 1: Population estimates 1991 - 2010
Source: CBS (1996)
Over half of the population lives in the mountainous areas and most are dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. Yet the ratio of agricultural land to agricultural population is only 0.12 ha/capita. Consequently, the hill residents are forced to seek off-farm employment through both reasonable and permanent migration to the Terai and urban areas. Migration has been taking place from the mountains to the Terai and from rural to urban areas. Nepal has a chronic problem of unemployment and under employment, brought about by a combination of factors such as high population growth rate, scarcity of cultivable land, declining agricultural productivity and the slow pace of industrialization.
Agriculture is by for the most important sector of the economy. About 90% of the population is supported by it. All the efforts made during the five-year plan periods to raise agricultural output and productivity have met with little success due mainly to increasing population density and the consequent decrease of cultivable land per capita.
Nepal has to depend heavily on external funding sources for all development works including forestry. Data shows that in recent years the contribution of the external sources has been increasing at a slightly higher rate than that of the domestic sources. In 1994/95 the external sources made up about half of the total development expenditure in the forestry sector.
On an average, forestry sector has been receiving only 4.6% of the government's total development expenditure. It can be expected that this trend will continue in the coming years. Table 1 compares total development expenditure of the government and the expenditure on forestry.
Table 1: Total development expenditure vs. forestry sector (million US$)
Year
Total Expenditure
Forestry Sector
Adapted from CBS (1996)
In spite of the most extreme physical difficulties, Nepal has built up a considerable road transportation system. So far nearly 9,600 km of roads have been constructed. Of this, 3,404 km is black top, 2,373 gravelled and 3,757 fair-weather (CBS, 1996). The gradual increase in the length of roads has improved the north-south and east-west linkage of different parts of the Kingdom. Public transport services, mostly in the private sector, have developed with the construction of roads. The nearest port is Calcutta in India which is 1,127 km away. Nepal uses Indian railways and roads for transporting goods to and from Calcutta. Air transport may seem to be too expensive for a poor country like Nepal. Given the difficult terrain, however, air transport is the most logical and feasible transport system in many parts of the country.
So far, no commercial deposits of oil, coal or gas have been found. So the development of hydro-electricity for power has been emphasized. However, electricity has contributed very little to the country's total consumption of energy. Fuelwood from the forests is therefore the major source of energy for domestic consumption. With a view to reducing the pressure on the forests, the government is launching plans and programs to develop alternative sources of energy such as biogas, turbines, solar and wind energy, as well as a particular emphasis on hydra-power.
2.2. Objectives
Long-term
Medium-term
The Master Plan for the Forestry Sector has spelled out the following objectives for the development of the forestry sector.
Long-term
· to meet the basic needs of the people for fuelwood, fodder, timber, and other forest products, and to contribute to food production through an effective interaction between forestry and farming practices.
· to protect the land against degradation by soil erosion, floods, landslides, desertification, and other effects of ecological imbalance.
· to conserve the ecosystems and genetic resources.
· to contribute to the growth of local and national economies by developing forest management and forest based industries and creating opportunities for income generation and employment.
Medium-term
· to support decentralization and promote people's participation in forest resource development, management and conservation.
· to develop the legal framework needed to enhance the contribution of individuals, communities, and institutions to forest resource development, management, and conservation.
· to strengthen the organizational framework and develop the institutions of the forestry sector to enable them to carry out their missions.
2.3. Role of Nepal in the regional context
From the beginning of the 1900s till 1979 the successive governments of Nepal had pursued the policy of large scale export of logs and timber from the Terai and Siwalik regions to India. In fact, up to 1970 the income from the forest was the largest source of government revenues in Nepal. Logs and timber export has been banned since 1979. Nevertheless, due to the open border between India and Nepal, illegal smuggling of logs and timber has continued. This has usually intensified during the periods of political turmoil when the government security machinery is weakened.
The supply of logs and timber has been adequate to fulfil the domestic demand of the country. Although some timber has been imported from Malaysia in recent years, it has not been able to compete with local timber in terms of quality.
If managed properly the forests of the Terai still have a great potential of earning huge amounts of revenue for the government. According to Pessonen (1994), if 50,000 ha of sal forests were managed as commercial production units on a sustainable basis, they would bring net income and royalties from timber worth US$ 10 million annually.
Nepal has been actively participating in almost all forestry and environment related regional forums, networks and projects. More important among these are: Farmer-centred Agricultural Resource Management (FARM) project, Asia-Pacific Agroforestry Network (APAN), Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia (FORSPA). Due to its political neutrality, Nepal has the potential of playing a leadership role in coordinating the activities of these international bodies in South Asian Region. For example, ICIMOD has its headquarters in Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal.
Due to its location in the Himalayas the sources of water for the major river systems of north India and Bangladesh, the proper management of Nepal's watersheds has an important international significance. Similarly, Nepal's national parks and wildlife reserves serve as attractive ecotourism spots for the people of the region. For example, in 1995/96 14,636 Indian tourists (18% of all visitors) visited the Royal Chitwan National Park in the Central Terai of Nepal (DNPWC, 1996).
In terms of policy development, Nepal's community forestry policy and legislation have been instrumental in shaping up similar policies in other countries of the region. Groups of policy makers and professional have been coming to Nepal on study tours to learn about Nepal's community forestry programme.
2.4. Major issues
The major issues confronting the development of forestry in Nepal are summarized in this section.
· The increasing human and livestock population continues to exert intense pressure on the forests. Excessive and uncontrolled grazing has created problems like low natural regeneration, soil compacting, reduced infiltration, increased runoff, soil erosion and related downstream impacts.
· The forest based industries have suffered severely from the declining supply of raw materials.
· The Timber Corporation of Nepal has monopoly right to harvest and market logs and fuelwood. This introduces market distortions and entrenches inefficiency in the forest operations.
· The cumbersome bureaucratic permit system seriously discourages private forestry. Lack of dissemination of information, quality seed supply, planting material and adequate technical support has not been conducive to successful private forestry.
· The government has not been able to scientifically manage the country's forest resources which have high potential of generating enormous revenues. Management plans have been prepared for many districts of the Terai. However, it is not clear whether the government can allocate enough budget for their implementation.
· Many donors are involved in Nepal's forestry sector but we are still far from achieving the goal of coordinating/complementing the projects of the donors for the overall development, management and utilization of forest resources.
· In spite of the involvement of many NGOs in the forestry sector, the government has not been able to establish mutually beneficial working relations with them.
· Community forestry programme has gained momentum: some 300,000 ha of forests in the hill districts have been converted to de jure community forests. Technical support to the Forest User Groups (FUGs) by the District Forest Office still calls for much improvement. Many instances of conflict have also begun to surface in community forestry which is a serious issue.
· There is also a need to change the organizational set up of government forestry institutions according to the future changes in policies and programmes.
· Matching up of forestry research with the needs of forest management is also a critical issue.
<section>4</section>
3. THE STATE OF FORESTRY IN NEPAL
3.1. Status and trends of forest resources
3.2. Policies and institutions
3.3. Environmental initiatives, protected areas and wildlife resources
3.4. Wood energy
3.5. Wood based industries
3.6. Non-wood forest products
3.7. Forests as service industry
3.1. Status and trends of forest resources
The distribution of natural forests generally follows attitudinal zones. Below 1,000 m there are tropical forest, predominantly of Shorea robusta. Acacia catechu/Dalbergia sissoo forests replace Shorea along rivers. In the foot hills in western Nepal, Shorea is replaced by Terminalia/Anogeissus forests.
Sub-tropical forests occur between 1,000-2,000 m which include Pinus roxburghii, Alnus nepalensis, Schima wallichii and Castanopsis sp. Lower temperate forests (2,000-2,700 m) consists of Pinus wallichiana and several species of Quercus. Upper temperate forests (2,700-3,000 m) includes Quercus semecarpifolia forest along with Rhododendron arboreum, Acer sp, Pinus wallichiana etc.
Sub-alpine forests are found at around 3,000 m up to 4,200 m. Abies spectabilis, Betula utilis and Rhododendron forests and Juniperus Indica forest represent this category. The alpine zone has no trees, but shrubby Rhododendron and Juniperus are found up to 4,500 m.
The forest area of Nepal is estimated to be 5.5 million ha or 37.4% of the total area of the country. The "other land" category covering another 15.7% has good potential for development into forest or pasture. These lands include shrublands, grasslands and uncultivated areas. Table 2 shows the distribution of Nepal's natural forests.
Table 2: The distribution of Nepal's natural forests (' 000 ha.)
Distribution by
Conifer
Hardwoods
Mixed
Total
Crown cover
Maturity
poles & regeneration
small timber
large timber
Nepal - total
Adapted from (MPFS, 1988)
More than a quarter of the forests are degraded (less than 40% crown cover). Almost two-thirds are occupied predominantly by small-sized timber, and one-third by large timber. There is not enough regeneration or pole-sized stands. The total growing stock is 522 million m^3 over-bark up to 10 cm top diameter or an average of 96 m^3/ha (MPFS, 1988).
Annual government and community planting has been 5,260 ha during the 1992-96 period. Reliable figures for private planting, however, are not available. Dalbergia sissoo is the most common plantation species in the Terai. Eucalyptus camaldulensis. Acacia catechu, Tectona grandis and Albizia sp. have also been planted. In the mountains, Pinus roxburghii has been the most commonly planted species. In recent years a number of other species such as Alnus nepalensis, Ficus sp. and Primus cerasoides have also been planted.
With regard to forest land use changes, a total of 103,968 ha of forests in the Siwaliks and Terai were cleared under the government's settlement programme from the 1950s to mid 1980s (MPFS, 1988). A more recent study conducted by FORESC which compares the 1978/79 maps with the Landsat data of 1990/91 shows that the annual deforestation rate is 1.3% for the Terai (FORESC, 1994). This is less pessimistic than the figure of 3.9% given by MPFS (1988).
The major causes of forest degradation are over-cutting of wood for fuel and heavy lopping of trees for fodder. Forest fire is also a major cause. Although forests are not immediately lost unless the fire spreads to the canopy, they are doomed by continuous loss of reproduction. Another cause of forest degradation in Terai is the illicit felling of timber for smuggling across the border to India.
3.2. Policies and institutions
3.2.1. Policies
3.2.2. Institutions
3.2.1. Policies
The inherent vulnerability of the national forests to degradation and encroachment has long been recognized and a strategic plan for bringing the situation under control was elaborated in the Master Plan for the Forestry Sector. To facilitate implementation of the Plan, Forest Act 1993 and Forest By laws 1995 are in place.
The Master Plan outlines broad strategies for sustainable management of the nation's forest resources in line with Nepal's economic, social and environmental goals. These are further elaborated in the Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-97). The first priority is to increase forest production and productivity without permanently damaging the resource base. The second is to reduce pressure on the resource through increasing efficiency in resource use, development of alternative sources of energy, rehabilitation of degraded forest land, promotion of private farm forestry and enforcement of legislation.
According to MPFS (1988), the approved forestry policy of Nepal is as follows:
a) Production and Utilization
· The forest resource to be managed and utilized for the basic priority products of fuelwood, fodder, timber, and medicinal plants.
· Forests near villages to be managed with the people's participation.
b) Conservation of ecosystems and genetic resources
· Land and forest resources to be managed and utilized according to their ecological capability so as to conserve the forests, soil, water, flora, fauna and scenic beauty.
c) Social aspects of land use
· The principles of decentralization policy to be applied in the forestry sector by community forestry as the priority forest management strategy.
· If the availability of forest land exceeds the needs of the local communities, the excess will be allocated for forest management in the following priority sequence: people living below the poverty line, small farmers and forest-based industries.
· Emphasis will be given to the multiple utilization of land for integrated farming systems by strengthening soil conservation and watershed management, agroforestry and other related activities.
d) Role of the private sector
· Establishment of private forests on leased and private land to be promoted.
· The Government to lease land to forest based enterprises for growing raw materials. New industries to be established only if their plans for the production and acquisitions of raw materials are acceptable to the Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation.
3.2.2. Institutions
The Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation (MFSC) and the four departments under it are the major government forestry institutions. MFSC is responsible for policy formulation in the forestry sector. It does that in close collaboration with National Planning Commission for the plan and programmes and the Ministry of Finance for budget. It is also responsible for drafting forest legislation in close rapport with the Ministry of Law and Justice. The four departments under MFSC are:
· Department of Forest
· Department of Soil Conservation
· Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation
· Department of Plant Resources.
The ministry is also responsible in supervising the operations of the following parastatals and development boards:
· Nepal Rosin and Turpentine Industry
· Herb Production and Processing Company
· Forest Products Development Board
· Forest Research and Survey Centre Development Board.
The Timber Corporation of Nepal (TCN) under the Ministry of Supplies is involved in the marketing of logs collected from the government forests.
The Forest User Groups (FUGs) also comprise a prominent institution in the use and management of the forest resource. A large number of NGOs, both national and international, are active in Nepal. Because of the extensive destruction and degradation of the forest resource in the country with adverse impact on the supply of forest goods and services, many of them have incorporated tree planting and forest conservation in their agenda.
A large number of bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors are providing technical and financial support to Nepal. The more important bi-lateral donors are: USAID, ODA, AusAid, DANIDA, FINNIDA, GTZ, SDC, JICA and SNV. The multi-lateral donor agencies are: World Bank, FAO, EU, IFAD, ADB and UNDP. Agencies like CARE and UMN are also involved in Nepal's forestry sector.
Many other institutions are also closely associated with the forestry sector in Nepal. These include: Institute of Forestry, Tribhuvan University, professional societies like Nepal Foresters Association, Association of Forest-based Industrialists, Ministry of Population and Environment and many environmental forums.
3.3. Environmental initiatives, protected areas and wildlife resources
The National Park and Wildlife Conservation Act provides for five categories of protected areas to help achieve the conservation of ecosystems and genetic resources. As defined in the Act, these are:
· National Park: an area set aside for conservation, management and utilization of flora and fauna together with the natural environment.
· Strict Nature Reserve: an area of ecological significance set aside for scientific study.
· Wildlife Reserve: an area set aside for the conservation of animal and bird resources and their habitats.
· Hunting Reserve: an area set aside for the management of animal and bird resources for hunting purpose.
· Conservation Area: an area managed for the sustainable development of human and natural resources.
In addition to protected areas under the National Park and Wildlife Conservation Act, the government may designate any land in public or private ownership as "protected watershed" based on the Soil and Watershed Conservation Act.
In the short history of protected areas in Nepal, diverse natural areas have been selected to protect notable biological communities representing the flora, fauna and culture of the country. To date there are eight National Parks, four Wildlife Reserves, one Hunting Reserve and two Conservation Areas totalling 2,105,100 ha, i.e. 14% of the country's total land area.
The Terai and High Mountain zones are well represented in Nepal's protected area system whereas the Middle Mountain zone is not adequately covered. The need for further protected areas to achieve better representation is recognized in national policies.
Some 100 mammalian, 850 bird and 3 large reptile species are found in the country out of which 26 mammals, nine birds and three reptile species are listed as totally protected in Nepal (MPFS, 1988). These are also listed in the Red Data Book on IUCN as rare and endangered species. Fish have not been included in the protected fauna so far.
The protected areas are closely associated with local people. The ultimate goal is to safeguard human and cultural values along with the natural environment. Accordingly, the habitation areas surrounding the National Parks have been classified as Buffer Zone and there is a legal provision for sharing the revenues of a National Park with the local communities living within the Buffer Zone.
The protected areas of Nepal clearly demonstrate the existence of varieties of plant and animal biodiversity in Nepal. In addition, there is also an urgent need to incorporate biodiversity management in forest areas outside protected areas (community forests and government forests).
3.4. Wood energy
Fuelwood is consumed in households as well as industries. Per capita consumption in household varies from one physiographic zone to another, because of climatic, economic and other differences. Based on per capita figures, combined with population projections, total household fuelwood consumption can be generated. Table 3 shows the projection of household fuel consumption.
Table 3: Household fuel consumption projection ('000 tonnes)
zone
High Himal
High Mountains
Middle Mountains
Siwaliks
Terai
Nepal
Adapted from MPFS (1988).
It is estimated that household fuel consumption in the Middle Mountains and Siwaliks will continue to increase. However, consumption in the High Mountains and High Himal will decline, as the population in these areas decreases because of migration to lower zones. The Terai has the biggest projected increase in consumption as a result of the big population increase that is expected, mainly from migration. It is estimated that 80% of fuelwood is obtained from forests, and private trees are the source of the remaining 20% fuelwood demand. Table 4 shows the industrial fuelwood consumption projections.
Table 4: Industrial fuelwood consumption projections ('000 tonnes)
Zone
Middle Mountains
Siwaliks
Terai
Nepal
Adapted from MPFS (1988).
A decrease is predicted in fuelwood use by industries after 2000, as industries switch over to alternative fuels possibly electricity.
3.5. Wood based industries
3.5.1. Timber Harvesting
3.5.2. Sawmilling
3.5.3. Furniture industry
3.5.4. Plywood
3.5.5. Wooden handicrafts
3.5.6. Papermills
The first mechanized wood-based industry, in the form of a match factory, was established only in 1938. Successive five year plans have emphasized the development of industries based on indigenous materials; the speeding up of industrial development and the contribution of forests to the country's economic, social and industrial development. However, the wood-based industries have not advanced much, because of a number of constraints.
3.5.1. Timber Harvesting
Two streams of timber harvesting is prevalent in Nepal. The first is the crude, manual harvesting by the villagers. The other is through government agencies. The harvesting techniques are labour intensive and only slightly more mechanized than those used by the villages. Hand saws and axes are used for felling, delimbing and cross-cutting. Bullock carts are used to bring the logs to depots, from where they are loaded manually onto trucks that take them to the mill. At present these are no industries being planned that would require large volumes of logs over short periods. It is therefore, unlikely that timber harvesting techniques will change much, except for the introduction of better hand tools.
3.5.2. Sawmilling
It is estimated that 86% of all timber consumption takes place outside industrial units i.e. rural consumption. Industrial saw milling is done by private saw mills. The saw mills are all technically similar, consisting of a horizontal band saw with a very simple carriage and a vertical band saw for re-sawing. Power is supplied by electricity or diesel engine. Private saw mills are licensed without being given timber quotes, and are dependent on parastatals for their log supply. The saw milling industry supplies the towns with sawn wood, where it is used for furniture, joinery, building and construction.
Based on the growth of urban population and assuming a constant per capita consumption and 10% demand by development projects the demand for industrial sawn wood has been projected in table 5.
Table 5: Demand for industrial sawn wood up to 2010
Urban population, million
Consumption '000 m^3 per capita
Sub total '000 m^3/yr.
Development projects (10% above)
Total demand '000 m^3/yr.
Corresponding log requirement, '000 m^3/yr.
Adapted from MPFS (1988).
The capacity of the present saw milling industry is more than sufficient to meet sawn wood requirements up to 2010. However, most of the mills will have to be renovated before that date. Some many have to be relocated for better access to the raw material. In order for it to be able to serve Nepal with a supply of sawn wood, sawmilling would have to be recognized as an industry and not just an extension or by-product of forestry.
3.5.3. Furniture industry
Nepal's furniture industry includes modern factories, hundreds of small workshops and thousands of individual carpenters. To meet future demand, there is room for additional modern factories, but these will have to secure raw materials from the parastatals. Existing factories are already unable to operate at full capacity because of the lack of raw materials. While furniture has export potential, since its value added nature could overcome the high transport cost, there are problems that would have to be solved in raw material supply, product quality, suitable designs, and knowledge of export markets.
3.5.4. Plywood
There are two plywood mills in Nepal whose total production capacity is 62,300 m^2. Both mills have old machinery and are very labour intensive. Because of shortage of raw materials, these mills 