<section>7</section>
5. ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS TO 2010
5.1 Summary scenario results
5.2 Base Case Scenario
5.3 Scarcity Scenario
5.4 Stronger Demand with Scarcity Scenario
5.1 Summary scenario results
This section examines some alternative scenarios for development for the Asia-Pacific region using the ITTO Trade Model. Three scenarios are considered:
· Base Case scenario
· Scarcity scenario
· Strong Demand with Scarcity scenario
The Base Case scenario models the status quo - how the forest sector of the Asia-Pacific region might develop if current, commonly held assumptions about its determinants continue to hold over the planning horizon and the region avoids unforeseen scarcity, changes in trade policy, or consumer acceptance of substitute products.
The Scarcity scenario addresses two issues described earlier in the paper: the possibility that the harvesting limits from current sources assumed for 2010 are unsustainable, and the likelihood that log exports from Malaysia and Papua New Guinea will be reduced by the end of the study period.
The Strong Demand with Scarcity scenario examines the eventuality that demand in the region for sawnwood and panel products will develop at a rate exceeding the base trend incorporated into the model and described earlier in this report, and that the scarcity conditions assumed in the Scarcity scenario also develop.
Table 8 - Summary of scenario results: price and quantity in 2010
Scenarios:
Base Case
Scarcity
Demand & Scarcity
Scarcity (% of Base Case)
Demand & Scarcity (% of Base Case)
Demand & Scarcity (% of Scarcity)
Consumption
Q[d] Ply
Q[d ]Saw
P[d] Ply
P[d] Saw
Supply
Q[s] C
Q[s ]IU
Q[s ]LI
Q[s ]Con
P[s ]C
P[s ]IU
P[s ]LI
P[s ]Con
Manufacturing
Consumers
Q[m] Ply
Q[m] S Ply
Q[m] Saw
Q[m] S Saw
Producers
Q[m] Ply
Q[m] S Ply
Q[m] Saw
Q[m] S Saw
Total
Q[m] Ply
Q[m] S Ply
Q[m] Saw
Q[m] S Saw
Trade
Q[e] Logs
Q[i] Logs
Q[e ]Ply
Q[i ]Ply
Q[e] Saw
Q[i] Saw
Q[e] S Logs
Q[i ]S Logs
Notes:
Q
quantity
C
current sources
volumes are '000 m^3
P
price index
IU
improved utilization
price index 1995=100
s
supply
LI
low-impact harvesting
d
demand
Con
conifer logs
m
manufacture
Logs
logs
e
export
Ply
plywood and veneer
i
import
Saw
sawnwood
S
softwood only
The Base Case results are described in detail, while the reporting of the other two scenarios is limited to identifying results that differ from the Base Case and discussing their significance. Table 8 summarizes the results for each of the three scenarios.
5.2 Base Case Scenario
Key assumptions
The Base Case scenario incorporates assumptions about log supply, consumer demand for tropical timber forest products and their willingness to accept substitutes, and log export policies.
Log supply
The availability of logs from current sources is assumed to increase slightly from 69 million m^3 in 1995 to 71 million m^3 in 2010. The Base Case scenario also includes potential incremental supply that could total 44 million m^3 by 2010: 18 million m^3 from improved utilization, 10 million m^3 from the adoption of low-impact harvesting technology, 12 million m^3 from conifer logs imported into the region, and 4 million m^3 from the improved recovery of logs from estate crops, principally rubber (Figure 6). This incremental supply is described as "potential" in that product prices must be sufficiently high to cover the higher cost of harvesting or processing the incremental supply.
Figure 6 - Potential supply levels to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Substitution
The Base Case assumes that product substitution will reduce the demand for traditional products, replacing the consumption of 30.5 RWE million m^3 of plywood and 11.7 RWE million m^3 of sawnwood.
Log export policy
Log export policy will remain as currently expressed: log exports will continue from Sarawak at a maximum level of 62% of the annual harvest until 2000, and then will continue indefinitely at a rate 50% of the annual harvest; Sabah will allow the export of plantation-grown wood up to a maximum of 33 % of annual harvest; and Papau New Guinea will continue to export up to 90% of its harvest as logs.
Analysis of the Base Case scenario with the ITTO Trade Model yields the following forecast.
Plywood consumption falls
Consumption of panel products is forecast to rise from 18.5 million m^3 in 1995 to 28 million m^3 in 2010; however, the consumption of the plywood component of the market for panel products will decrease from 16 million m^3 to 11.8 million m^3 over the same period (Figure 7). Substituted panel products account for the difference. The suppression of demand for plywood results in a real price decrease of 15% over the study period. ^4
^4 This result may be due to the lack of product detail in the Trade Model (i.e., only one grade of plywood is included).
Figure 7 - Forecast plywood and veneer consumption and price index to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Plywood consumption declines overall but the producer countries increase their share of consumption of the plywood produced in the region from 15% in 1995 to 26% by 2010.
Sawnwood consumption rises
Sawnwood consumption shows a different pattern, increasing by almost 50%, from 20.7 million m^3 to 36 million m^3 from 1995 to 2010, of which 6.5 million m^3 is substituted product (Figure 8).
The proportion of the sawnwood production consumed by the producer countries changes little over the study period (from 28% to 25%), but by 2010 much of the sawnwood consumption by the consumer countries is from conifer logs (63%).
The real price for sawnwood drops 18% over the study period, due to the acceptance of the substitute product and the importing of relatively inexpensive conifer sawlogs.
Figure 8 - Forecast sawnwood consumption and price index to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Total log production rises
Although the volume of logs from the conventional supply decreases by 22% (from 67 million m^3 to 52 million m^3) over the study period, 29 million m^3 of incremental supply is being utilized by 2010 (Figure 9). The more expensive portion of the conventional supply has been replaced by the lower-cost portion of the incremental wood. Consequently, real log prices decline by 16% over the study period.
Figure 9 - Forecast harvest levels and log price index to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Figure 10 - Forecast levels of plywood and veneer manufacturing to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Plywood production falls
Plywood production declines by 45% across the region, with most of this reduction occurring in the producer countries (Figure 10). The main consumer countries are favoured by their higher mill recoveries, the continuation of log exports in the region, and the availability of conifer substitutes.
Sawnwood production rises
Sawnwood production increases across the region, with consumer countries achieving a 150% increase in volume (Figure 11). As noted, much of this gain is realized by sawing imported conifer logs. Producer countries increase sawnwood production by 33%.
Figure 11 - Forecast levels of sawnwood manufacturing to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Log exports rise
Although Malaysian log exports are forecast to decline by 15% by 2010, a 150% increase in exports from Papua New Guinea causes the volume of exported logs (from current sources) in the region to rise by 36% (Figure 12). Including the exported conifer logs in the total results in an increase of 115% during the study period. (Note that the large increase in exported logs from Papua New Guinea is drawn mostly from the supply increment due to low-impact harvesting.)
The traditional major importers of logs (Japan, the Republic of Korea, and Taiwan Province of China) retain their share, claiming 87% of the exported hardwood logs (Figure 13).
Figure 12 - Forecast of log exports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Figure 13 - Forecast of log imports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Plywood exports and imports fall
Plywood and veneer exports and imports decrease over the study period reflecting the reduction in manufacturing previously noted, the adoption of substitute panels in consuming countries, and the redirection of the product to the domestic market (Figures 14 and 15). Plywood exports from Indonesia are forecast to drop by 60% while imports to the main consumer countries will decline by 80% by 2010.
Figure 14 - Forecast of plywood/veneer exports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Figure 15 - Forecast of plywood/veneer imports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Sawnwood exports and imports fall
Sawnwood exports decrease by 50% over the study period, as exporters (mainly Malaysia) meet their domestic demand and importers adopt substitute products or manufacture conifer sawnwood (Figures 16 and 17).
Figure 16 - Forecast of sawnwood exports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Figure 17 - Forecast of sawnwood imports to 2010 under the Base Case scenario
Implications for industry structure
While the magnitude of some of the specific modelling results may seem unlikely, the general evolution of the Asia-Pacific forest sector described by the model, subject to the assumptions of the Base Case, is quite plausible. Log supply does not appear to constrain development of the sector under current policies and assumptions of harvesting and processing technology, and real price development seems unlikely.
The analysis indicates that the development of the sector under Base Case assumptions will be determined largely by issues of substitution: the rate that consumers accept substitute products and the supply of conifer logs into the region.
New manufacturing capacity will be developed in the region to utilize the changing log supply. Recovery of logs from increased utilization implies that smaller logs and logs with different technical characteristics will be processed, requiring appropriate milling capacity.
Smaller logs and lower grades will result in substantial wood fibre that is unsuitable for sawlogs or veneer logs, but will provide a fibre source for substitute products, such as reconstituted panels.
New or additional processing plants are most likely to be developed in the supplier countries, close to the resource, but subject to the incentives and barriers discussed earlier in this paper.
Implications for trade
While the modelling analysis indicates less trade of both sawnwood and plywood, the Base Case results imply that a compensating trade in substitute products must develop. For example, Indonesia's forecast reduction in plywood exports and Malaysia's reduction in sawnwood exports might be replaced with exports of reconstituted panel products and more highly manufactured products. This possibility is not represented in the model.
Also note that the forecast growth of sawnwood manufacturing based on conifer logs in the consumer countries is, at least partially, a modelling anomaly. The conifer logs are allocated by the model to the consumer countries based on the relative efficiency of current installed milling capacity; new capacity developed to process conifer logs would likely have the same efficiency in a producer country as in a consumer country.
5.3 Scarcity Scenario
Key assumptions
The Scarcity scenario incorporates the assumptions of the Base Case with the following changes:
· the harvest limit from the natural forest in 2010 will be 25% less than was assumed in the Base Case, and this reduction will occur gradually over the study period
· starting in 2000, Sabah's log export limits will decline from 33% of harvest to 10% in 2010, Sarawak's will decline from 62 to 10%, and Papua New Guinea from 90 to 50%
· log exports out of the region will be eliminated in 2001
Reduced log supply
Under the Scarcity scenario, the availability of logs from current sources is assumed to decrease from 70 million m^3 in 1995 to 54 million m^3 in 2010. The incremental supply is also reduced (39.5 million m^3 in 2010) as it is partially a function of the supply from current sources. At 2010, 13.5 million m^3 will be available from improved utilization, 10 million m^3 from the adoption of low-impact harvesting technology, 12 million m^3 from conifer log imports into the region, and 4 million m^3 from estate crops (Figure 18).
Figure 18 - Potential harvest levels to 2010 under the Scarcity scenario
The product substitution rates assumed in the Base Case are unchanged. The Scarcity scenario was modelled and the results compared to the Base Case.
Plywood consumption is suppressed
Consumption of plywood in 2010 is reduced relative to the Base Case by about 7%, probably due to a 14% increase in price. The real price of plywood remains almost constant over the study period.
The producer countries' share of total consumption is unchanged.
Sawnwood consumption is suppressed
Sawnwood consumption is also suppressed (5% less than the Base Case) by a 13% increase in price in 2010 over the Base Case price. As with plywood, the real price of sawnwood is almost constant over the study period.
Total log production is suppressed
The total volume of logs harvested still increases over the study period, but is 5 % less than the Base Case harvest at 2010 (Figure 19). The volume taken from current sources is reduced by 12% relative to the Base Case, and the volume obtained from improved utilization is reduced by 8 %. The harvest from the low-impact supply and conifer imports increases to partially offset the reductions from the current sources and improved utilization.
The price of logs is unchanged over the study period, and exceeds the Base Case price by 14%.
Figure 19 - Forecast harvest levels and log price index to 2010 under the Scarcity scenario
Plywood production is stimulated
Plywood production declines substantially across the region, as in the Base Case. Hardwood plywood production is suppressed in 2010, relative to the Base Case, by 5% in the consumer countries and 12% in the producer countries. However, softwood plywood production is stimulated in the consumer countries; no softwood plywood was produced in the Base Case scenario. The aggregate production (softwood and hardwood) of the Scarcity scenario exceeds that of the Base Case in 2010 by 10%.
Sawnwood production is suppressed
Sawnwood production is suppressed (7%) across the region, with the largest reduction occurring in the consumer countries.
Reducing exports of tropical hardwood logs to the consumer countries stimulates the manufacture of conifer logs into plywood to meet domestic demand. The overall reduction in supply in the Scarcity scenario would cause the suppression of hardwood plywood and sawnwood across the region.
Log exports are suppressed
The major log exporters are constrained explicitly in the Scarcity scenario, and conifer logs flow into the region to meet the demand for logs. Under the Base Case, 7.5 million m^3 of conifer logs was exported into the region and comprised 36% of the log market; under the Scarcity scenario, 9.9 million m^3 of conifer logs comprise 62% of the market.
General comments
In summary, reducing the scheduled harvesting limits from current sources of supply by 25%, limiting log exports to roughly one-third of the level currently envisioned, and implementing these constraints progressively to 2010 have four general effects:
· the price for hardwood products increases by about 15% over the Base Case, but the real price does not increase over the period covered by the study
· manufacturing and consumption of hardwood log products decrease
· conifer logs imports to the region increase by one-third
· conifer logs are milled in consumer countries
The conditions imposed by the Scarcity scenario do not change the general findings of the Base Case analysis: log supply does not appear to constrain the development of the sector and various forms of substitution will be the dominant influence on the sector. Creating scarcity by removing 25% of the most valuable supply stimulates the importing and adoption of softwood substitutes, and the price effect serves only to maintain prices at 1995 levels.
5.4 Stronger Demand with Scarcity Scenario
To simulate the accelerated development of demand for sawnwood and panel products, demand was increased gradually above the base trend until it exceeded the base demand at 2010 by 20%. All other assumptions of the Scarcity scenario were incorporated without modification into the new scenario.
Plywood consumption increases
The 20% increase in demand scheduled for the region increases plywood consumption in 2010 by 23% of the Base Case amount and by 33% over consumption under the Scarcity scenario. Sawnwood consumption changes only slightly.
Plywood and sawnwood prices rise
The real prices of plywood and sawnwood rise substantially relative to both the Base Case scenario and the Scarcity scenario, and increase by about 30% over the study period.
Log prices strengthen
The price for logs harvested from current and incremental sources in 2010 increases by about 70% over the Base Case scenario price, 45% over the Scarcity scenario price, and about 40% over the study period.
Total log production rises only slightly
In spite of strong prices, log production in 2010 from sources in the region is up only slightly from the Scarcity scenario and is still less than the Base Case scenario. However, the importing of conifer logs rises substantially - by 53 % over the Base Case scenario and 17% over the Scarcity scenario.
Plywood manufacturing increases
In the consumer countries, plywood manufacture increases by 33% over the Base Case, by peeling imported conifer logs. The producers also increase plywood production (by 8% over the Base Case scenario and 21% over the Scarcity scenario) but process only hardwood logs.
Sawnwood manufacturing increases slightly
Sawnwood manufacturing increases slightly but the proportion of softwood processed drops from 14% (Base Case scenario) to 12% (Scarcity scenario) to 8% (Stronger Demand with Scarcity scenario).
Trade in hardwood logs suppressed
The volume of trade in hardwood logs remains unchanged from the Scarcity scenario, and suppressed relative to the Base Case, due to export restrictions.
Trade in conifer logs increases
However, the volume of trade in conifer logs increases by 53% relative to the Base Case scenario and 17% relative to the Scarcity scenario.
Trade in plywood and sawnwood increases
The volume of trade in plywood increases slightly with respect to the Scarcity scenario (7%) but remains less than the Base Case volume, while the volume of trade in sawnwood increases more substantially (53% relative to the Base Case and 17% relative to the Scarcity scenario).
General comment
In summary, the development of the sector indicated by the Base Case and Scarcity scenarios remains unchanged, except for strong real price development of products and logs. Note that this difference is likely due to the rate of product substitution being fixed in the current model. It is likely that price development would encourage further substitution, and reduce or eliminate the price trend.
<section>8</section>
6. CONCLUSIONS - FORECASTS OF INDUSTRY STRUCTURE AND TRADE FLOWS TO 2010
Consideration of the modelled scenarios and the other findings of this report lead to the following forecasts.
Natural forest log scarcity will be offset
Although harvest forecasts from current sources may be optimistic, sufficient incremental log supply will become available to avoid scarcity through improved utilization of current log sources, low-impact harvesting of sensitive sites, and the importing of conifer logs.
Hardwood log trade will decline
Hardwood log trade will decline across the region, and several more ITTO producer countries will become net importers by 2010.
Malaysia becomes an importer of logs
The volume of trade in hardwood logs will decline as Sarawak and Sabah progressively curtail log exports. However, Malaysia, principally Peninsular Malaysia, is already an importer of hardwood logs. This trade will grow over the study period, with most of the processing meeting demand for domestic consumption or further processing as value-added products.
Indonesia becomes a net log importer
Indonesia currently bans log exports and is considering log imports from Vietnam, Myanmar, and the Solomon Islands to offset declining log supplies. Log imports are likely to increase during the study period.
Papua New Guinea will probably continue to export logs.
Papua New Guinea's current policy is to reduce log exports by 10% each year for the period 1995-2000, and ban log exports thereafter. However, the domestic processing industry is generally non-competitive relative to other exporters of the region, and may be unable to absorb a significant increase in log supply. Consequently, log exports will likely persist well past 2000 and may even expand. Log exports from Papua New Guinea will compete with highly competitive log and product substitutes; significant price changes are unlikely.
Myanmar and Vietnam have an export opportunity
Myanmar and Vietnam have an opportunity to expand their log exports in the short term as the major exporters curtail their trade.
Conifer logs imports will expand
The region will import substantial volumes of conifer logs to provide substitutes to tropical logs in the manufacture of sawnwood and plywood, and the raw material for manufacture of substitute products such as reconstituted boards and panels.
Manufacturing will relocate to producer countries
Relocation of manufacturing capacity away from the consumer countries to the producers has been underway for some time, and will continue throughout the study period. This shift is due partly to normal market forces: the higher cost of manufacturing in consumer countries makes the producer countries more competitive and the manufacturing capacity in the producer countries is becoming more efficient. Relocation will also be accelerated by policies, such as constraints or bans on the export of tropical logs, or slowed by import tariffs and non-tariff barriers.
Sawnwood manufacturing will increase
Sawnwood manufacturing will increase in the producer countries, largely in response to growth in domestic demand and the development of secondary manufacturing for export. The same economic fundamentals will result in the manufacture of conifer sawnwood in the producer countries, making hardwood sawlogs available for manufacturing products for export.
If sawnwood manufacturing is to increase in consumer countries, it will be based on imported conifer logs, at least for lower-end products.
Plywood manufacturing will decline
Plywood manufacture will decline across the region as the supply of peeler-quality logs declines and consumers adopt reconstituted panels.
Manufacture of substitute products will expand
While substitute products will be imported from outside the region, new capacity will also develop within the region to manufacture substitutes, especially reconstituted boards and panels. The increasing supply of conifer logs and small logs resulting from intensive utilization of current log sources are attractive sources of raw material. New capacity to manufacture substitute products from underutilized fibre from current sources will most likely be established near their source of supply in the producer countries. However, new capacity based on conifer logs may be established in producer or consumer countries.
Sawnwood and plywood trade declines
Although processing capacity will shift to the producer countries, the overall trade in sawnwood and plywood will decline.
Substitute products trade increases
With new manufacturing capacity for substitute products being established in the producer countries, the trade of substitute products will expand in the region.
Prices will remain stable
Although demand will continue to be strong in the region and the harvest from the natural forest is at, or above, its long-term sustainable level, this analysis demonstrates that product and technological substitution could cause real prices to remain stable, or even decline, over the study period. This result is sensitive to the rate of substitution accepted by consumers and the rate of growth in demand for tropical timber solid-wood products.
<section>9</section>
REFERENCES
Barbier, E., Burgess, J.C., Aylward, B.A., Bishop, J.T., and Bann, C. 1993. The economic linkages between trade in tropical timber and the sustainable management of tropical forests. Final Report: ITTO Activity PCM(XI)/4, ITTO, Yokohama.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). 1990. Forest resources assessment 1990, Tropical countries. FAO, Rome.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). 1995. Forestry: Statistics today for tomorrow. 1945-1993, 2010. FAO, Rome.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). 1996. Forest products yearbook, 1994. FAO, Rome.
FAO and the Ministry of Forestry of Indonesia. 1990. Situation and outlook of the forestry sector. FAO, Rome.
International Trade Centre. 1993. Rubberwood: A study of the world development potential. International Trade Centre, Geneva.
International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). 1993. Analysis of macroeconomic trends in the supply and demand of sustainably produced tropical timber from the Asia-Pacific region: Phase I. ITTO, Yokohama.
International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). 1995. Analysis of macroeconomic trends in the supply and demand of sustainably produced tropical timber from the Asia-Pacific region: Phase II. ITTO, Yokohama.
International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). 1996a. Analysis of macroeconomic trends in the supply and demand of sustainably produced tropical timber from the Asia-Pacific region: Phase III: Trade model workshop. ITTO, Yokohama.
International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). 1996b. Annual review and assessment of the world tropical timber situation 1996. ITTO, Yokohama.
Jacques, R. 1996. Global demand for forest products to the year 2010. Canadian Forest Service, Industry, Economics and Programs Branch, Hull, Quebec. Research Note 47e.
PNG Forest Authority. 1996. Forest products marketing organization feasibility study. Consultant's report. ITTO, Yokohama.
Western Canadian Wood Machinery & Services Export Association. 1996. A market study of Indonesia and Malaysia. Canadian Forest Service, Victoria, British Columbia. FRDA Working Paper 96.09.
Zhang, D., Buongiorno, J. and Ince, P.J. 1993. PELPS III: A microcomputer price endogenous linear programming system for economic modelling, version 1.0. USDA Forest Service, Madison, Wisconsin. Forest Products Laboratory Research Paper FPL-RP-526.
<section>a</section>
LIST OF WORKING PAPERS ALREADY RELEASED
APFSOS/WP/01
Regional Study - The South Pacific
APFSOS/WP/02
Pacific Rim Demand and Supply Situation, Trends and Prospects: Implications for Forest Products Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/03
The Implications of the GATT Uruguay Round and other Trade Arrangements for the Asia-Pacific Forest Products Trade
APFSOS/WP/04
Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/05
In-Depth Country Study New Zealand
APFSOS/WP/06
In-Depth Country Study Republic of Korea
APFSOS/WP/07
Country Report - Malaysia
APFSOS/WP/08
Country Report - Union of Myanmar
APFSOS/WP/09
Challenges and Opportunities: Policy options for the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/10
Sources of Non-wood Fibre for Paper, Board and Panels Production: Status, Trends and Prospects for India
APFSOS/WP/11
Country Report - Pakistan
APFSOS/WP/12
Trends and Outlook for Forest Products Consumption, Production and Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/13
Country Report - Australia
APFSOS/WP/14
Country Report - China
APFSOS/WP/15
Country Report - Japan: Basic Plan on Forest Resources and Long-Term Perspective on Demand and Supply of Important Forestry Products
APFSOS/WP/16
Country Report - Sri Lanka
APFSOS/WP/17
Forest Resources and Roundwood Supply in the Asia Pacific Countries: Situation and Outlook to Year 2010
APFSOS/WP/18
Country Report - Cambodia
APFSOS/WP/19
Wood Materials from Non-Forest Areas
APFSOS/WP/20
Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010
<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects. Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing
the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome, 00100, ITALY
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Regional Forestry Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200
THAILAND
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org>
<section>2</section>
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Scope of the study
Data and Assumptions
Synthesis of Scenario Results
The Asia-Pacific region is being rapidly transformed by fast economic development and population growth. Patterns of forest resource utilization and the manufacture and trade of forest products have changed dramatically in recent years, and will continue to evolve in response to these economic and social forces.
This report examines the evolution of the solid-wood industries of the forest sector of the Asia-Pacific region from 1995 to 2010. Three scenarios are considered: a base case scenario reflects the current supply and demand conditions of the region, and the current industry structure and trading relationships; a second scenario examines conditions of scarcity of supply from the natural forest; and the third scenario combines scarcity conditions with stronger end-product demand.
Scope of the study
ITTO Trade Model
ITTO Trade Model
These scenarios are analyzed with the International Tropical Timber Organization Asia-Pacific Tropical Timber Trade Model. The major ITTO producing countries of the region are represented in the model: Indonesia, Malaysia (Peninsular Malaysia, Sabah, Sarawak), Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, and the Philippines. The model also includes the ITTO consuming countries: Japan, Republic of Korea, People's Republic of China, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand. Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, and the Solomon