<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study for Asia and the Pacific: Towards 2010. Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study for Asia and The Pacific: Towards 2010 </title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific I Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome, 00100, ITALY
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Regional Forestry Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200
THAILAND
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org >
<section>2</section>
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
During the past decade, forest sector specialists and forestry institutions world-wide have increasingly recognized the 'major importance of minor forest products'. FAO's decision to adapt its prior terminology and refer to 'non-wood' as opposed to 'minor' forest products reflects this significant change in perspective. In the early 1990s, the FAO Forestry Department launched a programme to support national efforts to increase knowledge, develop activities, and adapt policies for more systematic and sustainable use of non-wood forest products (NWFPs). FAO's programme aims to contribute better to sustainable management and conservation of both NWFPs and tropical forest ecosystems.
Combined with similar initiatives by other institutions, the availability of information regarding NWFPs in general - and their utilization, trade, and management in particular - has begun to increase substantially. Yet there is little question that most foresters still consider NWFPs to be of secondary importance compared to timber. An enormous amount of work remains to create broader acceptance and a more comprehensive understanding of the benefits, needs and specific approaches for sustainably managing NWFPs. Continuing compilation and dissemination of this information will enable policy makers to target support, incentives and disincentives that are more effective at impelling wise and sustainable forest use, recognizing the full potential and significance of NWFPs.
This Outlook Study provides an overview of the significance of NWFPs in the Asia-Pacific region. It examines current trends and projects their likely future impacts on NWFPs in terms of product availability and management, the importance of NWFPs to people and economy, and the effort to develop and achieve sustainable forest management in the region.
The study notes that despite considerable progress during the past decade, data regarding NWFPs are often scant, conflicting and unreliable, even for major commercial species such as rattan, bamboo and tree resin. It is nonetheless clear that NWFPs provide important sources of livelihood products and employment for tens and perhaps hundreds of millions of people in the region. Many of these products are traded commercially, but it is the residents of forest areas who are most dependent upon NWFPs to fulfil a wide assortment of subsistence uses. These uses include: food, spices, edible oils, medicines, fodder, forage, stall bedding, green manure, construction material, household utensils, fibre, ornamentation and rituals.
Access to NWFPs is vital to the livelihood strategies of millions of poor forest area people. For the poorest and most dependent people, reduced access to NWFPs - as primary or supplemental sources of food, medicine and income - can constitute a serious threat to their survival. Collection and processing of NWFP raw materials into finished products provides employment for millions of Asia-Pacific region people. For example, some 10 million people are said to be employed in collecting and processing tendu leaves into bidi cheroots. Precise data are lacking regarding the total number of people in the Asia-Pacific region who derive income from NWFPs ^1. But the number of people in the region who collect, process and trade NWFPs could be well over 100 million.
1 For an assessment of whether NWFPs are an effective source of livelihoods, see Fisher et al (APFSOS/WP/27) (Editor).
National revenue derived from the export of NWFP raw materials and finished products is also prodigious. The total value of rattan exports from Indonesia in 1989 alone was US$ 17 million ^2. The value of forest plants used as herbal medicines and as raw materials for production of modern pharmaceuticals is estimated to be several billion dollars.
2 The value is important in relation to other NWFPs but relatively small compared to other exports of the country, including wood products (Editor).
Biological "prospecting" and a trend toward increasing use of natural medicines and cosmetics is likely to expand international demand and trade in these products. Several studies suggest that the value of sustainable NWFP harvest could exceed that derived from harvesting timber from a similar area of forest. This argument has begun to provide compelling economic rationale for forest management systems based on long-term sustainable utilization of NWFPs as opposed to short-cycle timber extraction.
National, regional and international demand for NWFPs is likely to grow, creating potential for increased revenue generation. But this has parallel negative implications with respect to sustainable resource management. Adverse ecological impacts on forests from over-harvesting target species could disturb species interrelationships that are vital for maintaining ecosystem integrity and stability. Intensive selective harvest of NWFPs can cause chain-reaction effects that spread from point sources to the larger forest ecosystem. The long-term effects of improper NWFP harvest - though much less readily apparent than those associated with large-scale timber extraction - can be nearly as detrimental to forest ecology.
Much of what we know about sustainable NWFP management comes from indigenous technical knowledge (ITK) that is the result of centuries of experimentation by traditional and indigenous peoples who are dependent on forests for livelihood. Until recently, ITK regarding NWFPs and their sustainable management have largely been overlooked. Rapid social, cultural and economic changes associated with the modernization currently sweeping the Asia-Pacific region have begun to penetrate even the deepest forest recesses. This has a profound affect on traditional forest-dwelling people, as they are exposed and gain access to modern technologies and consumer products.
Influx to forest frontiers by an increasing number of lowlanders has contributed to changing local perceptions and behaviours with respect to forest utilization and management. The overall results of these changes have been predominantly detrimental to NWFP resources, as well as on the lives of traditional forest area inhabitants. At the same time, increasing trends in the availability and use of synthetic substitutes for NWFPs, domestication and cultivation on agricultural lands, as well as alternative employment options have reduced pressures on NWFP resources in some areas.
The study notes that the overall trend is toward depletion of NWFP resources. This is due to inadequately regulated off-take and increasing market demand for commercially popular species. There is also a growing demand for endangered plants and animals purchased as trophies and medicines by the region's growing number of affluent consumers. The vast majority of NWFP collectors and local traders receive low prices for sale of raw materials. But growing speciality markets for natural products, and for 'socially and environmentally sound' rainforest commodities, have created new opportunities. While outside entrepreneurs monopolize much of this business, many programmes assisted by government and non-governmental agencies are helping the traditionally underprivileged to gain access to these emerging niche markets. Fair trade organizations, which have emerged for many agricultural commodities, may become important mechanisms in the future to ensure that NWFP collectors and
processors receive a premium for products that are sustainably managed and harvested.
Some commercially valuable NWFPs can be cultivated on farms and plantations. When there is strong market demand, the trend is toward domestication and cultivation rather than collection from semi-depleted forest stocks. When this trend begins to predominate, as has already occurred in some areas, harvest pressures on remaining natural stocks are reduced. Examples of increasing cultivation of NWFPs include: rattan in Malaysia; Chinese medicinal herbs in Vietnam; and, to a lesser extent, fragrant aloewood (Aquilaria spp.) in Lao PDR. Potential to expand the area devoted to NWFP cultivation appears considerable for these and other forest species including ornamental plants (e.g. orchids), vegetables and mushrooms of high market value.
Forest policy is changing in many Asia-Pacific countries. Governments are grappling with the need to adapt existing policies to the economic, environmental and social changes rapidly taking place. Government spending cutbacks combined with increasing recognition of the potential for involving rural communities in sustainable forest management have become driving forces behind recent policy initiatives. This trend appears likely to increase given the need to adapt to changing mandates, and in response to growing confidence in the capacity of forest dependent rural people to manage natural resources wisely and responsibly.
There are many keys to catalyzing the vast and largely untapped potential for rural communities to play active roles in sustainable forest management. These include: provision of land and resource tenure to individuals and communities; collaborative planning by stakeholders to determine procedures, responsibilities, and benefit-sharing arrangements; and integrated conservation and development programmes that build local capacity to capitalize on forest product development and market opportunities, create economic alternatives to natural resource-based income generation, and set in place a system to organize and monitor local responsibility for sustainable landuse, sustainable forest utilization, and protected area conservation.
<section>3</section>
1. SIGNIFICANCE OF NWFPS IN ASIA-PACIFIC
A. Introduction
B. Why are NWFPs important?
A. Introduction
Purpose
NWFPs in the Asia-Pacific context
Complex and diverse nature of NWFPs
Paucity of data
Purpose
This study is one of many contributions that feed into the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study being prepared by FAO for consideration by ministers and senior policy makers in the region. The studies assess the status, trends and outlook for a range of issues and subsectors pertinent to forest management and policy in the region. The outlook time horizon is up to the year 2010, agreed to by the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission at its sixteenth session in Yangon, Myanmar in January 1996. In total, the studies comprise a comprehensive package of materials, which will be distributed to the delegates and participants of the next Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission meeting, to be held in Yogyakarta, Indonesia in February 1998.
This particular working paper focuses on non-wood forest products or NWFPs. In keeping with the Terms of Reference, the study on NWFPs considers their economic, environmental and social significance in the region. Major trends in NWFP management are analyzed, including collection, processing, utilization and trade in NWFPs, and the implications of these trends for demand and supply. Considering current trends and a range of emerging management and policy scenarios, the study suggests changes that might occur during the intervening period, and the projected status of NWFPs in the Asia-Pacific region by the year 2010.
The study does not purport to be a comprehensive treatment of NWFPs in the region, replete with data on the major products. Information of this nature may be found in some of the extensive references cited. Instead, the study utilizes selected site-specific and product-specific case studies to illustrate how current trends and future scenarios may develop within the region.
NWFPs in the Asia-Pacific context
For most of recorded history, people have valued forests as much for non-wood products as for wood. Ancient writings from China, Egypt and India recorded a wide variety of uses for forest plants, and the ancient Greeks prized botanical compilations from western Asia (Wickes 1990 cited in FAO 1995a). From the era of hunting and gathering up to the present, non-wood forest products ^3 (NWFPs) have provided subsistence and livelihoods for people in the Asia-Pacific region. For hundreds of millions of forest area residents, NWFPs are essential for family survival.
^3 The term 'non-wood forest products' (NWFPs), and also 'minor', 'secondary', and 'non-timber' forest products, are used as umbrella expressions for the vast array of both animal and plant resources other than wood (or timber in the case of 'NTFPs') that are derived from forests or forest tree species (FAO 1997).
Non-wood forest products may be classified by source (e.g., plant, animal) or by uses (e.g., food, medicines, fibres). NWFPs also provide a wide range of environmental and sociocultural functions that are important at the household as well as national level. The diagram below depicts the great diversity of non-wood forest products and services.
The NWFP Horizon
Source: More than wood. Forestry Topics Report No. 4, p. 10 (FAO 1993)
Complex and diverse nature of NWFPs
In a recent study from West Kalimantan, villagers identified over 800 plant species from which they derive nearly 1,800 uses to fulfil a broad range of needs (Graefen and Syafrudin 1996). NWFPs are used for food, spices, edible oils and medicines, for fodder, forage, stall bedding and green manure, as construction material and household utensils, as fibre for cloth, basket-making and rope, and for ornamentation and religious purposes.
People use NWFPs for an enormous range of purposes, including the following:
· Common subsistence products such as: medicines, staple foods, supplementary or emergency foods, protein foods, construction materials, tools and utensils, etc.
· Subsistence products that are utilized on a smaller scale or only on special occasions.
· Commercialized products that are sources of income (ranging from low to significant depending on the product and local economic conditions) to collectors. These products include primarily, rattan, resins, honey, aromatics, and bush meat.
· Other products with a range of commercialization ranging from local to national and international markets, e.g., medicines, tools and utensils, furniture, handicrafts, mats, walling and construction materials, major and minor foodstuffs.
· Products that have been long commercialized and internationally traded with high annual turnover and control of market chain by outside entrepreneurs.
A number of NWFPs, including rubber, rattan, bamboo, gaharu (fragrant aloewood) aromatic oils and medicinal plants have long been traded or bartered within the Asia-Pacific region, and in markets outside of the region. NWFP raw materials and processed products earn billions of US dollars per year. For rattan alone, the average value of annual world trade is more than US$88 million. Of this, US$50 million are generated from Asia-Pacific countries, especially Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam and China (Iqbal 1993).
NWFP collection and processing provide employment for millions of Asia-Pacific people. In India, about 7.5 million people are engaged part-time as collectors of tendu (Diospyros melanoxylon) leaves, and another 3 million process the leaves into bidi cheroots (Tewari 1982 cited in Arnold 1995). Estimated revenues from tendu leaves are US$200 million/yr (FAO 1994a). In Manipur State, India, 90 percent of the population depend on forest products as a major source of income, and some 250,000 women collect forest products (FAO 1992).
The relative value of NWFPs versus wood products varies greatly with the ecology of the forest. For example, in Borneo's highly valuable dipterocarp forests, timber values could be as much as 200 times higher than NWFP values, on a per hectare basis. Conversely, in the sal (Shorea robusta) forests of eastern India, the timber and NWFP values per hectare per year could be almost equal.
A list of multipurpose Bhutanese forest plants comprising over 40 pages illustrates the extraordinary diversity and importance of NWFPs (FAO 1994b). Yet, as extensive as it is, the list under-represents the holistic value of NWFPs to Asia-Pacific forest peoples. The economic value comprises only one subset of the integral value of NWFPs, particularly in the case of forest communities for whom the sum of the tangible parts is not worth nearly as much as the presence of the whole forest ecosystem (Levin 1992).
Paucity of data
The lack of basic and reliable information on NWFPs is such an acute problem that it deserves separate mention. An immediate problem that confronts any NWFP researcher is the lack of authoritative information.
Information on production and domestic consumption is strikingly lacking for most NWFPs. This is because their value is often greatest within relatively restricted local economies where the contribution to daily subsistence is significant, but where small-quantity trading in NWFPs goes unrecorded. Local uses and small transactions are rarely treated in national statistics and have been inadequately studied. As a consequence, little knowledge exists on the actual production and harvest levels of even major NWFPs, while data on minor products are altogether lacking. The development potential of NWFPs is poorly understood. Aside from the communities that are primarily engaged in NWFP management, only few people are familiar with practices to ensure sustainable exploitation and development.
Export figures for NWFP are the only data kept on a more-or-less systematic basis. Yet most official statistics are unreliable. FAO discontinued collection and publication of NWFP statistics in 1972, but is now seriously attempting to redress the problems of availability and accuracy (Padovani 1995). Among the distortions commonly encountered in trade statistics of most exporting countries are: information for a group of products is merged; under- reporting, over-reporting or not reporting at all; no data on illegal trade; and use of unrealistic prices.
Illustrating the frequent wide discrepancies that make official statistics suspect, Lintu (1995) reported that the combined exports of rattan from Indonesia, Philippines and Malaysia in 1989 exceeded US$250 million. Iqbal (1993) cited Indonesian Bureau of Statistics figures for rattan export in 1989 of just over US$1 million. Yet he also found in the 1989 COMTRADE database that import of Indonesian rattan by industrialized countries exceeded US$17 million, or about one-quarter of world-wide rattan export for that year. Because Indonesia imposed export restrictions on rattan in 1989, there may have been anomalies with inventory stockpiles, or even illegal trade. This example demonstrates again the difficulties in locating reliable, timely data.
Another example of data discrepancy was observed in Lao PDR. On an ordinary day at Luang Prabang harbour, orchid stems were loaded onto two large trucks of approximately 25-m3 capacity each. Inquiries at the Ministry of Forestry revealed that the only data recorded on export of orchid stems was delivery of four tons annually to China. In reality, the recorded annual export figure of four tons could be exceeded by the amount of orchid stems transhipped from Luang Prabang during one day (Koppelman, personal communication).
The paucity of reliable data on NWFPs constrains efforts to develop appropriate policies, regulatory mechanisms, trade arrangements, and extraction patterns aimed at ensuring sustainable NWFP and forest management, including:
· Sustainable management regimes for various NWFPs under a range of ecological conditions.
· Traditional NWFP management approaches and practices.
· How traditional approaches and practices are being impacted by increasing exploitation due to population and market demand growth.
· Impact of over-exploitation on poor forest dwelling populations, and their adaptation to increasing resource scarcity.
· Role of land and resource tenure in developing sustainable NWFP management regimes.
· How appropriate policies could support sustainable NWFP management.
· Appropriate technologies for on-farm planting and forest enrichment of NWFPs.
· Adding value to raw materials by processing or direct marketing to maintain income benefits while reducing harvest volumes.
· Role of sustainable NWFP management by local communities in galvanizing community involvement in forest and biodiversity conservation.
· Role of sustainable NWFP management in integrated conservation and development projects.
· The proportion of current NWFP production that is gathered from natural forests, compared to the quantities from tended (managed) forests, and from domesticated or cultivated trees on farms or in plantations; and the reasons and trends behind this.
B. Why are NWFPs important?
Household importance
NWFPs and food security
Economic importance
Ecological benefits and risks
Social and cultural significance
NWFPs in ICDP approaches
Household importance
Among forest people in the Asia-Pacific region, NWFPs make a substantial contribution to family subsistence and livelihoods. Hundreds of millions of people living in or near forests depend to some degree on NWFPs for their livelihoods. It is likely that more than 200 million people in the region gain a significant portion of their annual income from the collection, processing and marketing of NWFPs ^4. Most of this activity occurs on a small-scale and is not recorded. Therefore, the importance of NWFPs to the survival and economic strategies of Asia-Pacific peoples - particularly poor, forest-dependent folks - is often poorly appreciated by their governments.
^4 Although Lynch (1995) gives an incredible estimate of 1 billion people, which is almost the entire rural population in Asia Pacific! Other estimates are as low as 200 million worldwide (Pimental et al. 1996).
NWFP-based activities - including collection, sale of raw materials, simple primary processing, and local handicraft production - fill seasonal food or income gaps. They can provide a buffer in times of hardship or emergency, serve as activities of last resort, and generally improve household income security (Ruiz Perez and Arnold 1996). Aside from the millions of people that benefit directly from collection, use, trade and processing activities, millions of others are NWFP consumers. For example, in Melanesia, consumption of starch from the sago palm (Metroxylon spp.) provides the main source of energy food for more than 300,000 people, and a normal part of the diets of 1 million people (Ulijaszek 1983 cited in FAO 1995b).
Given the marginal nature of rural family economy throughout most of the region, NWFPs can provide a critical lifeline for millions of people. In many cases, there are few, if any, alternatives available to supplement income and ensure minimal family subsistence needs. The relative importance of NWFPs, and the number of poor people throughout the region who use or sell significant quantities of these products, have often been underestimated. Most development programmes have concentrated on improving agricultural production in relatively productive areas. Insufficient attention has been paid to the needs of marginalized people in remote areas for whom NWFPs are often vital to survival, given their current socio-economic conditions.
The relative importance of NWFPs to household economic strategy depends primarily on available subsistence and income options. Rural communities often are quite stratified in socio-economic terms. This diversity is due to varying access to land, resources, and income earning opportunities outside the community. Depending on the economic status of a particular household, NWFPs contribute, to a greater or lesser extent, to family self-sufficiency, food security, income generation, savings and risk minimization (Ruiz Perez and Arnold 1996). For those with a broader range of options, the importance of NWFPs as a proportion of total household income generally declines.
While nearly all forest area households use NWFPs to some extent, indigenous peoples, the landless, and the poor can be wholly dependent on these products. For the poor, access to NWFPs throughout the year can be crucial to survival. For example, the largely impoverished Sherpa and Rai cultural minorities in eastern Nepal use 34 forest plant species as staple and survival foods (Daniggelis 1992). In other cases, it is the less poor who derive their incomes from NWFP. ^5
^5 In another scenario, Wickramasinghe et al. (1996) conclude in their study of a Sri Lankan village that the extremely poor often cannot afford to spend time collecting NWFPs. Meanwhile, middle lower income groups do not need to depend on NWFPs because they have more lucrative income earning options, including small-scale trading.
Millions of people in the Asia-Pacific region depend on NWFPs as their principal medicinal sources. Modern medicines, even if available, are too expensive for the poor to afford. Of the 7,000 plant species in Nepal, 700 have well-known medicinal uses and are the main source of curatives for about 85 percent of all Nepalese (Dani 1986 cited in Upadhaya et al. 1996). In Indonesia, the estimated consumption of jamu herbal tonics prepared from NWFPs was nearly 8,000 tons in 1992 (Food and Drug Administration 1992 cited in Hadi 1995). The use of NWFPs in Chinese medicines is legendary, but defies quantification.
It is notable that while poor households are generally most dependent on NWFPs, local elites often sequester most of the NWFP-derived income (as is the case with most other activities including agriculture). Influential families enter into business alliances with outside NWFP entrepreneurs and serve as their local agents. The agents procure raw materials at very low prices from collectors, and, in turn, provide them with credit advances at high interest rates to buy food and commodities required for NWFP collection forays into the forest. Exploiting the economic weakness of NWFP collectors accelerates unsustainable harvest practices, as collectors struggle to earn income and repay debts (Warner 1979, Mittelman 1997a). While this situation may be common, there are some exceptions where collectors have been able to negotiate terms of mutual advantage. These latter cases are important as they provide encouraging indications of how the more general exploitative arrangements can
be minimized.
NWFPs and food security
NWFPs are linked to food security in three major ways (Durst et al. 1997):
· Environmental links between forests and food production, and the role of watershed forests in conserving soil and water resources.
· Household nutrition links in terms of consumption of NWFPs.
· Socio-economic links in terms of generating income and employment from NWFPs to support household food security.
In times of scarcity created by crop failure or during food deficit periods, NWFPs fill critical income and subsistence gaps. There are hundreds of millions of upland farmers in the Asia-Pacific region. Very often, upland farmers cannot produce sufficient food to satisfy their annual household nutritional requirements. Although NWFPs provide important benefits year-round, it is during periods of scarcity when collection, processing and trade of NWFPs are most critical to family survival. For these millions of families affected by annual food deficits, access to supplemental forest foods and income can mean the difference between life and death. When NWFP access is curtailed, deficiencies of essential food nutrients become much more prevalent (Eder 1981, Chamberlain et al. 1996).
In Palawan, Philippines, NWFPs comprise 30-60 percent of annual food intake for the Batak tribe. When Batak access to forest survival foods has been restricted, their health status deteriorated rapidly leading to significant increases in infectious diseases, morbidity and mortality (IUCN and Haribon Palawan 1995, Mittelman and Alisuag 1995).
A major strategy for future action is to focus on enhancing local livelihood through local enterprises based on NWFP resources. Capturing an appropriate share of a product's added value closer to the source would help to ensure a more equitable distribution of benefits through the marketing chain, as well as the proper valuation of NWFP resources in forest management decisions (FAO 1995c).
Economic importance
The historical focus on timber in professional forestry circles has led to the consistent underestimation of the economic value of NWFPs. Recent research has brought into perspective the enormous value associated with NWFPs (de Beer and McDermott 1989, Counsell and Rice 1992). In addition to the diversity of benefits they provide the rural poor, NWFPs generate local, national and international trade revenues that are worth a total of billions of dollars annually. One estimate for the total value of world trade in NWFPs is in the region of US$11 billion (FAO 1997, Iqbal 1995). (Again, caution is required in considering these estimates due to the absence of reliable trade data on NWFPs.)
The total economic value of plant-based medicines has been estimated at $43 billion per year (Khan 1995), though many of the items included are no longer collected from forests but are now cultivated in gardens and farms. Trade in medicinal plants may grow rapidly as bio-prospecting becomes increasingly important to medical science and in response to expanding global demand for new pharmaceuticals and natural medicinal products. On the other hand, successful bio-prospecting may lead to synthetic and cultivated medicines, greatly reducing the amount of forest-derived materials traded around the world. Simpson (1997) expresses scepticism about the pote