<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Focus on Coconut Wood</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Senior Forestry Officer
Regional Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Forestry Department
Maliwan Mansion
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Phra Atit Road
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Bangkok 10200
Rome, 00100, ITALY
THAILAND
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Email: <Patrick.Durst@field.fao.org>
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION1
1Mr. Romulo N. Arancon, Jr. is currently the Assistant Director of the Asian and Pacific Coconut Community (APCC) based in Jakarta, Indonesia. Mr. Arancon was formerly the Department Manager of the Coconut Extension and Training Centre of the Philippine Coconut Authority (PCA). He has also served as a Co-Training Director of the UNDP/FAO project (RAS/81/110) "Regional Coconut Wood Training Programme" at the PCA-Zamboanga Coconut Wood Research Centre, Philippines. This document has been significantly restructured by the editor but great efforts have been made to retain the original message.
The coconut palm (Cocos nucifera, L.) has multifarious uses. It is often described as a tree of life and is one of the most important crops in the tropics. It is also considered as one of the world's most beautiful trees. Practically all parts of the coconut can be manufactured into commercial products. The coconut provides food, shelter and fuel especially in countries in Asia and the Pacific where it is abundantly grown.
Unlike the many uses of the coconut fruits and the leaves, it is perhaps not very well known that the coconut stem is equally useful. Annex 1 gives some characteristics of the tree and its wood relevant to utilization. The possibility of utilizing the coconut palm wood on a commercial scale has been recognized only in the last decade or so, although usage of wood from palm species has been known by people in the villages since time immemorial. In more recent times, coconut palm wood has been successfully utilized in a number of coconut growing countries such as the Philippines, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Fiji, the Tonga Islands and many others.
It has been used in boat making in many islands in the Pacific. Relatively large and elaborate church structures and roof components have been constructed early in this century from round or hewn coconut palm wood, and these materials are reported to be still in good condition. These roof structures have been reported to have survived many tropical high wind storms including the hurricane "Isaac" (Tonga Islands) in 1982 which was responsible for considerable damage to many contemporary buildings.
As a result of the heavy reliance on utilization of traditional wood species without adequate provision for resource renewal, the wood-using industry now faces scarcity and prohibitive cost of conventional wood. The need to look for lesser-known indigenous wood material that can be used as a good substitute for commercially-known wood species to overcome the inadequate supply of logs and at the same time help conserve the remaining forests led to a serious consideration of the many uses of the coconut trunk.
The growing number of old and senile palms in coconut growing countries especially in Asia and the Pacific necessities large-scale replanting. In some countries, the occurrence of strong hurricanes usually fells thousands if not millions of coconut trees on a yearly basis. Still in other countries, the move towards urbanization or coconut plantations being transformed into residential areas requires the cutting of coconut trees and thus, necessitates efficient utilization of the trunks^2.
2When old palms are felled, proper disposal of the trunks should be done. Otherwise, if they are allowed to rot in the field, they would serve as breeding places for beetles which would ultimately create serious infestation problems to the newly - established coconut palms.
It has been widely recognized that the most effective way of disposing the felled trunks is to convert them to saleable wood products which not only provides a system of proper disposal but can generate employment and give an additional source of income in coconut producing countries. Furthermore, coconut wood utilization can supplement the supply of raw materials for the wood industry and provide low-cost but equally durable construction materials for the housing programmes in these countries and for export.
Cognizant of the value of the coconut trunk as a wood resource with various applications, efficient coconut wood utilization technologies have been developed by a number of research institutes in Asia and the Pacific. The main purpose of this paper is to make an assessment of the existing and potential resources of coconut wood in the Asia-Pacific region with focus not only on resource availability trends but also on the technologies and facilities that are available for efficient coconut wood utilization and the driving forces that affect them. The paper will also describe and analyse the current situation as well as the prospects of utilization and marketing of cocowood products in the region highlighting on the value that could be added by processing coconut wood and the actual as well as the potential financial and social impact such operations could bring to the region.
<section>3</section>
2. RESOURCE INVENTORY
Regional Overview
Country information
Regional Overview
Magnitude of resource and potential yields
Supply
Magnitude of resource and potential yields
The coconut area in the Asia and Pacific region is presented in Table 1. The estimated coconut area with senile palms as well as the estimated number of senile trees and the projected number of senile trees available for cutting up to year 2015 or beyond are also presented in Table 2.
Indonesia and the Philippines followed by India, Papua New Guinea and Thailand showed large areas with senile palms which are no longer productive and are therefore due for cutting or replanting. Indonesia as well as some of the Pacific Islands (Fiji, Micronesia, Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu) have 50 to 60% of their coconut area with over-aged or senile palms. Among the Pacific countries, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and Fiji have quite large numbers of coconut trees that need replanting with so much trees that could be processed into coconut wood.
With Indonesia's estimate of about 50% over-aged palms, the country has a coconut wood resource of approximately 185.6 million senile trees which could be cut down and replaced with hybrids and other high yielding varieties. Based on a sawn lumber recovery of 0.30 cubic meter per tree, around 55.7 million cubic meters of sawn wood are available for economic utilization. Assuming that the sawn lumber shall be used for the construction of a typical 60-square meter, 2-bedroom low cost house with a lumber requirement of 15 cubic meters per house, a total of 3.71 million housing units could be constructed out of these wood materials. And if this cocowood resource were spread in a 40-year replanting cycle, still a yearly cocowood resource of 4.64 million senile trees or 1.4 million cubic meters of sawn wood would be available yearly in the next 40 years for economic utilization. This cocowood resource could be used to build some 93,000 housing units per year.
In the Philippines, where coconut wood is becoming widely used in house construction, a cocowood resource of 95 million senile trees would give 28.5 million cubic meters of sawn wood for economic utilization, or a potential of 1.89 million housing units.
The age of a coconut tree can be visually estimated by counting the leaf scars while the volume of the stem is derived in the usual manner from its height and diameter. A typical coconut farm is estimated to have 100 trees per hectare. Coconut wood resource assessment in a given/region area can be done by estimation of the percentage area considered overmature or senile, the tree population per hectare, the replanting or felling rate per year and the wood volume per tree. Other methods of resource assessment involve actual survey in a given area or aerial photography.
It should also be noted that since coconut is basically a smallholder's crop, adequate incentives from government and appropriate policies on cutting and replanting senile and unproductive coconut trees must be in place. To make the resource available, coconut smallholders must be predisposed to cut and replant senile trees, given the necessary incentives, policy support end the required facilities and infrastructure. The investment both from government and the private sector necessary to enable productive use of this resource would certainly use of this resource would certainly contribute to better employment, and additional income for the coconut smallholders and overall economic development in coconut growing countries.
Further details concerning specific countries in Asia and in the Pacific follow below.
Supply
Totalling the country level availability reported in the sections which follow, the whole Asia-Pacific region has an estimated number of senile trees of about 371.3 million or 111.4 million cubic meters of sawn coconut wood. This coconut wood supply level would be enough to build a total of 7.4 million housing units. However, it must be noted that the actual availability of this resource depends on the magnitude of the replanting/coconut cutting programmes of the coconut producing countries in the region. These must be adequate incentives for coconut cutting/replanting in terms of income derived from the sale of logs, government and private sector assistance in actual logging operation and subsidies for the new planting of high yielding coconut varieties and hybrids.
Based on the Philippine experience, coconut cutting was greatly influenced by the price derived from the sale of the trunks. This led to the Philippine government's policy of regulating the cutting of coconut trees only in the case of senile, diseased and typhoon-damaged trees. The price of the trunks even encouraged smallholder coconut farmers to indiscriminately cut productive trees.
Coconut cutting or replanting in the many coconut producing countries in the Asia-Pacific region has been proceeding at a very slow rate per year, if at all. Some countries do not yet have an institutionalized coconut replanting programme. Given the necessary boost and with the provisions of adequate incentives, coupled with the pressure of a dwindling conventional wood resource, coconut cutting could proceed in a grand scale thereby making available a tremendously supply of coconut trunk for lumber.
Country information
Philippines
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Western Samoa
Philippines
In the Philippines, coconut is mainly a smallholder crop. Coconut occupies 23% of the country's total land devoted to agricultural use. Major coconut producing areas are Southern Mindanao, Southern Luzon and Western Mindanao. It has been estimated that coconuts are grown in approximately 1.6 million coconut farms in which 71% of the landholdings are 5 hectares and below, and only about 3% are more than 50 hectares.
As of 1995, the total coconut area is estimated at 3.164 million hectares. Of these about 30 % have already reached senility which consist mainly of palms that are 60 years old and over. Based on this estimate and with an average of 100 trees per hectare, the potential is for around 95 million unproductive and senile palms to be cut and replanted. On the basis of sawn timber recovery of 0.30 cubic meter per tree, a total of 28.5 million cubic meters of coconut lumber would be available for economic utilization. This raw material supply availability does not yet account for the thousands or millions of trees that may be felled due to strong typhoons. On the average, some 25 typhoons at varying intensities hit the Philippines annually.
Indonesia
From approximately 1.8 million hectares in 1970, the coconut area in Indonesia has tremendously increased in the past two decades to 3.71 million hectares in 1995. Coconut area represents around 26% of the entire plantations in Indonesia. Around 95% of the country's coconut area is situated in the islands of Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, Kalimantan, Nusa Tenggara, and Maluku. Sumatra accounts for some one-third of total coconut cultivation. In the 1970's, coconut growing was 99% smallholdings. In the 1980's, share of smallholdings slightly declined to 97%, with 2% going to privately-owned estates and 1% to government-owned estates. Of the entire area under coconut, 93% is classified as holdings of less than 5 hectares. About 50% of the palms are senile and need replanting.
India
The coconut area in India has increased from a little over 1 million hectares in the early 1970's to over 1.6 million hectares in 1995 and is anticipated to further increase to 2 million hectares by the year 2000. Coconuts are grown mainly along the coastal belts and some interior tracts. More than 90% of the area under coconut is concentrated in the Southern States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andra Pradesh. Kerala accounts for 55% of India's total coconut area. Coconuts are mainly grown by smallholders with 98% of the holdings of size less than 2 hectares. About 20% of the palms are both senile and unproductive, and therefore need replanting.
Malaysia
Coconut ranks fifth in Malaysia's agriculture in terms of cultivated area with oil palm and rubber occupying the greater portion. The coconut industry, however, still plays an important role in the country's economy providing livelihood to some 100,000 farm families or almost 10% of the nation's farming community.
In terms of area planted, the highest level was attained in 1982 at 363,000 hectares. Since 1986 at 330,000 hectares, the area planted to coconut was observed to be at a generally decreasing trend reaching to 315,000 hectares level in 1992 and down to 290,000 hectares in 1995.
Coconut in Malaysia is generally a smallholder's crop with 91% under smallholder cultivation and 9% under estate management. Of the total area planted to coconut, 63% is located in Peninsular, Malaysia, 19% in Sabah and 18% in Sarawak. With increasing labour shortage, decreasing productivity of palms and the massive conversion of coconut lands to oil palm plantation and other more profitable crops, the country projects a continuous decline in coconut area at a rate of 2.5-3.5% per year to some 285,000 hectares towards year 2000. It was estimated that about 32% of the total plantings are now well over 60 years old.
Sri Lanka
Coconut accounts for the second largest land usage in Sri Lanka with about 25 % of the total arable land. As a major commercial crop in the country, the coconut industry provides employment to some 135,000 people involved in the production, processing, and trading sectors of the industry.
The period from 1970 to 1995 saw a gradual decline in area under coconut, from 466,000 hectares in 1970 to 419,000 hectares in 1995. This gradual decline in area under coconut which involved cutting of coconut palms was due to the increasing use of coconut land for urbanization, industry and housing programmes.
Coconut in Sri Lanka is largely under private ownership with a vast majority classified as smallholding of less than 1.2 hectares. The percentage of palms over 60 years of age was estimated at about 15% of the total plantings.
Thailand
Most of the coconut areas in the country are found in the peninsular provinces or on the shores of the Gulf of Thailand accounting for 80% of total planted area. Coconut farms in Thailand are primarily of the smallholder type with a mean farm size of 2.4 hectares, 80% or more of the holdings being less than 2 hectares.
In the period 1970-1992, the coconut area ranged between 320,000 and 412,000 hectares and is expected to remain stable up to year 2000. The country estimates the present age structure of coconut palms at 60% of the population between 15 and 40 years old, 10% immature or non-bearing and the remaining 30% mainly senile palms. Typhoons also hit the prime coconut producing areas in Southern Thailand and at times cause massive felling of trees. Some of the country's coconut area are also converted into the production of other more profitable crops or into housing development projects.
Vietnam
The coconut industry in Vietnam contributes to the economic welfare of some 10 million Vietnamese, and provides direct employment to some one million people. In 1957, the country had 31,540 hectares planted to coconut which increased to 40,800 hectares in the early 60's. Due to war damage, coconut area decreased to about 35,000 hectares in the early and mid 1970's. The area under coconut henceforth increased reaching a peak of 350,000 hectares in 1990 and has drastically declined to some 186,000 hectares in 1995. The decline in area was due to the shift in land use from coconuts to fruit trees.
Of the total area under coconut, 73% is located in the 9 provinces of the Mekong delta. As a matter of national land policy, private coconut holdings in Vietnam are limited to 0.5 hectares or less, with 60% smallholders, 30% cooperatives and 10% state farms. Since nearly 65% of the area under coconut has been planted after 1983, the majority of the palms are relatively young; senile palms are estimated to be about 10%.
Federated States of Micronesia
The Federated States of Micronesia has a total land area of 66,551 hectares of which 17,000 hectares are planted to coconut. There are no large plantations, only smallholders with an average farm size of less than 2 hectares. A substantial decrease in coconut area occurred in the last two decades from 30,000 hectares in 1970's to 17,000 hectares in the 90's. This decreasing trend in coconut area is a result of substantial conversion of coconut lands to the production of other crops especially in the State of Kosrae and conversion to housing facilities in the State of Chunk. The existing coconut stands are mainly already senile (60%) or have reached 60 years or more and are therefore due for replanting.
Fiji
The coconut area in Fiji has gradually declined from 78,000 hectares in 1978 to 64,000 in 1995, of which 60% or approximately 39,000 hectares are already senile or over-mature and are therefore due for replanting. Fiji's current coconut replanting/cutting programme is about 5,250 hectares until year 2000. This means an annual rate of about 1,313 hectares per year. There is only one coconut wood processing plant in Fiji called the Pacific Green Industries. Currently its absorption capacity is at 700 logs per week. It is however willing and capable of increasing its absorption capacity to 100,000 logs per year. Logs are bought on the farm at US$6.00 each, that is at 8ft × 8" diameter. These logs are only made into furniture for the local and export markets.
Papua New Guinea
Coconut occupies about 6% of the country's total land area. Of the total coconut area, smallholder cultivation (less than 5 hectares) accounts for about 6%. From 1970 to 1979, coconut area was maintained at about 265,000 hectares. Currently there are 260,000 hectares of coconut land in PNG, of which 50% of the total plantings are estimated to be senile and unproductive and therefore need replanting.
Solomon Islands
Area under coconut in Solomon Islands is recorded at 59,000 hectares with a total tree population of about 9 million. Total coconut area is projected to remain stable until year 2000. Of the total coconut area, 65-85% is classified under smallholding with an average of 2.5 hectares per holding. The age structure of the palms is relatively young with about 50% of the existing stands under smallholder cultivation planted in the 1970's. A sizeable area of coconuts was also planted after the second world war. It is estimated that some 20% of the plantings are senile.
Vanuatu
Coconuts in Vanuatu occupy some 96,000 hectares or roughly 66% of total land under agricultural use or 18% of the country's total arable land. Of the total plantings, some 20% are under plantations and 80% are under smallholdings, with the steady increase in smallholdings observed towards the 90's. There has been a substantial increase in coconut area from 61,000 hectares in 1970 to 96,000 hectares in 1995. At an annual average increase of 3%, coconut area is expected to be in the vicinity of 120,000 hectares by year 2000. It was estimated that only 7% of plantation coconuts were under 30 years old and about 50% of the plantings are already senile and unproductive. Replanting rate is reported to be at 2.7% per annum especially among smallholders.
Western Samoa
The coconut area in Western Samoa has gradually increased since 1970 from 28,000 hectares to a peak of 50,000 hectares in 1987. Since then, the total coconut area slightly decreased due to land conversion and cyclones damage but has now increased to 75,000 hectares through replanting and new planting. More than 80% of the coconut farms are based on landholdings with an average area per holding of 3.64 hectares. The country is also hit by cyclones, the more devastating ones were OFA in 1990 and VAL in 1991, felling thousands of coconut trees. It is estimated that about 16% of the total plantings are 60 years old or over and considered senile.
<section>4</section>
3. USES OF COCONUT WOOD AND MARKETS
Use in construction
Use in Furniture and high-value products
Charcoal
Chemicals
Market Profile
Demand
Use in construction
One of primary uses of coconut timber is for building construction. Coconut timber is suitable for housing components like trusses, purlins, walls, joists, doors, window frames and jalousies. Low density coconut wood materials (from the centre of the stem) should be used only in non-load structures like walls and panels while high density coconut wood (from the perimeter of the stem) can be used for load-bearing structures like trusses and joints. Table 6 could serve as a guide for prospective users of coconut timber for building construction. Table 7 lists the different coconut timber derived products and the recommended characteristics of raw materials to use.
The small diameter of coconut stem limits the size of sawn lumber, hence the optimum width and thickness of boards that are usually recovered are 25mm and 50mm, respectively. For structures requiring bigger sizes of lumber, glued lamination of the wood to the desired dimensions solves this particular problem.
High density coconut wood could also be used as posts, power and telecommunication poles, trusses, floor tiles (parquet), girts, floor joists, purlins, balustrades and railings and other load bearing structures. When coconut logs are to be used in ground contact under exposed conditions (e.g. as posts or as poles for electrical wires) they must be properly treated.
Medium density boards can be effectively used for walling, horizontal studs, ceiling joists and door/window frames. As a rule, coconut wood with density below 400 kg/m^3 should not be used as structural framing materials. However, they can be used in the internal parts of a building as ceiling and wall lining in the form of boards and shingles. A problem related to structural application of cocowood is the difficulty of nailing and subsequently splitting of high density wood finishes.
Use in Furniture and high-value products
Coconut wood can be a promising material for the manufacture of furniture, novelties and other handicrafts due to its beautiful grain and attractive natural appearance. High value coconut wood products which include furniture, decorative interior walls, parquet floors, various novelties and curio items like walking sticks, ash trays, hammer handles, egg cups, plates, bowls, vases, etc. are equally, if not more than, comparable to the traditional wood species commonly used in the furniture industry as far as appearance is concerned. Hence, with effective product promotion, quality furniture and other high value coconut wood products can have a potential share not only in the domestic but also in the world markets.
Coconut wood has potential for the manufacture of high value and export-quality finished products. However, like many other conventional wood species untreated freshly-cut lumber can be easily attacked by mould and staining fungi especially if the material is not properly stacked and is exposed to humid environment during the air drying process. Further degradation during air drying can also be caused by decay fungi and pinhole borers. Hence, prophylactic treatment is necessary if it is used for the production of high value products for export.
Checks and cracks develop on the surface of improperly dried coconut wood or in response to variation of relative humidity; hence kiln drying should be done to bring its moisture content to the level most appropriate for equilibrium with its location in service.
Charcoal
Coconut trunk and other sawmill residues are readily usable for charcoal making and for the production of energy. Coconut wood is similar to other woods in its characteristics as fuel, although the range of densities within the stem leads to variation in the energy potential.
Studies using the 2-cord double walled masonry block kiln showed the production of good quality charcoal for domestic use at an average yield of 25 % based on the oven-dry weight. Charcoal and charcoal briquettes have higher heating value. They are easily handled and produce less smoke compared to wood.
For fuel purposes, coconut trunk charcoal must be converted into briquettes to increase its strength and density as well as to improve its shipping properties. A technology for briquetting coconut trunk charcoal has already been developed. A briquetting plant in the Philippines produces ovoid type briquettes of 1.5 oz size at 500 lb/hr. The briquettes have good crushing strength and burning properties. Sorghum grain is an effective binder for charcoal briquettes of coconut trunk.
Chemicals
Activated carbon can also be made from coconut trunk charcoal. The product can be a reliable source of carbon for the manufacture of various chemicals such as carbon disulphide, calcium carbide, silicon carbide, carbon monoxide, paint pigments, pharmaceuticals, moulding resins, black powder, electrodes, catalyst reactor, brake linings, and gas cylinder absorbent. Ethanol can also be produced from coconut waste products.
Market Profile
The construction industry provides the bulk of the demand for coconut lumber. In the construction of big buildings, coconut lumber is used in large volumes as scaffolding and as form lumber. Selected and graded coconut lumber is also used as house posts, girders, trusses, door jambs and sidings. It has also been proven to be a suitable material for pallets. In the Philippines, a significant volume of coconut lumber was used in the government's low cost housing programme, as well as in other government buildings and various resorts throughout the country. This involves some 1.0 to 2.0 million cubic meter of coconut lumber annually.
Field observations could indicate that demand for coconut lumber is increasing. One indicator is the increase in the number of coconut lumber producers and dealers. Another indicator of rising demand in the increasing price trend of coconut trees. Ten years ago in the Philippines, coconut trees could be had for free. In 1995, one trunk was priced as high as P800 (US$29.00) depending on accessibility or nearness to highway or buying/processing centre and the quality of the trunks. The usual buying price in the Philippines could be pegged at a national average of P500 per trunk (US$15.00) with the buyer doing the logging operation, handling and transport. In Fiji, coconut logs of 8ft × 8" diameter are bought on the farm at US$6.00 each.
When compared to the local mainstream lumber species, coconut wood has a remarkably lower price. Philippine data reveal that the commercial hard wood apitong (Dipterocarpus grandiflorus) would cost P 38.00 (US$1.38) per board foot (bd. ft.) as compared to P800 (US$0.29) per bd. ft for coconut lumber. Tanguile (Shorea polysperma), a common commercial wood of lesser basic density as apitong is still comparatively much higher in price than cocowood, at P 26.00 (US$0.95) per bd. ft.
Demand
The actual and potential demand for coconut wood could be derived from actual and projected needs for housing, the construction of big high-rise buildings, electrical and telecommunication poles, poultry and other livestock buildings, grocery pallets, and demand for house/office furniture, novelty items and curious for both the domestic and export markets within and outside the Asia-Pacific region.
Table 11 shows the potential demand for coconut lumber based on the housing requirements of 1% and 5% of most of the Asia-Pacific countries, respectively. With an estimated population in coconut growing countries in Asia and the Pacific of about 1.5 billion people and assuming that 1% of the population would need housing facilities, made from coconut wood, some 15 million housing units would then be required, equivalent to demand for some 226 million cubic meters of coconut wood assuming that one housing unit would require at least 15 cubic meters of coconut wood. Some 75 million housing units would be required if one assumes that 5 % of the present population would immediately need coconut-based housing facilities. This requirement would create a demand of some 1.132 billion cubic meters of coconut wood.
It may be noted that even at 1 % level, the demand of coconut wood for housing within the coconut growing countries in the Asia-Pacific region would exceed the supply. Thus, for housing needs alone, cocowood could have a big demand. The demand of coconut wood for other uses, e.g. construction of high rise buildings, furniture, novelties, etc., would have to compete for the demand of the wood for basic housing units.
The demand for coconut lumber in the construction industry is in the form of scaffoldings a