<section>a</section>
Chapter 4 - The role of the glycemic index in food choice
Definition of glycemic index (GI)
Factors influencing the blood glucose responses of foods
Calculation of glycemic index of meals or diets
Practical application of the glycemic index
Physiologic and therapeutic effects of low glycemic index foods
Carbohydrate foods often contain vitamins and minerals plus other compounds, such as phytochemicals and antioxidants, which may have health implications. Consuming a wide variety of carbohydrate foods is therefore recommended as this is more likely to be a nutritionally adequate diet with the health benefits commonly ascribed to carbohydrate foods (83).
Food choice depends not only on nutrition and health considerations but also on factors such as local availability, cultural acceptability and individual likes and needs. There is no one measure which can be used to guide food choices in all cases. The chemical composition of foods (e.g. fat, sugars, dietary fibre content) should be an important factor influencing food choice. However, simply knowing the chemical nature of the carbohydrates in foods, for example, does not reliably indicate their actual physiologic effects. Foods which are good choices in some situations may not be the best choices in others. Likewise, foods which are poor choices in some situations may be good choices in others.
Two indices of carbohydrate foods based on their physiologic functions have been proposed. A recently suggested satiety index (84) measures the satiety value of equal energy portions of foods relative to a standard, which is white bread. The factors which control food intake are complex and satiety needs to be distinguished from satiation. Nevertheless, investigation of satiety indices of foods is considered an interesting area of future research, which, if validated, may aid in the selection of appropriate carbohydrate foods to promote energy balance. A more established index is the glycemic index which can be used to classify foods based on their blood glucose raising potential.
Definition of glycemic index (GI)
The glycemic index is defined as the incremental area under the blood glucose response curve of a 50g carbohydrate portion of a test food expressed as a percent of the response to the same amount of carbohydrate from a standard food taken by the same subject. The italicized terms are discussed below because the methods used to determine the glycemic index of foods and to apply the information to diets may profoundly affect the results obtained.
Incremental area under the curve
A number of different methods have been used to calculate the area under the curve. For most glycemic index data, the area under the curve has been calculated as the incremental area under the blood glucose response curve (IAUC), ignoring the area beneath the fasting concentration. This can be calculated geometrically by applying the trapezoid rule. When a blood glucose value falls below the baseline, only the area above the fasting level is included. Sample data are shown in Table 1. The data for Standard #1 are used in the diagram in Figure 2 to illustrate the details of the actual calculation.
TABLE 1 Sample blood glucose responses to the ingestion of 50g carbohydrate
Minutes
IAUC
Standard #1
Standard #2
Standard #3
Test Food
50g carbohydrate portion:
The portion of food tested should contain 50g of glycemic (available) carbohydrate. In practice, glycemic carbohydrate is often measured as total carbohydrate minus dietary fibre, as determined by the AOAC method. Since this method does not include RS 1 and RS2 when they are present, they will be mistakenly included as glycemic carbohydrate.
Blood glucose response
This is normally measured in capillary whole blood. Plasma glucose can be used to determine the glycemic index and gives similar values. However, capillary blood is preferred because it is easier to obtain, the rise in blood glucose is greater than in venous plasma and the results for capillary blood glucose are less variable than those for venous plasma glucose. Thus, differences between foods are larger and easier to detect statistically using capillary blood glucose (85). An illustration of the difference between glucose as measured in simultaneously-obtained venous plasma and capillary whole blood is shown in Table 2.
TABLE 2 Glucose response from capillary blood and venous plasma
0 min
15 min
30 min
45 min
60 min
90 min
120 min
IAUC
Capillary blood
Venous plasma
Standard food
Either white bread or glucose can be used as the standard food. The GI values obtained if white bread is used are about 1.4 times those obtained if glucose is the standard food. Other standard foods could be used, but to enable comparison with data in the literature, the GI of the new standard food relative to standardized white bread or glucose should be established.
Same subject
Blood glucose responses vary considerably from day-to-day within subjects. Thus, to obtain a representative mean response to the standard food, it is recommended that the standard food be repeated at least three times in each subject. This is illustrated by the data in Table 1, which is typical for normal subjects. The standard food was repeated three times giving IAUCs of: 114, 155 and 179. The mean ± SD IAUC is 149 ± 33 and the coefficient of variation (100 × SD/mean) is 22%. For this subject, the GI of the test food = 100 × 93/149 = 62.
Figure 2 - Sample calculations of incremental area under the curve (IAUC)
The IAUC for the data illustrated above (Standard #1, Table 3) equals the sum of the areas of the triangles and trapezoids: A+B+C+D+F
The area of triangle A = 2.0 × 15/2 = 15.0
The area of trapezoid B = (2.0 + 3.6) × 15/2 = 42.0
The area of trapezoid C = (3.6 + 1.0) × 15/2 = 34.5
The area of triangle D = 1.0 × t72
since: t'/15=1.0/(1.0+0.2)
therefore: t' = 15 × 1.0/1.2 = 12.5
therefore the area of triangle D = 1.0 × 12.5/2 = 6.25
The area of triangle E = 0.3 × t"/2
since: t"/30 = 0.3/(0.3 + 0.2)
therefore: t" = 30 × 0.3/0.5 = 18
therefore the area of triangle D = 0.3 × 18/2 = 2.7
The area of trapezoid F = (0.3 + 0.6) × 30/2 = 13.5
Therefore, IAUC = 15.0 + 42.0 + 34.5 + 6.25 + 2.7 +13.5 = 114 mmol.min/L
Protocol
To determine the GI of the food, the tests illustrated in Table 1 would be repeated in six more subjects and the resulting GI values averaged. Normally, the GI for more than one food would be determined in one series of tests, for example, each subject might test four foods once each and the standard food three times for a total of seven tests in random order on separate days. Subjects are studied on separate days in the morning after a 10-12 ho overnight fast. A standard drink of water, tea or coffee should be given with each test meal.
Factors influencing the blood glucose responses of foods
Starchy foods with a low GI are digested and absorbed more slowly than foods with a high GI. Some factors that influence glycemic properties of foods are listed in Table 3.
TABLE 3 Food factors influencing glycemic responses
Amount of carbohydrate
Nature of the monosaccharide components
Glucose
Fructose
Galactose
Nature of the starch
Amylose
Amylopectin
Starch-nutrient interaction
Resistant starch
Cooking/food processing
Degree of starch gelatinization
Particle size
Food form
Cellular structure
Other food components
Fat and protein
Dietary fibre
Antinutrients
Organic acids
Calculation of glycemic index of meals or diets
The GI can be applied in a detailed fashion to mixed meals or whole diets by calculating the weighted GI value of the meal or diet. For example, the way to calculate the GI of a meal containing bread, cereal, sucrose, milk and orange juice is shown in Table 4.
TABLE 4 Calculation of the glycemic index of meals
Food
Grams Glycemic Carbohydrate
Proportion of total Glycemic Carbohydrate
Food Glycemic Index
Meal Glycemic Index *
Bread
Cereal
Milk
Sucrose
Orange juice
TOTAL
* Values for each food equals the proportion of total glycemic carbohydrate multiplied by the food GI. The sum of these values is the meal GI.
Using this type of calculation, there is a good correlation between meal GI and the observed glycemic responses of meals of equal nutrient composition. Blood glucose responses are also influenced by the amount of carbohydrate in the meal. To compare the expected glycemic load of meals with different carbohydrate contents, a non-linear adjustment can be applied (86), but this has only been tested in normal subjects.
For detailed application of the GI, a value of the GI for every food in the diet or meal needs to have been assigned (for many foods the value has to be estimated). The accuracy of the calculation depends upon the accuracy of the GI values ascribed to foods, which may vary from place to place due to local factors such as variety, cooking, processing, etc. Foods particularly prone to such variation include rice, potatoes and bananas.
Practical application of the glycemic index
The glycemic index can be used, in conjunction with information about food composition, to guide food choices. For practical application, the glycemic index is useful to rank foods by developing exchange lists of categories of low glycemic index foods, such as legumes, pearled barley, lightly refined grains (e.g. whole grain pumpernickel bread, or breads made from coarse flour), pasta, etc. Specific local foods should be included in such lists where information is available (e.g. green bananas in the Caribbean and specific rice varieties in Southeast Asia).
In choosing carbohydrate foods, both glycemic index and food composition must be considered. Some low GI foods may not always be a good choice because they are high in fat. Conversely, some high GI foods may be a good choice because of convenience or because they have low energy and high nutrient content. It is not necessary or desirable to exclude or avoid all high GI foods.
Physiologic and therapeutic effects of low glycemic index foods
Meals containing low GI foods reduce both postprandial blood glucose and insulin responses. Animal studies suggest that incorporating slowly digested starch into the diet delays the onset of insulin resistance. Some epidemiologic studies suggest that a low GI diet is associated with reduced risk of developing non-insulin diabetes in men (87) and women (88). Clinical trials in normal, diabetic and hyperlipidemic subjects show that low GI diets reduce mean blood glucose concentrations, reduce insulin secretion and reduce serum triglycerides in individuals with hypertriglyceridemia (89,90,91,92). In addition, the digestibility of the carbohydrate in low GI foods is generally less than that of high GI foods. Thus, low GI foods increase the amount of carbohydrate entering the colon and increase colonic fermentation and short chain fatty acid production. This has implications for systemic nitrogen and lipid metabolism, and for local events within the colon.
<section>b</section>
Chapter 5 - Goals and guidelines for carbohydrate food choices
Rationale and framework
Principles of carbohydrate food choices
Carbohydrate nutrient and food goals
Translation from carbohydrate nutrients to foods
Considerations for target audiences
Rationale and framework
Although the scientific basis for dietary guidelines requires an understanding of physiology and health relationships, the guidance most helpful to consumers uses food-based terms (93). In preparing such guidelines, food traditions and beliefs must be taken into account and the total food intake should reflect practical issues, such as meal patterns, food status, celebratory or usual role, seasonal availability, affordability and sustainability. These, including the health priorities, are matters for national policy makers.
Principles of carbohydrate food choices
The principles are:
1. To acknowledge the socio-cultural context, lifestyle and stage of life-cycle, in food carbohydrate choice;
2. To give preference to food choices rather than to nutrient goals in carbohydrate food choices, and in so doing:
a. Use food categories as a guide to chemically defined carbohydrate type.
b. Use numbers of portions (serving sizes) of foods from designated food categories in order to provide semi-quantitative food-based advice. This may imply that meal frequency would need to increase in some cultures, because the accommodation of enough carbohydrate food in the course of the day, without an excessive amount on any one occasion, requires more frequent servings and consumption;
3. To appreciate that many of the world's health problems are associated with inadequate carbohydrate intake, and potentially also associated with inappropriate carbohydrate intake;
4. To ensure the acceptability and practicality of any recommended change in carbohydrate food intake;
5. To acknowledge that there may be unintended consequences involved in carbohydrate food intake change, and also to ensure that risks involved in dietary changes from traditional diets is considered;
6. To monitor the intake of carbohydrate foods and, wherever possible, of chemically defined carbohydrate components of those foods in relation to health issues.
7. To ascertain whether food carbohydrate choices encourage biodiversity and are sustainable.
Carbohydrate nutrient and food goals
Nutrient goals
The minimum amount of carbohydrate in the human diet that is needed to avoid ketosis is of the order of 50 g/day in adults. Beyond this, additional energy needs are best met by nutrient-dense carbohydrate foods. There must, of course, be adequate intakes of protein (with essential amino acids) and essential fatty acids from fat. Moderate intake of sugar-rich foods can also provide for a palatable and nutritious diet.
Food goals
There are a number of approaches to translating nutrient recommendations to food goals:
1. Recommending the total weight of food groups to be consumed. Various national food guides have suggested quantities of specific foods to be consumed, such as fruits and vegetables, and pulses, nuts and seeds.
2. Examining sources of carbohydrate foods in various diets, particularly diets which have desirable total carbohydrate intakes or from countries where the incidence of lifestyle diseases is low. Recommendations can then be made on the basis of intakes.
3. Examining major food groups which contain carbohydrate foods and recommending numbers of servings of those food groups. Numerous countries around the world, both developed and developing, have produced food guides with such groupings, and considering the level of agreement that exists for carbohydrate as a percent energy, these food guides are remarkably consistent in their advice.
4. Examining indices which exist to describe various physiological properties of carbohydrate-containing foods, such as glycemic index values and values from other indices which are presently being developed.
On the basis of the above approaches, and taking into account the principles for carbohydrate food choice, the following recommendations can be made:
1. A variety of foods should provide the carbohydrate in the diet, not a single or small number of sources.
2. Cereals, roots, pulses, fruit and vegetables are all components of a healthy diet throughout the world.
3. Cereal foods or root crops, where this is the main staple, should provide the major source of carbohydrate energy.
4. Intake of fruits and vegetables (including potatoes in developed countries) should be high. As well as being a valuable source of carbohydrate, fruit and vegetables are an important source of antioxidant vitamins and other food components.
5. Consumption of pulses, nuts and seeds should be encouraged. While this group often represents only a small amount of carbohydrate energy, these foods are a good source of protein and micronutrients. They should be consumed with cereals to optimize protein quality.
6. At least small quantities of milk products are desirable, even when low lactase activity exists, since these are a good source of protein and micronutrients.
These recommendations apply to all individuals over the age of two years, with adjustments as necessary for growth and the increased demand of pregnancy and lactation.
Translation from carbohydrate nutrients to foods
Achieving goals for intake of carbohydrates does not ensure nutritional adequacy. Carbohydrate foods provide a range of nutrients and other substances essential for health in addition to energy. It is therefore essential to consume a variety of foods in order to derive the full benefits of a high carbohydrate diet. Nutrients from foods require monitoring. For example, in Iran (94) carbohydrate foods include vegetables (250 g/day), fruits (210 g/day), pulses (20 g/day) and cereals (wheat at about 250 g/day and rice 110 g/day, uncooked). Wheat has mostly been consumed as bread with traditional pastries being festive foods. Recently, consumption of the latter has increased substantially with potential reduction of nutritionally useful food groups traditionally accompanying bread. This may not significantly impact on total carbohydrate intake, but could influence nutritional adequacy. Traditional methods of food preparation and preservation facilitate food choice variety, and
promote nutritional benefits. Alteration of traditional practices may compromise such benefits. Ongoing monitoring may be required to guard against nutritional inadequacy.
Considerations for target audiences
Planners and policy makers need to:
1. Recognize dietary goals of at least 55% of total energy from a variety of carbohydrate sources.
2. Recognize the extent of change necessary in order to meet these goals (e.g. it may take considerable change in food production and consumption to meet goals in Western countries).
3. Understand that there must be a gradual transition in meeting new dietary guidelines and that new terminology will need to be gradually accepted.
4. Consider the effects of economic and cultural factors in achieving dietary goals.
5. Develop clear guides about the types and quantities of food recommended.
6. Develop methods to monitor food consumption to meet dietary goals.
Primary producers and processors need to:
1. Consider how existing and new technologies can be used to help meet dietary goals regarding the quantity and nutritional properties of food carbohydrates, as well as levels of micronutrients and other desirable food components.
2. Provide foods, such as breakfast cereals and snack foods that are high in NSP, low in energy density, and with a low glycemic index.
3. Increase the availability and convenience of fruits and vegetables.
4. Provide appropriate information to the consumer on food labels.
To facilitate individual choice
Provide easily understandable food-based guides for the consumer.
<section>c</section>
Chapter 6 - Recommendations
The following recommendations are derived from the Consultation discussions and resulting conclusions detailed in the report. Specific recommendations are grouped under the appropriate report headings.
The role of carbohydrates in nutrition
The Consultation RECOMMENDS:
1. That the terminology used to describe dietary carbohydrate be standardized with carbohydrates classified primarily by molecular size (degree of polymerization or DP) into sugars (DP 1-2), oligosaccharides (DP 3-9) and polysaccharides (DP 10+). Further subdivision can be made on the basis of monosaccharide composition. Nutritional groupings can then be made on the basis of physiological properties.
2. That the concept of glycemic carbohydrate, meaning "providing carbohydrate for metabolism" be adopted.
3. Against the use of the terms extrinsic and intrinsic sugars, complex carbohydrate and available and unavailable carbohydrate.
4. That food laboratories measure total carbohydrate in the diet as the sum of the individual carbohydrates and not "by difference".
5. That the use of the term dietary fibre should always be qualified by a statement itemizing those carbohydrates and other substances intended for inclusion. Dietary fibre is a nutritional concept, not an exact description of a component of the diet.
6. That the use of the terms soluble and insoluble dietary fibre be gradually phased out. The Consultation recognized that these terms are presently used but does not consider them a useful division either analytically or physiologically
7. That the analysis and labelling of dietary carbohydrate, for whatever purpose, be based on the chemical divisions recommended. Additional groupings such as polyols, resistant starch, non-digestible oligosaccharides and dietary fibre can be used, provided the included components are clearly defined.
8. That the energy value of all carbohydrate in the diet be reassessed using modern nutritional and other techniques. However, for carbohydrates which reach the colon, the Consultation recommends that the energy value be set at 2 kcal/g (8 kJ/g) for nutritional and labelling purposes.
9. That the continued production and consumption of root crops and pulses be encouraged to ensure the adequacy and diversity of the supply of carbohydrate.
10. That the continued consumption of traditional foods rich in carbohydrate should be encouraged where populations are in transition from a subsistence rural economy to more prosperous urban lifestyles. Processed foods are likely to be a substantial part of the diet and processing can be used to optimize nutritional properties.
The role of carbohydrates in the maintenance of health
The Consultation RECOMMENDS:
11. That the many health benefits of dietary carbohydrates should be recognized and promoted. Carbohydrate foods provide more than energy alone.
12. An optimum diet of at least 55% of total energy from a variety of carbohydrate sources for all ages except for children under the age of two. Fat should not be specifically restricted below the age of 2 years. The optimum diet should be gradually introduced beginning at 2 years of age.
13. That energy balance be maintained by consuming a diet containing at least 55% total energy from carbohydrate from various sources and engaging in regular physical activity.
14. Against consuming carbohydrate levels above the optimum, including carbohydrate-containing beverages, for purposes of recreational physical activity. Higher carbohydrate intakes are only needed for long-term extreme endurance physical activities.
15. That, as a general rule, a nutrient-dense, high carbohydrate diet be considered optimal for the elderly, but that individualization is recommended because their specific nutritional needs are complex.
Dietary carbohydrate and disease
The Consultation RECOMMENDS:
16. That a wide range of carbohydrate-containing foods be consumed so that the diet is sufficient in essential nutrients as well as total energy, especially when carbohydrate intake is high.
17. That the bulk of carbohydrate-containing foods consumed be those rich in non-starch polysaccharides and with a low glycemic index. Appropriately processed cereals, vegetables, legumes, and fruits are particularly good food choices.
18. That excess energy intake in any form will cause body fat accumulation, so that excess consumption of low fat foods, while not as obesity-producing as excess consumption of high fat products, will lead to obesity if energy expenditure is not increased. Excessive intakes of sugars which compromise micronutrient density should be avoided. There is no evidence of a direct involvement of sucrose, other sugars and starch in the etiology of lifestyle-related diseases.
19. That national governments provide populations in transition from traditional diets to those characteristic of developed countries, with dietary recommendations to ensure nutritional adequacy and retention of an appropriate balance of macronutrients.
The role of glycemic index in food choice
The Consultation RECOMMENDS:
20. That for healthy food choices, both the chemical composition and physiologic effects of food carbohydrates be considered, because the chemical nature of the carbohydrates in foods does not completely describe their physiological effects.
21. That, in making food choices, the glycemic index be used as a useful indicator of the impact of foods on the integrated response of blood glucose. Clinical application includes diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance. It is recommended that the glycemic index be used to compare foods of similar composition within food groups.
22. That published glycemic response data be supplemented where possible with tests of local foods as normally prepared, because of the important effects that food variety and cooking can have on glycemic responses.
<section>d</section>
References
1. FAO. 1980. Carbohydrates in human nutrition, a Joint FAO/WHO Report. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 15, Rome.
2. Asp, N-G. 1996. Dietary carbohydrates: classification by chemistry and physiology. Food Chemistry 57:9-14.
3. Cummings, J.H., Roberfroid, M.B., Andersson, H., Barth, C., Ferro-Luzzi, A. 1997. A new look at dietary carbohydrate: chemistry, physiology and health. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:1 -7.
4. Englyst, H.N. and Hudson, G.J. 1996. The classification and measurement of dietary carbohydrates. Food Chemistry, 57(1): 15-21.
5. Southgate, D.A.T. 1991. Determination of food carbohydrates. Elsevier Science Publishers, Ltd., Barking.
6. Greenfield, H. and Southgate D.A.T. 1992. Food composition data. Production, management and use. Elsevier Applied Science, London.
7. Asp, N.-G. 1995. Classification and methodology of food carbohydrates as related to nutritional effects. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 61(4(S)):930S -937S.
8. Department of Health. 1989. Dietary sugars and human health. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
9. U.S. Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs. 1977. Dietary goals for the United States. 2nd Ed. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.
10. McCance, R.A. and Lawrence, R.D. 1929. The carbohydrate content of foods. Medical Research Council Special Report Series 135 Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
11. Englyst, H.N. and Cummings, J.H. 1990. Non-starch polysaccharides (dietary fiber) and resistant starch. New Developments in Dietary Fiber. Physiological, Physicochemical, and Analytical Aspects. (Furda, I. and Brine, C.J. eds.). Plenum Press, New York and London, pp. 205-225.
12. Englyst, H.N., Kingman, S.M. and Cummings, J.H. 1992. Classification and measurement of nutritionally important starch fractions. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 46:S33-S50.
13. Wurzburg, O.B. 1986. Nutritional aspects and safety of modified food starches. Nutrition Reviews 44:74-79.
14. Björck, I., Gunnarsson, A. and Östergård, K. 1989. A study of native and chemically modified potato starch. Part II. Digestibility in the rat intestinal tract. Stärke 41:128-134.
15. Trowell, H. 1972. Dietary fibre and coronary heart disease. Revue Européenne d'Etudes Cliniques et Biologiques 17(4) 345-349.
16. Burkitt, D.P. and Trowell, H.S. 1975. Refined carbohydrate foods and disease: some implications of dietary fibre. Academic Press, London.
17. British Nutrition Foundation. 1990. Complex carbohydrates in foods: report of the British Nutrition Foundation's Task Force. Chapman and Hall, London.
18. Asp, N-G., Schweizer, T.F., Southgate, D.A.T. and Theander, 0. 1992. Dietary fibre analysis. In Dietary fibre. A component of food. Nutritional function in health and disease (eds. T.F. Schweizer and C.A. Edwards), Springer, London, pp. 57-102.
19. Muir, J. and O'Dea, K. 1993. Validation of an in vitro assay for predicting the amount of starch that escapes digestion in the small intestine of humans. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 57:546.
20. Björck, I. 1996. Starch: nutritional aspects. In; Carbohydrates in food (Eliasson A-C. ed.). Marcel Dekker Inc, pp 505-554.
21. Asp, N-G., van Amelsvoort, J.M.M. and Hautvast, J.G.A.J. 1996. (eds.) Nutritional implications of resistant starch. Nutrition Research Reviews 9, 1-31 (final EURESTA report).
22. Englyst, H.N., Quigley, M.E. Hudson, G.J. and Cummings, J.H. 1992. Determination of dietary fibre as non-starch polysaccharides by gas-liquid chromatography. Analyst, 117:1707-1714.
23. Englyst, H.N., Quigley, M.E. and Hudson, G.J. 1994. Determination of dietary fibre as non-starch polysaccharides with gas-liquid chromatographic, high-performance liquid chromatographic or spectrophotometric measurement of constituent sugars. Analyst, 119:1497-1509
24. Pendlington, A.W. and Brookes, A. 1995. BCR studies in progress. In: Recent progress in the analysis of dietary fibre. COST 92 Metabolic and physiological aspects of dietary fibre in food. European Commission. Directorate-General XII Science, Research and Development, Luxemburg, ISBN 92-827-4981-9, p.p. 129-141.
25. Englyst, H.N., Quigley, M.E., Englyst, K.N., Bravo, L. and Hudson, G.J. 1996. Dietary fibre. Measurement by the Englyst NSP procedure. Measurement by the AOAC procedure. Explanation of the differences. J. Assoc. Publ. Analysts, 32:1-52.
26. FAOSTAT (PC version) [CD-ROM]. 1996. Available: Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rome.
27. Grigg, D. International variations in food consumption in the 1980's. Geography 1993;78:251-66.
28. Grigg, D. The starchy staples in world food consumption. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 1996; 86:412-431.
29. Cho, W.J. Changing food consumption and dietary intake in AFO countries. Report of an APO Symposium, December 1994. Asia Productivity Organization, 1996.
30. Scrimshaw, N.S., Taylor, L. Food. Scientific American 1980;243:78-88.
31. Stoskopf, N.C. Cereal grain crops. Reston, VA: Reston Publishing Co., Inc., 1985.
32. Dyson, T. Population and Food. London: Routledge, 1996.
33. Food and Agriculture Organization. In: World agriculture: Towards 2010, an FAO study (ed. N. Alexandratos), London: J. Wiley & Sons, 1995.
34. Dowler, E.A., Ok Seo, Y.I. Assessment of energy intake. Food Policy 1985; August: 278-88.
35. Gibson, R.S. Principles of nutritional assessment. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
36. Crane, N.T., Lewis, C.J., Yetley, E.A. Do time trends in food supply levels of macronutrients reflect survey estimates of macronutrient intake? American Journal of Public-Health 1992;82:862-6.
37. Stephen, A.M., Wald, N.J. Trends in individual consumption of dietary fat in the United States, 1920-1984. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition; 52:457-69.
38. Stephen, A.M., Sieber, G.M. Trends in individual fat consumption in the United Kingdom 1900-1988. British Journal of Nutrition 1994;71:775-788.
39. Stephen, A.M., Sieber, G.M., Gerster, Y.A., Morgan, D.R. Intake of carbohydrate and its components - international comparisons, trends over time and effects of changing to low fat diets. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1995;62:851S-67S.
40. Gregory, J., Foster, K., Tyler, H., Wiseman, M. The dietary and nutritional survey of British adults. London: HMSO, 1990.
41. Commonwealth Department of Community Services and Health. National dietary survey of adults: 1983. No. 2 Nutrient intakes. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, 1987.
42. Commonwealth Department of Community Services and Health. National dietary survey of schoolchildren (aged 10-15 years): 1985. No. 2 Nutrient intakes. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, 1989.
43. Morgan, K.J., Zabik, M.E. Amount and food sources of total sugar intake by children ages 5 to 12 years. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1981;34:404-13.
44. Gibson, S.A. Consumption and sources of sugars in the diets of British schoolchildren: Are high-sugar diets nutritionally inferior? Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics 1993;6:355-71.
45. Englyst, H.N., Cummings, J.H. Improved method for measurement of dietary fibre as non-starch polysaccharides in plant foods. Journal of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists 1988;71:808-14.
46. Cummings, J.H., Frolich, W. eds. Dietary fibre intakes in Europe. Brussels: Commission of the European Community, 1993.
47. Kuratsune, M., Honda, T., Englyst, H.N., Cummings, J.H. Dietary fiber in the Japanese diet as investigated in connection with colon cancer risk. Japanese Journal of Cancer Research. 1986;77:736-8.
48. Amaral, M.L.K. Dietary fibre and lipid metabolism. PhD Thesis, University of Saskatchewan, Canada. 1995.
49. Prosky, L., Asp, N-G., Furda, I., DeVries, J.W., Schweizer, T., Harland, B. Determination of total dietary fiber in foods, food products and total diets: Interlaboratory study. Journal of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists 1984;67:1044-52.57.
50. Southgate, D.A.T. Determination of carbohydrates in foods. II. Unavail