<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Summary of the Country Outlook: LAO PDR. Country Report - Laos</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies.
Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Senior Forestry Officer
Regional Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Forestry Department
Maliwan Mansion
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Phra Atit Road
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Bangkok 10200
Rome, 00100, ITALY
THAILAND
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Email: <Patrick.Durst@fao.org>
<section>2</section>
1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Lao PDR is a landlocked, mountainous country. It has a total area of 236,800 km^2 and a population of about 4.5 million people. The country has a low population density of 17 persons per sq. km, but population is growing at 2.9% per year. About 89% of it people live in the rural areas, most of them at subsistence level.
Lao PDR is heavily dependent on its natural resource base to provide livelihoods for the bulk of its population and to earn foreign exchange. Wood products account for 35%-45% of the total export revenue, while the share of forestry of the GDP is estimated at 16%. About 80% of domestic energy consumption is wood-based. The forest also provides a host of non-timber forest products, including foodstuffs and medicines, and valuable environmental services, which indirectly support agricultural and energy production. In addition, the forests in Lao PDR contain biodiversity of great local and international importance.
Compared to other Asian countries, Lao PDR is still quite rich in forest resources. However, the relatively still abundant forest resources of Lao PDR are disappearing rapidly. In 1940 the country had about 17 million hectares of forest, covering 70% of the land area. The forest cover was estimated at 47% of the total land area in 1989 (reported in the National Forest Reconnaissance Survey). Slash-and-burn cultivation and uncontrolled logging are the main culprits for deforestation and forest degradation, which again have adverse impacts on biodiversity. About 60,000-70,000 hectares of closed-canopy forests are lost every year, while some 100,000 hectares of forest fallow are cleared annually for slash-and-burn cultivation. Road and dam construction, hunting, and illegal trade in wildlife and plants are some other main threats to biodiversity.
<section>3</section>
2. CURRENT STATUS
2.1 Forest policy and legal framework
2.2 Forest resources in Lao PDR
2.3 Forest management in the 1990s
2.4 Biodiversity conservation, watershed management and other environmental initiatives
2.5 Wood-based industries
2.6 Human resources
2.1 Forest policy and legal framework
The basic directions for forest sector development were set in the first National Forestry Conference organized in 1989. During this congress, it was concluded that a new system of sustainable forest management needs to be established. The strategic directives agreed upon during this conference were:
· preservation of forests and improvement of management to increase production
· rationalization of the use of forests to increase their economic value; and
· permanent settlement by the year 2000 of 60% of the 1.5 million people currently engaged in shifting cultivation.
To translate the general government forest policy into action, a National Forestry Action Plan was prepared in 1990-1991. This plan has been guiding forestry development in Lao PDR in the 1990s.
New legislation has been introduced to provide directions and a regulatory framework for forestry development since the early 1990s. The legal reform culminated in the issue of a first comprehensive Forest Law in the country in 1996. The law promotes the participation of people in forest management, protection and conservation, e.g. through provision of incentives. The law has a provision for allocating degraded forests and forested land to individuals and organizations for management according to prescribed purposes. Concrete steps have already been taken to allocate land and forestland to local people. In mid-1996 the Prime Minister's Office issued instructions on implementing forestland allocation. In July 1996, a First Nationwide Review Conference on Land Management and Forestland Allocation was held. The conference resulted in a number of resolutions to guide forestland allocation in the future. A national Land Management and Forestland Allocation Steering Committee was
set up in July 1996 to assist the Government in studying policies, plans, and regulations, and in coordinating, monitoring, and controlling land allocation (Decree No. 137/PM).
There is not yet comprehensive legislation supporting biodiversity conservation. Following Decree 164 PMO/93 specific areas have been set aside for conservation purposes. The Forest Law also has provisions regarding conservation. According to the law individuals and organizations have a duty to protect the environment. Biodiversity is to be protected also outside the conservation forests. In August 1996, the Government of Lao PDR (GOL) signed the international Convention on the Conservation of Biodiversity. This has implications for the policy and regulatory framework for biodiversity conservation in Lao PDR.
Regulations pertaining to forest management and biodiversity conservation are currently being drafted, and they are to be completed and approved in 1998. Draft regulations for governing harvesting operations, management contracting and planning, village forestry, and national biodiversity conservation areas already exists.
A National Code of Timber Harvesting Practice was drafted in mid-1997. The purpose of the Code is to provide guidelines for carrying out timber harvesting operations in order to protect the environment and promote forest development consistent with the principles of sustainable development. The GOL is also participating in the development of Regional Timber Harvesting Code for the Asia-Pacific countries.
2.2 Forest resources in Lao PDR
Natural forest
Forest plantation sub-sector
Natural forest
Despite ongoing deforestation, Lao PDR still has about 11 million hectares of forest. The central and southern parts of Lao PDR retain some of the highest proportions of forest cover in Asia. However, much of the remaining forest is degraded and under shifting cultivation. Good quality forest accounts for less than 50% of the total forest area. The remaining forest area with a crown density above 20% is distributed among different regions of the country as shown in table 1.
Table 1 - Forest cover in Lao PDR in 1989
North
Central
South
Total area
Total land area (mill. ha)
Total forest (mill. ha)
Forest cover (%)
Mixed deciduous forest covers about 35% of the country. About 5% of the country is covered by dry dipterocarp forest and a further 5% by dry evergreen forest. The remaining 1.5% is comprised of coniferous and mixed coniferous forests (Jerndal, 1992).
Forest plantation sub-sector
The forest plantation sub-sector is not yet well developed. In fact, large-scale forest plantation development is something relatively new in Lao PDR. The first forest plantation was established in 1975 but it was for species trial only. Forest plantation development was properly initiated in early 1990s. The total effective forest plantation area in 1997 is about 40,000 ha.
In 1996, GOL introduced new forest policy to promote forest plantation by allocating degraded forest land to household as well as private sectors for planting trees and exempting the land tax. Forest plantations are established by farmers, state and private companies. The main species introduced are Eucalyptus sp., Acacia, teak, Azadirachta indica, Alstonia scholaris, Sarcocephalus sp., Azilia xylocarpa and Pterocarpus macrocarpus.
2.3 Forest management in the 1990s
The Government of Lao PDR (GOL) has done a lot in recent years to reverse the negative forestry trends and promote sustainable forest management and biodiversity conservation. Earlier in this document, the policy and legal reforms introduced to support sustainable forest management were described. Some other major thrusts being pursued to tackle the current problems in the forestry sector include:
Drafting of the forest regulations pertaining to village forestry, biodiversity conservation and watershed management, harvesting, etc. The comprehensive forest regulations based on the 1996 Forest Law are to be completed during this year.
· Forest land allocation to local communities and other resource managers has been ongoing now for few years. This work will be intensified in 1998-2000.
· Expanding of the protected area system to cover almost 14% of the total land area, and initiation a number of projects to develop management plans for the National Biodiversity Conservation Areas.
· Strengthening of the information base through a nationwide forest inventory. Through the Lao-SIDA Forestry Programme (LSFP), the National Office of Forest Inventory and Planning (NOFIP) has been strengthened. National Forest inventory has been ongoing since 1990 and is expected to be completed in 1999. This inventory will provide reliable up-to-date information on the forest resources and will provide a basis for macro-level forest planning. National Forest Inventory data and other information sources are currently being consolidated to provide a thorough overview of the forest resources of each province.
· Strengthening of human resources through training. Forestry education and training is being strengthened both at the university and training centre level. In addition, training of forestry staff has been undertaken with support from a number of projects. These activities have helped in creating a more efficient and capable forestry cadre.
· Development and piloting of sustainable forest management systems. Various types of forest management models are currently being tested and implemented in Lao PDR. There is a change in the emphasis from large-scale state production forestry toward more people-oriented forest management. A form of community forestry called village forestry is presently being developed by the Department of Forestry's (DOF) Forest Management and Conservation Programme (FOMACOP) with assistance from the Government of Finland and the World Bank. In early 1998, village forestry implementation covered about 145,000 ha. Joint forest management type of models are being tested in state production forests in the LSFP.
· Systematic forest plantation development has been started to supply timber and reduce pressure to utilize natural forests. There are some private joint ventures and also a major forest plantation programme finance by Asian Development Bank.
· Development of a National Village Forestry Strategy. In 1997 a draft national Village Forestry Strategy was prepared. It was discussed in February 1998 in a national workshop. The strategy, which is to be completed during within next six months, will provide a framework plan for involving local people in forest management throughout the country.
2.4 Biodiversity conservation, watershed management and other environmental initiatives
Biodiversity conservation efforts are of recent origin in Lao PDR. In 1986, the DOF established a National Office for Nature Conservation, which is the ancestor to the present Centre for Protected Areas and Watershed Management (CPAWM), and initiated a nationwide programme of wildlife and habitat surveys. These efforts received wider recognition during the First National Forestry Conference, in 1989, and in the consequent National Forestry Action Plan. Field studies not only helped to identify the best remaining forest areas and wildlife populations, but also led in the 1990s to the existing discovery of several new species of mammal, such as the saola and large-antlered muntjac. Such discoveries emphasize both the richness of Lao biodiversity and the extreme threats it faces from widespread hunting and collection of NTFPs both for subsistence and commercial use.
Up to now the GOL has established and declared 20 National Biodiversity Conservation Areas (NBCA), covering almost 30,000 sq. km, or about 12.5% of the country's land area. In addition, large areas have been designated as Protection or Conservation Forest at provincial and district levels, some of which will be upgraded to an NBCA status. In total, these classes of forest now cover over 8 million ha or 76% of the recognized forest estate: a large commitment by any standards.
Most recently, in 1996, the National Assembly passed The Forestry Law, which provides a comprehensive policy framework for all aspects of forestry, including a basis for zonation of NBCAs in to "Strictly Protected" and "Controlled Use" zones. Regulations are currently being drafted to provide the necessary directions for all aspects of wildlife, habitat and protected area management.
Besides initiatives in the forestry sector, a Science, Technology and Environment Organization (STENO) was established in 1993 under the Prime Minister's Office. STENO has a mandate to provide cross-sectoral co-ordination within the framework of an "Environmental Action Plan" (STENO, 1993). At the international level one of its responsibilities is to lead participation in the Convention on Biological Diversity, which Lao PDR ratified in 1996. Lao PDR is also a signatory to the World Heritage Convention, but is not yet a party to CITES. In addition to initiatives on protected areas or wildlife, several donor-funded projects are attempting to promote integrated planning and development in watershed areas.
2.5 Wood-based industries
The Lao wood-based industry is composed mainly of the sawmilling industry. In 1996 there were about 100 registered sawmills. Most of the mills are relatively small in an international context, averaging a production capacity of about 3,000-4,000 m^3 in terms of output. However, there are also large mills producing sawnwood for the international market. The total capacity of the sawmilling sector is estimated at about 500,000 m^3, but due to low capacity utilization rate the annual official production has been around 250,000 m^3 during the mid-1990s. In addition to registered sawmills, sawnwood is being produced by pit sawing and small-scale industrial operations. The volume of these operations has been estimated at 200,000-250,000 m^3, which implies that annual production of sawnwood would be about 500,000 m^3 at present.
There are two plywood mills with a combined capacity of 100,000 m^3. There are no pulp and paper mills in Lao PDR. Downstream processing is still relatively limited comprising mainly parquet production for export and furniture manufacture for the domestic market.
The forestry sector is one of the main sources of export revenue for the GOL. The share of the forest sector exports of total exports has fluctuated between 30% and 45% in the 1990s compared with about 10% in 1985. In 1996, the share of forest products in total export value was about 40%. The most important export product is sawnwood, followed by logs, stumps and knobs, parquet and plywood. In principle, there is a log export ban but logs, mainly pine (Pinus merkusii), are still being exported. The main source of logs for export is infrastructure clearance sites such as dam construction areas. This means that the volume and value of annual log exports varies greatly.
At present, Lao PDR is practically self-sufficient with respect to logs and mechanical forest industry products although some special panel products like MDF are being imported in small quantities. However, due to lack of processing capacity, domestic paper demand is met solely through imports.
2.6 Human resources
One of the main issues that hinders forestry development in Lao PDR is the inadequate numbers of high quality professionals at various levels, including district level. The new emphasis on biodiversity conservation, village/community forestry, land-use planning and forest extension, requires new knowledge and partly different skills from what was needed in the past. The problem of inadequately trained staff is most prevalent at the district level. The statistics below show the breakdown of number of forestry personnel by qualification:
Qualification
Number in 1995
Ph.D.
Masters Degree
Bachelor Degree
University Diploma
Forestry Technician
The prime effort within the current planning period is to upgrade the qualifications of the above personnel. A particular emphasis is on upgrading those with B.Sc. degrees to the Masters level and to raise those who have a Diploma to the Degree level. At the moment GOL 21 DOF staffs are working towards a M.Sc. degree primarily in Malaysia and Thailand, with additional specialist qualifications being undertaken in Europe.
Formal forestry education is being provided by the Faculty of Forestry of the National University, which provides a Bachelor degree. Every year about 100 graduate from the Faculty of Forestry. In addition, there are 3 training centres which concentrate on training forestry staff to upgrade their capability in working in the field.
Various projects also develop training materials, train trainers and PAFO/DAFO staff and villagers in the field. Most of the training in village/community forestry and use of participatory tools such as PRA is being provided through various projects and not through the education/training institutions. This of course is not the best option from the viewpoint of sustainability of training efforts. One of the future challenges will be to integrate village/community forestry and conservation related training into the training curricula at the university and training centres.
Before 1985 there was only limited forestry research. Most of the research was conducted by foreigners. Researchers from France made important contributions in forest taxonomy and ecology (for example, J. Vidal). UNIDO supported research on wood technology (UNIDO) and the Australian government supported plantation species trials in 1969-75.
Since 1985 the GOL with support from Sweden (SIDA) has established three field stations. Trials have been concentrated mainly on some indigenous species suited to lowland conditions such as teak and styrax. In 1992 the Government of Australia (ACIAR) initiated comprehensive provenance trials with Eucalyptus and Acacia species. The Government of Canada through IDRC has provided support since 1992 to rattan and bamboo studies. Lao PDR is now a member of bamboo and rattan research network (INBAR).
In the early 1990s non-timber forest products have been studied by NOVIB of Netherlands and IUCN Non-timber Forest Product Project that is still active. Government of New Zealand (GNZ) has supported studies on pine in Xiang Kwang. Lao PDR is also a member of the FAO Neem network and has established field trials of Neem.
In addition to the permanent trials/demonstrations at field stations a number of projects have been conducting research to meet their information requirements. Some projects also have components that can be described as adaptive model building research, or action research, with in-built training functions for the Lao personnel. Examples of these are:
· growth rate studies of natural forest
· thinning systems for teak plantations
· development of village forestry/joint forest management models
· management systems for natural dipterocarp and pine forest
· development of natural forest management plan models
There is no forest research institute in Lao PDR, but since January 1996 forestry research activities have been coordinated and monitored under the Forestry Research Centre (FRC) of the DOF.
In late 1997, GOL/FORSPA/LSFP organized a seminar on the development of a national forestry research programme. Earlier in February 1998, the DOF organized a follow-up seminar that focused on ways of organizing forestry research in Lao PDR. All this work will culminate in formulation of a national forestry research programme ready for implementation.
<section>4</section>
3. FUTURE TRENDS
3.1 Sustainable forest management in the 21st century
3.2 Forest and biodiversity conservation
3.3 Wood-based industry development
3.4 Human resource development
3.5 Forestry research development
The population of Lao PDR is increasing by 2.9% a year. Given this trend, the population of Lao PDR will be about 8.5 million in the year 2020, i.e. almost double compared to the current population. The economy is also growing relatively rapidly and GDP will more than double during the two decades. The growing economy and population will have a significant impact on the forestry sector:
· the demand for various forest products, including industrial products and also non-timber forest products will increase
· demand for higher quality forest products will increase; if these products cannot be produced in Lao PDR, they have to be imported
· increasing population will put more pressure on the forest and land resources
· the need to conserve biodiversity and protect watersheds will increase.
At the same time when more products and environmental services are needed to meet the needs of the current and future generations, the potential of the forest and land resources to meet the requirements is declining. If the current negative trends such as deforestation continue, the gap between demand and sustainable supply is likely to increase.
To address these issues the GOL is emphasizing the following:
· bring the remaining natural (production) forest under sustainable forest management mainly through involvement of local populations in forest management (e.g. through village forestry)
· develop the forest plantation sector to supply timber and reduce the pressure to exploit the natural forests
· intensify the management of the national biodiversity conservation areas and other protected areas
· strengthen the human resource and research capacity.
In the following sections, these strategies are discussed in more detail.
3.1 Sustainable forest management in the 21st century
Forest plantation development
Village forestry development to manage and conserve natural forests
Forest plantation development
GOL has determined that development of the forestry plantation sector in Lao will be along different lines from the commonly accepted model in the Region. It has broadly determined that the features of the future plantation forestry sector will be:
· Concentration in the hands of many small farmers rather than a few large companies.
· Highly integrated with food crop growing, cattle rearing and aqua-culture rather than tree monocultures.
· Environmentally friendly by using mosaic planting patterns, leaving of existing scattered natural trees during land clearing with protection strips for water bodies, steep areas, and rice paddies etc., and prohibiting conversion of land with food production potential or containing viable non-degraded forest.
· Protection of the social structure, way of life and common lands which are required for sustenance by preventing the disadvantaging of non-participants. This will be achieved by requiring plantation establishment to be subject to a social-technical-environmental survey and granting of a certificate by PAFO followed by regular compliance monitoring by the DOF.
The following objectives of the forest plantation sector follow and support the above principles:
· Re-establishment of tree cover on unstocked and degraded forest lands and converting these to productive use.
· Production of wood for industrial use, construction materials and fuelwood from industrial tree plantations.
· Establishment of a policy and institutional framework for development of sustainable industrial tree plantations.
· Integration of plantation forestry with traditional and modern food growing activities by the smallholders.
· Use of environmental protection and socio-technical land surveys prior to plantation establishment to protect against land and water resources degradation, loss of food production land, loss of peoples land rights, loss of access to NTFP by those who use these for subsistence, and disadvantaging of people by plantation establishment.
Establishment of fast growing exotic and local species commercial plantations will continue and it is expected that 500,000 ha will be established by the year 2020. The fast-growing plantations will be dominated by different Eucalyptus and Acacia species. Teak and local species will also be heavily promoted. It is estimated that by 2020 about 40% of plantations will be teak and local species. Most plantations will be small 1-5 ha, but in terms of area large plantations will gain more importance over time.
Large-scale forest plantation establishment by foreign companies in joint ventures with Lao enterprises will be promoted. These ventures will establish their own plantations but they will also contract farmers to plant trees on their own land. Planting by farmers and private individuals on their own land will be the second largest group of plantations (in terms of area coverage). The third largest group will be planting by private Lao companies on their own land. Until now, there has been very little interest on forest plantation establishment by private Lao companies but with supporting government policies and favourable market development the situation is expected to change.
GOL will continue to have a high profile in the forest plantation development during the next two decades. It will continue to encourage and guide private plantation establishment by providing incentives such as loans, and high quality seed from the National Seed Centre, which is in the process of being formed. One of the major tasks for the government will be creation of a favourable investment environment, including a clear policy and legal framework for commercial plantation management and marketing of forest products.
Village forestry development to manage and conserve natural forests
The Department of Forestry has been developing a national village forestry strategy since 1997. The draft strategy was discussed in a recent national Village Forestry Workshop. The objective is to develop and promote village forestry as one of major systems for the sustainable management of the Lao forests. The strategy is to provide a framework that will direct individual projects so that they will work in a concerted manner toward a common goal of sustainable forest management based on people's participation. Having a national strategy will help in putting the various projects into a unified framework, facilitate coordination, improve resource allocation, provide guidance to various on-going projects so that they conform to the national development objectives, and help in identifying and formulating new projects.
There can be no single forest management system applicable throughout the country. As part of the village forestry strategy implementation specific systems applicable to different conditions e.g. in terms of forest and other biological resources, culture, economy, people and topography, will be developed.
It is envisaged that this objective can be attained in three phases spanning a period of fifteen years. The following outline some of the main activities:
First phase of five years
· A strong policy and legal foundation for village forestry will be built, e.g. Village Forestry Regulations will be drafted and issued.
· The national co-ordination of village forestry projects will be strengthened.
· Various village forestry models, including joint forest management, with their respective concepts, guidelines, and operating procedures will be developed and tested extensively by the different projects, all of which will be sharing experiences and lessons learned.
· Training capacity in village forestry will be strengthened.
Second phase of five years
· Forestry organizations will be partly re-oriented and strengthened to promote village forestry.
· Village forestry related curricula integrated into university forestry programme.
· Village forestry will be integrated into the existing training system.
· Forestry staff already trained in village forestry will be mobilized to train provincial and district staff from other provinces.
· The different provincial and nucleus district forestry offices will promote village forestry.
· Development of appropriate village forestry models will continue to suit a variety of conditions.
Third phase of five or more years
· Strengthening of forestry field organizations in village forestry continues.
· The experiences during the previous ten years will be consolidated and the various models, and related training and educational materials will be modified based on obtained field experiences.
· Village forestry will continue to be promoted so that it is adopted, adapted, and extensively practiced all over the country.
The necessary policy and legal framework for village forestry development will be in place within 1-2 years. It is hoped that appropriate village forestry models for all major forest categories will have been developed, tested and modified for country-wide implementation by the GOL before the end of the year 2010. However, the expansion of village forestry will start in 2000 in areas and conditions, for which functioning systems already exist. In 2010-2020 the programme should already expand to most of the provinces.
3.2 Forest and biodiversity conservation
Over the coming decade, the Government's commitment to halt losses in forest cover, whether from shifting cultivation or uncontrolled logging, give grounds for cautious optimism that Lao PDR will retain most of its present gross forest cover, with significant representative samples of virgin forest remaining within the protected area system. Less certain are the prospects for retaining viable populations of key wildlife and plant species that are under intensive pressure from rural communities. The risk is that we end up protecting "empty forests". This is the central challenge facing protected area management over the coming decade.
While the strategies for protected area and watershed management seem sound, realities on the ground remain extremely basic. Funds to pay for i