<title>Guidelines for the management of tropical forests 1. The production of wood (FAO forestry paper 135)</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication has been prepared in response to a request from the 12th Session of the Committee on Forestry (13-16 March 1995) which called for a handbook on tropical forest management, aimed at providing practical advice to forest services and to the practising tropical forest manager in the field.
Recognising that the sustainable management of forests implies the provision of a range of products and services, this book focuses on the maintenance and enhancement of the productive functions of tropical forests, and deals in depth with the practical aspects of the management of tropical forests in which the main products are wood and timber.
The importance of the productive functions of forests was once more recognised in the conclusions of the XI World Forestry Congress (Antalya, Turkey, 1997) which stated that: "managing the world's tropical forests for sustainability is one of the most critical challenges facing humanity; one of its main objectives continues to be management for wood production, while paying increased attention to the sustainability of other goods and services provided by them".
The present document complements other FAO publications already available, including FAO Forestry Papers Nos. 53, 55, 88, 89, 101, 107, 117 and the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. It is intended to be followed by other publications currently in preparation: "Management of Tropical Forests: II. The Production of Non-Wood Products"; and "Planning for Forest Use and Conservation".
FAO hopes that this publication, which identifies and outlines practical steps for more effective and efficient tropical forest management, in the long run, will contribute to the improvement of the quality of forestry field operations and help increase the area of tropical forests under planned and sound management, in all tropical regions.
Jean Clément
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
FAO wishes to acknowledge the excellent work done by Mr. Ian Armitage, main author of the document. Furthermore, FAO sincerely thanks the following persons for collaborating as external reviewers and for providing useful comments in the course of the preparation of the handbook: Jean-Paul Lanly, initiator and supporter of the idea, now with the Regional Council of Rural Engineering for Water Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Paris, France; B. von der Hyde, GTZ, and Thang Hooi Chiew, Forestry Department, Malaysia; B. Hahn-Schilling, FOMISS-GTZ, Sarawak, Malaysia; E. Kleine, Malaysia-German Sustainable Forest Management Project; Niro Higuchi, INPA, Manaus, Brazil; Richard Bruce, Selva Madera Ltda., Brazil; Tim van Eldik, Precious Woods, Brazil; the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), Indonesia; and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), Japan.
Colleagues in the Forestry Department of FAO were closely involved in the work; their individual and collective assistance and support is acknowledged.
ACRONYMS
AAC
Annual Allowable Cut
ACA
Annual Cutting Area
CAI
Current Annual Increment (m^3/ha/year)
CFI
Continuous Forest Inventory
CIFOR
Center for International Forestry Research
DCF
Discounted Cash-flow
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GIS
Geographic Information System
GPS
Global Positioning System
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
MAI
Mean Annual Increment (m^3/ha/year)
NGO
Non-governmental organization
NPV
Net Present Value
NWFP (s)
Non-wood Forest Product (s)
PAME
Participatory Assessment Monitoring and Evaluation
PCT
Potential Crop Trees
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
RRA
Rapid Rural Appraisal
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
ABBREVIATIONS
dbh
diameter at breast height (1.3 metres above ground level)
ha
hectare
km^2
square kilometres
m
metres
m^3
cubic metres
mill
millions
m^3/ha
cubic metres per hectare
sp/ha
stems per hectare
vol
volume
<section>3</section>
Introduction
1 The purpose of the guidelines
2 An overview of tropical forest management for wood production
3 Further reading
1 The purpose of the guidelines
Background
Intended users
Scope of the Guidelines
There is no universal model for the management of tropical forests
Background
The extent of tropical forests being purposely managed on an operational scale for the sustainable production of wood is, on a world scale, very small and may be as little as five per cent of the total tropical forest area. Progress in establishing stable and enduring forest management arrangements is so slow that it is currently having little impact on the general decline and quality of tropical forests. These Guidelines have been written as a partial response to this concern.
Sustainable forest management signifies that due attention be given to the productive, protective, social and environmental aspects in an integrated manner. Recent international efforts have concentrated on efforts to facilitate monitoring of effects of forest management through the specification of criteria, by which sustainability is defined; and the identification of corresponding, quantitative, qualitative and descriptive indicators, to be used as tools for monitoring and evaluation both of the effects of forest management and of possible remedial action taken to improve management strategies and methodologies to better meet specified aims (see Annex 1).
The present Guidelines aim at providing advice related mainly to one of the seven or eight commonly used criteria for sustainable forest management: the productive functions of the forest; and more specifically, on the production of timber, wood and wood products from forest ecosystems.
A companion volume on management of tropical forests for the production of non-wood products is currently in preparation. Forestry Paper 107, "Conservation of Genetic Resources in Tropical Forest Management" (FAO 1993), in turn, reviews principles and concepts related to genetic aspects of tropical forest management. Documentation on forest management planning; and on socio-economic aspects of tropical forest management is also and on will provide complementary information in this regard.
The main purpose of these Guidelines is to promote and encourage more extensive application of forest management practices for the production of wood that will ensure that tropical forests will improve the contribution of the forestry sector as a component of sustainable social and economic development. It is hoped that they will fill a need for procedural and practical guidance on how managers working in and close to tropical forests can plan and undertake operations where the production of wood is the main objective, within the wider framework of a comprehensive strategy into which the various complementary components of sustainability are incorporated in a holistic manner.
Intended users
The primary users of these Guidelines will be those involved in forest planning and management at the operational forest level. Users are likely to be government district forest officers, concession managers and supervisors, managers and planners of privately-owned forests, supervisors of logging and wood processing companies and forest supervisors of local communities and of non-governmental organizations having a managerial role with tropical forests. It need not of course be limited to these predominantly field users. Others are forestry students, lecturers and personnel involved with forestry sector development planning and policy development. The attention of users should be drawn to the fact that wood production constitutes one of many, mutually complementary and generally compatible uses and functions of forests and forest ecosystems, and that management for the production of wood should invariably be within the wider framework of forest management.
Scope of the Guidelines
Within the framework of sustainable forest management, the present Guidelines cover the management of tropical forests for wood production, because they are among the largest wood sources in tropical developing countries and, equally importantly, because there is a compelling need for well planned management of them. Emphasis upon wood production recognises that timber and other wood products from tropical forests are in high and continuing demand worldwide and that wood can to be produced profitably from them on a sustainable basis through careful management, which duly considers also the other values of forest ecosystems. It is an acknowledgement that, in most cases, revenue from wood production is likely to be the most secure source of funding for maintaining the range of environmental services that tropical forests can provide.
The Guidelines, in focusing mainly on the criterion of maintaining the productive functions of the forest, and more specifically on the production of wood and non-wood products, are intended to be practical and provide advice on how to plan and manage tropical forests for the sustainable production of wood. Principles rather than detail are highlighted thereby enabling potential users to adapt the guidance offered to their own local situations. They do not provide a comprehensive presentation of new methodologies that are being developed for forest management. The aim has been to keep the Guidelines relatively simple and focused on basic issues concerned with how the production of wood in tropical forests can be planned and implemented in practice at an operational level. It is a response to an expressed need for basic guidance on topics concerning the sustainable production of wood in tropical forests which were not easily available. It is recognised that it is difficult at
the present time to include all aspects of sustainable forest management in one book and these Guidelines do not attempt to do this.
It is acknowledged that environmental and social considerations are important in planning a balanced approach to sustainable management of tropical forests for wood production. The Guidelines will, to some extent, consider soil, water and biological diversity conservation and the interests of forest dependent communities.
The Guidelines may be read in their entirety in order to provide a comprehensive review of the steps involved in maintaining and sustainably utilising the productive functions of the tropical forest, or they may be referred to part-by-part for detail on specific stages of management focused on wood production. Selected books, papers and reports having relevance to topics covered in each part are listed. These include references to information presented in the Guidelines which may be referred to for greater detail on specific topics. The Guidelines complement other publications currently under preparation elsewhere. Each has its own focus but collectively are all expected to contribute towards the goal of achieving sustainable tropical forest management that will be of enduring value to forest communities, to forest owners and to others who have direct interests in them. Advice has been drawn from existing knowledge and experience in tropical Asia, Africa and America.
There is no universal model for the management of tropical forests
There are two strong arguments in support of management for the production of wood in natural tropical forests. The first is that no ecologically satisfactory alternative land uses to natural forests are to be found for many tropical sites because they are too infertile for agriculture. Secondly, wood having the qualities found in many types of tropical forests cannot be produced as cheaply, in large dimensions or in the quantities required to meet present and future industrial requirements from intensively managed plantations on the same infertile sites. Maintaining the land under a permanent forest cover, and adopting a planned basis of sustained yield management within an overall, sustainable forest management plan, is usually the most appropriate long-term development strategy.
Significant policy, legislative, technical, economic and social differences between countries mean that each country needs to approach the challenge of determining an effective development strategy in its own way.
It is because of such wide-ranging variation that there can be no single approach or method for achieving sustainable management of tropical forests where wood production is the main objective. Although these Guidelines do not illustrate all methods or techniques that can be applied for securing better quality and more extensive forest management, they do aim to describe principles, systems and a number of practical ways that can be adapted to help improve management practices pertaining to the criterion related to the production of wood. Flexibility and adaptation of principles and advice will enable national forest managers to develop their own approach to forest management, considering the opportunities and constraints of each case.
Whilst there is no universal model for sustainable management of tropical forests, there is a considerable body of collective knowledge and experience from tropical Asia, America and Africa which can be shared and adapted to local circumstances. It is hoped that the advice set out on the sustained production of wood and wood products in these Guidelines can be adapted to the situations prevailing in each country which will gradually lead to meaningful increases in the extent of tropical forests that can be managed on a sustainable basis for wood production.
2 An overview of tropical forest management for wood production
A definition of tropical forests
The current status of tropical forests in the world
Rates of deforestation of tropical forests
Forest utilisation
A definition of tropical forests
Forests growing in tropical regions vary widely in composition, structure,, function and productivity because of the diversity of climates, soil types and biogeographic conditions where they grow. Definitions of tropical forests are varied. For the purposes of these Guidelines they are considered to comprise two forest classes, namely, evergreen tropical rainforests and moist deciduous tropical forests as defined by FAO in Figure 1. These classes are sometimes grouped together and referred to as Tropical High Forests, located in the tropical belt of the world where the dry season is short or does not occur at all. Both classes are of seedling origin that normally develop a high closed canopy.
Figure 1: Forest Classes Comprising Tropical Forests
Evergreen Tropical Rainforests: Occur where the annual rainfall is greater than 2,500 mm, where forests grow mostly at low elevations, are evergreen, luxuriant, predominantly of hardwood species, have a complex structure and are rich in both plants and animals. Soils tend to be shallow and poor in nutrients, features having a marked effect on forest management practices.
Moist Deciduous Tropical Forests: Occur where the annual rainfall is between 1,000 and 2,500 mm. The composition and structure vary greatly depending on rainfall distribution, temperature and soil types. They are less rich in tree species and much less biologically diverse than the tropical rainforests.
Source: FAO, 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management.
The current status of tropical forests in the world
Tropical forest occurs in more than 80 countries and, in 1990, occupied 37 per cent of the total land area of the tropical regions, about one-third of the world's forest cover. They are the source of most of the wood harvested in the tropics. Within this large area is a diverse range of forest types, but they may be broadly grouped into four main classes:
- Evergreen tropical rainforests
- Moist deciduous forests
- Dry forest zones
- Upland forest formations.
The greatest concentration of evergreen tropical rainforests is in Central and tropical South America, constituting 52 per cent of the total world area, much of it in the Amazon Basin. Africa has the next largest area (29 per cent) and a smaller area occurs in Asia (19 per cent). Most moist deciduous forests occur in Africa and Latin America. This class is now less extensive than tropical rainforests because much of the land where it formerly occurred is well suited for human settlement, has been cleared and is now used for agriculture and other purposes. Bamboo and rattan are also significant resources in many tropical forests.
Rates of deforestation of tropical forests
Although the extent of the world's forests is still substantial with some 40 per cent of the earth's land surface under various types of tree cover, there are major differences in the rates of forest loss amongst different forest types. Tropical forests and other types, such as dry and upland forest formations, are estimated to have covered some 1,790 million hectares in 1990, down more than 120 million hectares in the 10 years from 1980, a decline of 0.8 per cent annually in tropical developing countries. The decline has continued in the period between 1990 and 1995. Forest cover and mated rates of deforestation in tropical forests are illustrated in Tables 1 and 2.
Recent estimates suggest that nearly two-thirds of tropical deforestation worldwide is due to farmers clearing land for agriculture. The largest losses are occurring in tropical moist forests, the zone best suited for human
Table 1: Tropical Land Area and Forest Cover (million ha)
Tropical Region
Land Area of Each Region
Total Forested Area in 1990
Tropical Rainforests
Moist Deciduous Forests
Africa
Asia
America
World Total
Source: FAO. 1993. Forest Resources Assessment 1990 - tropical countries.
Table 2: Tropical Forest Cover and Deforestation (million ha)
Tropical Region
Total Forested Area
Annual Rate of Deforestation
Area
Percent
Africa
Asia
America
Oceania
Source: FAO. 1997. The State of the World's Forests 1997. settlement and agriculture.
Forest utilisation
As an important part of the economies of most tropical countries forests provide a wide range of products, including timber, fuel, food, medicines and building materials; they also have prominent environmental values. Fuelwood utilisation is increasingly important as data in Table 3 for tropical developing countries show. The figures probably underestimate the real level of utilization because of unrecorded cutting. Fuelwood production in tropical developing countries in 1994 is estimated to have been 67 per cent of total roundwood production.
Table 3: Fuelwood Production from Tropical Forests in 1984 and 1994 (million cubic metres)
World
Tropical Asia & the Pacific
Tropical Africa
Tropical America
Source: FAO Yearbook: Forest Products. 1994, Rome.
Timber has been a primary source of income through trade in logs. Forests have also been used as security for loans and debt relief and through the exchange of concession rights for the construction of physical infrastructure. A prominent production component from tropical forests is sawlogs and veneer logs, largely from unsustainably managed forests, as 1994 data in Table 4 illustrate.
Table 4: Sawlog and Veneer Log Production from Tropical Forests in 1994 (mill cubic metres)
World
Tropical Asia & the Pacific
Tropical Africa
Tropical America
Source: FAO Yearbook: Forest Products, 1994, Rome.
Considerable regional variation exists in the rates of commercial log recovery from tropical forests. For example, commercial levels of log production are about 8 m^3/ha in Latin America and the Caribbean region, 14 m^3/ha in Africa and 33 m^3/ha in the Asia and Pacific region. There is considerable variation within regions. Log production in Indonesia, for example, is commonly 50-100 m^3/ha and in Colombia can be as low as 6 m^3/ha.
3 Further reading
de Montalembert, M. R. & Schmithüsen, F. 1994. Policy, Legal and Institutional Aspects of Sustainable Forest Management. In "Readings in Sustainable Forest Management". Forestry Paper No. 122, FAO, Rome.
Dubourdieu, Jean. 1997. L'Aménagement Forestier: Gestion Durable et Intégrée des Ecosystèmes Forestiers. Office National des Forêts, Paris, [in print]
FAO. 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management - what future for the world's forests? Rome.
FAO. 1994. FAO Yearbook: Forest Products. Rome.
FAO. 1997. The State of the World's Forests 1997. Rome.
Grayson, A. J. (Ed.) 1995. The World's Forests: International Initiatives since Rio. Commonwealth Forestry Association, Oxford.
IIED. 1997. Sustainable Forest Management: a practical guide. IIED-SGS Forestry, London.
Johnson, N. & Cabarle, B. 1993. Surviving The Cut: Natural Forest Management in the Humid Tropics. World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.
Leslie, A. J. 1994. Sustainable Management of Tropical Moist Forest for Wood. In "Readings in Sustainable Forest Management". Forestry Paper No. 122, FAO, Rome.
Poore, D. 1989. No Timber Without Trees - Sustainability in the Tropical Forest, Earthscan Publications Ltd, London.
Rowe, R. Sharma, N. P. & Browder, J. 1992. Deforestation: problems causes and concerns. In "Managing the World's Forests: looking for balance between conservation and development". Dubuque, Iowa.
Synnott, T. J. 1992. The Introduction of Basic Management into Tropical Forests. In "Wise Management of Tropical Forests 1992." 91-95 p. Oxford Forestry Institute.
United Nations. 1992. Earth Summit - Rio Declaration & Forest Principles. UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Dept. of Public Information, United Nations, New York.
WRI. 1992. World Resources 1992-93: A Guide to the Global Environment. World Resources Institute. Oxford University Press, New York.
<section>4</section>
Principles of sustainable tropical forest management where wood production is the primary objective
1 Background issues concerning sustainable forest management
2 A national policy and legal framework
3 Security of forest tenure and the permanent forest estate
4 Forest management planning
5 Permanent definition of forest boundaries
6 Effective forest protection
7 Maintenance of forest ecosystems and site productivity
8 Assessment of forest resources
9 Knowledge of the sustainability of tropical forest ecosystems
10 The choice of an appropriate silvicultural system
11 Minimisation of adverse environmental impacts
12 Commercial sustainability and business management
13 Community participation in sustainable forest management
14 Monitoring of managerial performance
15 Further reading
The basic principles forming the foundation of practical action for sustainable management of tropical forests where wood production is the primary management objective are explained in this chapter.
Figure 2: The Basic Principles of Tropical Forest Management
The basic principle of tropical forest management comprise the following elements:
· · National Policy and Legal framework
· · Security of Tenure of Forest Resources and Land
· · Effective Forest Protection
· · Knowledge on Sustainability of Tropical Forest Ecosystems
· · Maintenance of Site Productivity
· · Forest Management Planning
· · Goals and Objectives for Forest Management
· · Definition of Forest Resources
· · Application of Appropriate Silvicultural Systems
· · Minimisation of Adverse Environmental Impacts
· · A Regard for the Interests of Forest-Dependent Communities
· · Commercial Sustainability and Business Management
· · Monitoring of Managerial Performance
1 Background issues concerning sustainable forest management
What is forest management?
A definition of sustainable tropical forest management for wood production
ITTO forest management guidelines
Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Natural forest management as a conservation tool
What is forest management?
The term forest management is applied in situations where an integrated, coordinated series of actions are taken, directed towards the achievement of specified objectives. It is because of the many different situations where choices need to be made in manipulating forest resources to meet particular objectives that the term has come to have different meanings to different people. In the broadest sense, forest management is a process which effectively integrates the biological, social and economic factors which influence the decisions leading towards the implementation of one or more specified objectives. An FAO understanding of forest management is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: An FAO Understanding of Forest Management
Forest Management:
Forest Management deals with the overall administrative, economic, legal, social, technical and scientific aspects related to natural and planted forests. It implies various degrees of deliberate human intervention, ranging from actions aimed, at. safeguarding and maintaining the forest ecosystem and its functions, to favouring specific socially or economically valuable species or groups of species for the improved production of goods and services. Sustainable forest management will ensure that the values derived from the forest meet present-day needs while at the same time ensuring their continued availability and contribution to long-term development needs.
(Source: FAO. 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management - what future for the world's forests?)
Historically, forest management has mostly considered biological issues with a strong focus upon silviculture for the production of wood. As the forestry profession has grown, an understanding of the term "forest management" has broadened to span wider environmental issues, such as conservation of biological diversity, social and economic matters and, more generally, the concept of sustainability.
The Forest Principles, developed at the Earth Summit - the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED, held in Brazil in 1992) - have defined forest management as a part of a Statement of Principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and Sustainable development of all types of forests; it is expressed in Figure 4.
Figure 4: An UNCED Definition of Forest Management
Forest Management:
Forest resources and forest lands should be sustainably managed to meet the social, economic, cultural and spiritual human needs of present and. future generations. These needs are for forest products and services, such as wood and -wood products, water, food, fodder, medicine, fuel, shelter, employment, recreation, habitats for wildlife, landscape diversity, carbon sinks and reservoirs, and for other forest products. Appropriate measures should be taken to protect forests against harmful effects of pollution, including air-borne pollution, fires, pests and diseases in order to maintain their full multiple values.
(Source: UNCED. 1992. Earth Summit - Rio Declaration & Forest Principles.)
A definition of sustainable tropical forest management for wood production
It is important to define the meaning of the term sustainable management of tropical forests where it is applied to the production of wood. A study undertaken for the International Tropical Timber Organization led to a definition having these primary considerations:
I. Sustainable forest management should be practised on an operational and not an experimental scale.
II. It should embrace a balanced and comprehensive range of management activities that include working plans, yield prediction and control and other technical requirements.
III. It should include the wider political, social and economic criteria without which sustainability is probably unattainable.
ITTO forest management guidelines
Prior to UNCED in 1992, ITTO established a set of principles that comprise an international reference standard for the development of more specific national guidelines for sustainable management of natural tropical forests for wood production. Criteria for monitoring of sustainability in tropical moist forests were also defined by ITTO. The ITTO principles were published as:
Guidelines for the Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests, ITTO Policy Development Series No. 1.
In 1993 the ITTO principles were supplemented by guidelines for the establishment and management of planted forests in tropical regions and guidelines for the conservation of biological diversity in tropical production forests. The development, application and enforcement of national guidelines based on the ITTO reference standard are matters for national decision by individual countries. The primary features of the ITTO guidelines, many having policy and operational implications, are summarized in Figure 5.
Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
UNCED and Sustainable Forest Management
The need to reconcile the productive functions with the protective, environmental and social roles which all types of forests fulfil was firmly expressed at UNCED. A declaration of 27 guiding principles focusing on the rights and obligations of sovereign states with respect to environment and development was agreed to at UNCED.
It included the Forest Principles - a Statement of Principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and Sustainable development of all types of forests and to provide for their multiple and complementary functions and uses. As one positive step aimed at developing the Forest Principles there has been broad international agreement to formulate scientifically sound criteria and indicators for the management, conservation and development of all types of forests.
Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Management at the Forest Level
Criteria and indicators are tools which can be used to define, implement and monitor Sustainable forest management in the broadest sense of the term, nationally and at the forest level.
Figure 5: Features of the ITTO Guidelines Concerning Sustainable Forest Management at National and Forest Levels
NATIONAL LEVEL
Policy and Legislation
- Forest policy
- National forest inventory
- Permanent forest estate
- Forest ownership
- National forest service
FOREST LEVEL
Planning
- Static and dynamic inventory
- Setting of management objectives
- Choice of silvicultural concept
- Yield regulation
- Annual allowable cut
- Management inventory
- Mapping
- Preparation of working plans
- Environmental impact assessment
Harvesting
- Pre-harvest prescriptions
-Roads
- Extraction
-Post-harvest stand management
Protection
- Control of access
- Fire protection
- Use of chemicals
Legal Arrangements
- Concession agreements
- Salvage permits
- Logging permits on private or customary land
Monitoring and Research
- Yield control and silviculture
- Environmental impact studies
(Source: ITTO, 1992. Guidelines For the Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests.)
IV. Criteria: Criteria define the essential factors of forest management against which forest sustainability may be assessed. Each criterion relates to a key management factor which may be described by one or more qualitative, quantitative or descriptive indicators.
V. Indicators: Through measurement and monitoring of selected indicators, the effects of forest management action, or inaction, can be assessed and evaluated and action adjusted to ensure that forest management objectives are more likely to be achieved.
International Initiatives to Define Forest Management Criteria and Indicators
Since UNCED, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management have been formulated within the framework of several international and national meetings. These include the Helsinki Process (for European forests, 1994), the Montreal Process (for temperate and boreal forests, 1993 to 1995), the Tarapoto Proposal (Amazon Forests 1995), the Dry Zone Africa Proposal (1995), the Near East Proposal (1996) and the Lepaterique Process of Central America (1997). The international initiatives are summarized in Annex 1.
Internationally coordinated efforts in the testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level are being led by CIFOR in tropical and temperate countries. Criteria and indicators which can be considered objective, cost-effective and relevant in the assessment of the sustainability of prevailing forest management practices are being identified, taking into account ecological, institutional, social and economic conditions and needs.
Natural forest management as a conservation tool
Governments and rural community owners of tropical forests sometimes ask under what circumstances should natural forest management be applied as a conservation tool. When and where d