GLOBAL FIBRE SUPPLY STUDY.
WORKING PAPER SERIES.
Implications of Sustainable Forest Management for Global Fibre Supply.
Jeremy Williams, Peter Duinker and Gary Bull.
Working Paper GFSS/WP/03 August 1997.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
GLOBAL FIBRE SUPPLY STUDY WORKING PAPER SERIES.
Series Editors: Peter N. Duinker Faculty of Forestry, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Canada Gary Bull Forest Products Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Rome.
Working Paper GFSS/WP/03.
Jeremy Williams (Arborvitae Environmental Services Ltd., Toronto, Canada) Peter Duinker (Faculty of Forestry, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Canada) Gary Bull (Forest Products Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Rome).
August 1997.
The designation employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
FOREWORD In late 1995, the FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS) with an outlook to the year 2050. The study was recommended by the FAO Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper (now the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products). The general objective of the study is to contribute reliable data, information, forecasts and analysis of industrial fibre sources in order to promote sustainable forest management. The GFSS will include a compilation of the latest available inventory data, including recovered and non-wood fibre, focusing primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. It will also include a projection and analysis of future developments in fibre supply, based on explicit consideration of the major factors affecting supply. The GFSS is unique among FAO studies in that special emphasis is placed on collection and compilation of fibre volume inventory and growth data for the developing regions - Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The study complements other FAO work, such as the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study and the upcoming Forest Resources Assessment 2000. FAO is also updating its statistics on forest plantations and developing a method for estimating fibre volumes from non-forest areas in the tropical regions. Available data from these studies will be included in the GFSS. The major products of the GFSS will include: · A database accessible on-line through the Internet providing estimates of commercial wood volumes from natural, semi-natural and plantation forests; · An on-line interactive fibre-supply model incorporating key determinants of supply; · A statistical and descriptive report on the data and three fibre-supply scenarios which are based on factors deemed to be the most critical; · A working paper describing in detail the methods for data compilation, gap filling, data validation, forecasting and definitions, survey forms and country list; · A series of additional working papers on sustainable forest management, improved forest productivity from industrial forest plantations, fibre-supply modelling, recovered and nonwood fibre, and other topics; and · An issue of Unasylva, FAO's quarterly journal on forestry and the forest industry, dedicated to the theme of global fibre supply. This paper, solicited by the GFSS and co-authored by Jeremy Williams, Peter Duinker and Gary Bull, explores the concept of sustainable forest management and describes its potential implications for fibre volumes and costs. We sincerely hope that it contributes productively to the world-wide dialogue on sustainable forest management for fibre and other values.
Olman Serrano Chief Wood and Non-wood Products Utilization Branch Forest Products Division.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This series of working papers have seen the contribution of many silent partners. Our colleagues in the Forestry Department provided much needed advice on several issues. In addition, there have been many outside reviewers from different research institutions and technical cooperation agencies who have provided valuable information. We also want to thank our special assistant Ms Elisa Rubini who guided each report through the many technical hurdles in document preparation.
Implications of SFM for Global Fibre Supply - Williams, Duinker and Bull.
SUMMARY This study has examined evidence on the wood-supply implications of implementing sustainable forest management (SFM), biodiversity conservation, and certification. The concept of SFM has been broadened in recent years and the objectives of management are shifting in emphasis away from predominantly timber production towards ecological and social sustainability. Biodiversity conservation is widely seen as an integral component of SFM and provides an excellent example of the need to gain knowledge and develop means of assessing complicated forest values. Certification protocols are being developed by many of the forestproduct exporting countries and regions of the world. In many cases, these are linked to SFM but not everyone agrees on the required strength of the linkage. We have reviewed a suite of initial efforts to estimate the impacts of adopting SFM. However, many of these are based on simulation models and trial operations - few could be considered representative of contemporary operations. The studies reviewed here consistently showed that there will be widespread reductions in harvest volume, particularly in the short term, and costs can be expected to rise between 5 percent and 25 percent, on average. However, there is an expectation that long-term supply will increase through application of SFM. In the tropics, much of this increase is driven by the maintenance of site productivity and the retention of, and prevention of damage to, immature stems. In temperate forests, the longer-term increase is less pronounced and may not be captured without intensified silviculture. Instead, the value of the harvest may rise as more large and high-quality products are harvested. Few studies report impacts of SFM adoption on costs. Of those that do, costs are generally expected to rise. There will be some additional costs of implementing certification, primarily associated with undertaking measures required to meet the certification standards, rather than the costs of the actual assessment. Because it is unclear how many companies will opt for certification, it is difficult to say whether there will be a significant impact on overall wood supply costs or volume. A significant result of this study is that a number of driving forces will lead to significantly improved forest management practices. Throughout the world, there is pressure to improve forest management. Even if only a relatively small number of forest-products companies and forests become certified, it can be expected that the rest of the industry will continue to improve practices because the act of preparing certification criteria has raised the level of expected performance. This general improvement entails a rebalancing of forest values and may lead to reduced timber-harvest volumes. Perhaps the relative value of non-timber forest values is rising faster than the value of timber, resulting in a reallocation of forest areas among competing uses, with the outcome of reduced timber harvests. However, in the longer term, there will be gains in some regions of the world as better management practices lead to the maintenance of timber productivity.
FAO Global Fibre Supply Study, Working Paper Series - GFSS/WP/03.
INTRODUCTION.
The Global Fibre Supply Study was initiated in 1995 by FAO to update the organization's forecasts of global fibre supplies [FAO 1996]. To undertake the project, staff are building a country-specific database of the world's industrial roundwood supply using best available inventory data, developing separate supply estimates for each of the world's major production regions, and aggregating the results to develop a global estimate. Future supply will be sensitive to a number of factors affecting forest management which are not adequately handled in the timber-supply models. In particular, governments, NGOs, research institutes, universities, international organizations and forest-products companies throughout the world have recognized the need to modify forest management practices to ensure that the forests are used sustainably. While there is still a great deal of debate about how to assess sustainability and how to develop sustainable management paradigms, there are already some clear indications of coming changes. Three such changes are likely to have a significant impact on either timber supply or the costs of procuring timber. They include: · · · implementation of rigorous sustainable forest management (SFM) systems; development and implementation of forest and wood-product certification systems; and introduction of measures to conserve biological diversity (also known as biodiversity).
These measures are supported by a variety of global agreements, processes and policies, such as Agenda 21, the UN Forest Principles, and the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity adopted at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCED). SFM, certification, and biodiversity conservation are inter-related in many ways. However, the nature of the linkages varies among countries and regions. Biodiversity conservation is widely viewed as an essential component of SFM - if biodiversity is being degraded, then management cannot be considered sustainable. Therefore, all credible SFM systems will have to include goals, objectives and indicators of biodiversity, and will eventually also need approaches for measuring or assessing levels of biodiversity. There is more variation in the linkage between SFM and certification. Certification is one of the most controversial forestry issues today. In some countries, certification is seen as the outcome of an independent assessment of whether a forest area is managed sustainably or whether a particular product is made from wood fibre obtained from sustainably managed forests. According to this perspective, the broadest criterion for determining whether a forest is sustainably managed is whether the manager is following a well-defined SFM system designed for that forest. Critics of certification point to the potential for mis-use, and the questionable logic that consumers would make additional efforts or pay additional amounts to use certified products. A great deal of literature has been produced on these topics during the past five years. However, there are still substantial gaps in our knowledge. Many ecosystem components and processes are poorly known and we understand little about how to measure the socioeconomic impacts of alternative management systems. There is a large gap between our conceptual understanding of SFM and our ability to translate it into appropriate practices.
However, it is widely agreed that we must start now and work with the best available information, designing management practices to be efficient at helping us learn as we go. 1.1 SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT.
SFM is a broad term that covers a range of new practices and extends the concept of sustainability far beyond the idea of sustained yield1 that was so predominant in forest management until the mid- to late 1980s. Current visions of SFM require managers to conserve biological diversity, manage the forest to provide for non-consumptive values ranging from aesthetics to maintaining the forest for succeeding generations of people, and recognize that humans (especially aboriginal peoples) are part of the forest ecosystem. Other banners for contemporary forest management, such as ecosystem management and new forestry, are here considered to be consistent with and within SFM. SFM was developed and refined from the original concept of sustainable development. Sparked by UNCED and re-inforced by numerous international efforts [see FAO 1997a], there are now several major international initiatives developing criteria and indicators of SFM (Table 1.1). These initiatives cover a huge area of the global forest. Table 1.1: Ongoing international SFM initiatives by region Ecological region Temperate and boreal forest Tropical forest Dry-zone sub-Saharan forest Dry-zone Near East All forest types.
(Source: FAO 1997a).
Initiative Helsinki Process Montreal Process ITTO Producer Countries Tarapoto Proposal FAO/UNEP Dry Zone Africa FAO/UNEP FAO Central America/Lepaterique Process.
Number of countries 38 12 25 8 27 30 7.
Forest area (thousand ha) 904 577 1 500 000 1 305 046 540 000 278 021 69 895 19 631.
SFM practices vary widely by forest type. In many tropical forest areas, the emphasis has been on reducing the damage associated with logging by using practices such as directional felling, developing detailed pre-harvest plans of roads, skid trails, and landings before harvesting, and trying to minimize damage to residual trees and the site. Efforts are also underway to modify the conventional approach of harvesting only a few commercial species and virtually eliminating them from the forest. In temperate forests, SFM is resulting in increased local input in decision-making, consideration of large-scale issues in planning, efforts to determine how to conserve forest biodiversity, and shifts in the way clearcutting is implemented.
Sustained yield management referred to the ability to provide a predictable flow of timber in perpetuity. In many cases, implementation of sustained yield practices led to a future timber supply that was constant or increasing. Some authors argued that where the present forest had a very high standing volume, a reduction from present harvest levels to a lower sustainable level was permissible.
FOREST AND WOOD-PRODUCT CERTIFICATION.
A second significant development in forest management is the impending implementation of certification systems. The essence of certification is a set of standards developed to ensure that a forest area is sustainably managed. Such standards are largely consistent with the concepts embodied in SFM. Some systems certify that defined forest areas are sustainably managed whereas others certify that specific products are made from wood from sustainably managed forests. The common element of these approaches is that forest sustainability must be assessed; product certification requires additionally that a wood tracking system be used to identify the source of every component and unit of final product. Salim et al. [1997] cited two main objectives of timber certification: · to provide a market incentive to improve forest management toward sustainable practices (SFM objective); and · to improve market access and share for products of such management (trade objective). To date, few forests have been certified and there has been little impact on markets. Many producer countries interested in certification are also major exporters (notably Indonesia, Malaysia, Sweden, Finland, Canada, and Ghana). They hope that certification will prevent future trade difficulties or provide preferential access to markets, as well as lead to improved forest management standards. On the consumer side, it is primarily European customers who have shown an interest. A variety of international agencies, including FAO, have taken an interest in certification. FAO supports the general thrust of certification on the grounds that it will lead to a wider adoption of sustainable management [FAO 1997b], while recognizing that there are many uncertainties and issues to be resolved. Byron and Perez [1996] offered the following outlook: "whether one sees it (certification) as a short-term fad, or a useful transition phase, is seems unlikely that 25 years from now, each piece of {tropical} timber will sport a green label . . . any more than that every item of cotton clothing sold will bear a label certifying that no DDT or slave labour was used in the growing of the cotton or making of the item." All of the credible certification processes developed so far take a broad view of forest management, and stipulate that the sustainability of forest operations must be confirmed by a set of appropriate indicators. This means that all forest values must be sustained, including biodiversity and ecosystem integrity. While the full impact of certification on wood supply will vary from region to region, a key assumption for any scenario is the proportion of the wood supply which will become certified. Some forest-products companies will doubtless choose not to become certified, but it is likely that the overall impact of certification initiatives will extend into positive changes in the practices of those companies. Thus, the certification initiative can be expected to raise the industry-wide standards of forest management. 1.3 CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY.
Forest managers have recently become aware of the importance of conserving biodiversity in forests. An internationally accepted definition of biodiversity is found in the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity: "the variability among living organisms from all sources including,.
inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems" [UNEP 1992]. Biodiversity is recognized at several levels within forest ecosystems. Genetic diversity refers to the level of variation within a population's gene pool; ideally, genetic material is retained and can be readily distributed in healthy populations. Species diversity refers to the variety of species present in a given area. Ecosystem diversity is the variety of ecosystem types, as defined by abiotic and biotic characteristics. In forestry, the ecosystems most at risk are usually mature forests dominated by commercially valuable tree species. Biodiversity conservation is an important component of SFM - it preserves the resilience of ecosystems and ensures the continued existence of species. Some people argue that humankind has an ethical or stewardship responsibility to conserve biodiversity. A consensus is emerging concerning the elements that constitute biodiversity and the variety of spatial and temporal scales that should be considered in assessing its status [Duinker 1996a]. However, a great impediment is a lack of agreement on how it should be measured or assessed. Unfortunately, no company or agency can claim today to have a comprehensive system in place for conserving biodiversity, although many forest managers are implementing practices which will contribute to biodiversity conservation. 1.4 PROJECT TERMS OF REFERENCE.
The objective of this project was to review available literature and interview knowledgeable researchers to estimate possible impacts on global fibre supply of implementing SFM, certification schemes, and biodiversity conservation measures. Most of the studies done to date on this subject are in the form of case analyses because there is great variability in local forests, supply-demand conditions, and forest practices. Case studies are not meant to provide a set of "correct" numbers for impact analysis, but they are indicative of possibilities. The results of the literature review are presented by region, and impacts expressed in terms of percentage changes in timber supply and wood cost. FAO provided the following terms of reference for this study: · Identify and estimate the impacts of ecosystem management practices and the implementation of the accompanying silvicultural systems on projected harvest volume (both per hectare and for the overall regional supply) and timber production costs by region; · Review recent developments in wood certification and discuss the implications for forest management, using scenarios where appropriate to illustrate key points; · Discuss the implications of biodiversity guidelines on future forest harvesting in terms of industrial roundwood volumes and wood quality; · Provide a linkage between ecosystem management, wood certification and biodiversity guidelines and discuss and analyse their joint impact on fibre supply in the various regions, using examples where appropriate to illustrate key points. Since biodiversity conservation is widely seen as a major component of SFM, the economic implications of implementing both SFM and biodiversity conservation are discussed together in.
the text below. The next section begins with an examination of the basic principles of SFM, then compares it to traditional sustained yield management, and finally provides some examples of how it is implemented in various parts of the world. Many certification schemes requires forests to be managed by SFM principles (and certified wood products will have to come from such forests). However, many more forests may be managed by SFM principles than become certified. Hence, Section 3 will describe the results to date of estimates of how certification might affect forest-products markets. Section 4 provides a summary of the major findings and conclusions.
INTERPRETATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT OV E R V I E W.
For many years, pleas for environmentally friendlier management have come from environmental groups, the general public and certain quarters in the forestry profession [e.g. Leopold 1949]. In response, government forest-management agencies and the forest-products industry have recently introduced sweeping changes to forest management. These changes dramatically increase the scope of forest management and integrate ecological and social considerations with traditional timber management. In retrospect, one can see that such a paradigm shift was developing for several decades. In the 1970s and 1980s, terms such as multiple use management, holistic resource management, and integrated forest management were used to describe environmentally sensitive alternatives (see Bull [1995] for a thorough review). Many of the approaches advocated during these years could be viewed as timber management with constraints. Critics argued that these approaches retained the dominance of timber and did not provide adequate weight to the other forest components. The latest changes address this criticism and new terms have come into use. The language of the late 1980s and 1990s centres on the terms: (a) sustainable forestry [e.g. Kessler et al. 1992; Aplet et al. 1993; Murray 1993; Maser 1994]; (b) new forestry [e.g. Swanson and Franklin 1992]; (c) ecological integrity [e.g. Woodley et al. 1993; Noss 1995] and (d) ecosystem management [e.g. Agee and Johnson 1988; Mitchell et al. 1990; LeMaster and Parker 1991; USDA Forest Service Eastern Region 1992; Jensen and Bourgeron 1993; Forest Ecosystem Management Assessment Team 1993; Ontario Forest Policy Panel 1993; Grumbine 1994; Irland 1994; Jordan and Uhlig 1994; Kaufmann et al. 1994; Oliver 1994; Salwasser 1994; Daust 1995; Kohm and Franklin 1997]. SFM has come to serve as a common umbrella term for a wide range of improved forest management practices. Moreover, despite global differences in forest types, socio-economic importance of forests, and forest industry structure, an internationally accepted concept of SFM is emerging. In almost all countries, SFM is characterized as covering a very broad set of values and benefits and being tied to the concept of sustainable development. Thus, SFM goes far beyond traditional timber management in its intent and implications.
Global convergence in SFM thinking is being driven by factors such as increased international trade, world summit meetings on the environment and follow-up international efforts to improve the quality of forest management, and the rapid emergence of certification as a basis for deriving forest management standards [FAO 1997a]. Notable participants in the development of SFM include the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (under the aegis of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development) and the World Commission on Forests and Sustainable Development. The International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) proposed a `Year 2000 Objective', in which producer member countries have committed themselves to having all of their internationally-traded tropical timber come from sustainably-managed forests by the year 2000. There are many national and regional initiatives to define criteria and indicators for SFM and to determine means of assessing progress towards achieving it [FAO 1997a]. The most prominent regional initiatives include: · · · · · · · the `Helsinki Process', involving European boreal, temperate and Mediterranean forests; the `Montreal Process', involving temperate and boreal forests outside Europe; the `Tarapoto Proposal' for forests in the Amazon basin; the ITTO producer-countries initiative; the UNEP/FAO Dry-Zone Africa initiative for forests in sub-Saharan Africa; FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting for the Near East; and FAO/CCAD Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Central America.
FAO [1997a] estimated that these initiatives cover approximately 4.6 billion ha of forest land (see Table 1.1). In addition, it is now clear in many countries that industry wants to embrace SFM as a working concept. For example, forest industries in Brazil, Canada, Ghana, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sweden, among other countries, are developing the ways and means to find practical approaches to implement SFM. For the purposes of this report, all proposals for improved forest management (except certification) have been grouped under the banner of SFM. We have done this because the concept of SFM, while still evolving, has been defined so far to embrace improvements in almost every aspect of forest management. Thus, approaches such as new forestry and ecosystem management, the latter of which is equally broadly defined [e.g. Grumbine 1994; Gerlach and Bengston 1994], will be considered to be within SFM. An examination of recent reports and forest certification criteria reveal some common themes of SFM. For example, Nussbaum et al. [1996] listed four main principles of SFM systems:.
4. Maintain sustained yields of goods and services including ecological functions. Maintain biodiversity at the ecosystem (or landscape), species, and genetic levels. Optimize the socio-economic impacts of forestry. Develop a supportive institutional framework for SFM, including policies, skills, and research.
The Indonesian forest certification scheme [Salim et al. 1997] is based on the assumption that forest management is sustainable if the ecological, economic and social functions of forests are maintained. Sustainability of the three classes of functions is further detailed in a number of basic SFM principles: (i) Sustainability of Production Functions Sustainability of Production Functions is characterized as follows: · Sustainability of the forest resource is supported when the production forest area is stable and secure, assuring the continuity of timber-resource-based business. · Increased production may be possible with increased intensity of forest management practices. · Business profitability is sustained when the production forest is able to produce financial benefits within the limits of progressive and attractive business. (ii) Sustainability of Ecological Functions Sustainability of Ecological Functions refers to the production forest's ability to continue functioning as a life-support system so it will guarantee the existence of unique ecosystems and germ-plasm of both flora and fauna. Therefore, sustainability of ecological functions should consist of efforts to: · maintain ecosystem stability within the permanent forest estate so that the forest continues to function as a life-support system and centre of biodiversity; and · maintain survival of endemic/endangered/protected species of flora and fauna. (iii) Sustainability of Social Functions Sustainability of Social Functions is interpreted as the condition whereby extraction of forest products does not create negative community impacts. Commercial activity should not disturb or hinder the functioning of society, nor should it disturb existing economic activities. On the other hand, the presence of a forest concession should increase community welfare, through: · Equity: assurance of the right to live and conduct local community life in accordance with the value system and institutional norms understood by local community. · Community Participation: the proactive involvement of the local community in deciding the direction for and transformation process to its life system. The Canadian Standards Association (CSA) has developed a forest-oriented environmental management system based on SFM [CSA 1996]. The CSA views an SFM system as being a framework of processes and requirements designed to ensure that targeted outcomes are achieved on a defined forest area. The SFM system contains the following four components:.
commitment to the principles of SFM on the part of the registration applicant;.
public participation in all major elements of the management cycle;.
a management system with specified elements: preparation, planning, implementation, measurement/assessment, and review/improvement; and.
continual improvement. The SFM system relies on six criteria of SFM developed by the Canadian Council of Forest Ministers [CCFM 1995]:.
6. 2.2 conservation of biological diversity; maintenance and enhancement of forest ecosystem condition and productivity; conservation of soil and water resources; forest ecosystem contributions to global ecological cycles; multiple benefits to society; and accepting society's responsibility for sustainable development. REGIONAL DISCUSSIONS AND LOCAL CASE STUDIES.
Most of the case studies published to date are focused on some of the stand-level impacts of adopting practices consistent with SFM. The case studies are based on operational tests, controlled experiments or simulation models. None of the case studies reported here examined a comprehensive set of potential SFM measures. Much of the effort devoted to putting the concepts of SFM into practice is just beginning, so relatively few reports describing impacts of implementing SFM have been published. We obtained as many relevant case study reports as possible, but unfortunately no case studies were found for significant forest regions such as Africa or Papua New Guinea. Since most of the case studies describe work in progress, there will undoubtedly be modifications to the existing approaches as unforeseen issues arise. This is exemplified by recent changes made in applying British Columbia's Forest Practices Code, after the costs associated with following the Code were found to be unduly high [KPMG 1997]. 2.2.1 Latin America.
2.2.1.1 Chimanes Forest, Bolivia Howard et al. [1996] used simulation modelling to examine the financial attractiveness of four alternative silvicultural prescriptions applied to a sample area of the Chimanes Forest in Bolivia. Inventory data were collected from unharvested forest, and timber species were assigned into one of three merchantability classes based on the demand for timber of that species. Estimates were made of the number of trees per hectare by diameter class using a negative J-shaped function. Of the four prescriptions, the first two were essentially variations of current cutting practices which generally remove all of the merchantable timber from the forest in successive harvests, with the most valuable species harvested first. Prescription No. 1 had a cutting cycle of 5 years, whereas a 10-year delay period was modelled in Prescription No.
The yield of both these prescriptions was set at 2.5 m3/ha, which represents light harvests.
The third and fourth prescriptions were designed so that a wider range of species was taken in each cut and residual trees of all species were left to provide seed. A more intensive harvest was also taken in an effort to concentrate the ha