<title>A Manual for the Planning, Design and Construction of Forest Roads in Steep Terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
2. GENERAL PLANNING OF OPENING UP MOUNTAIN FOREST RESOURCES
2.1 ROAD-NET PLANNING
2.2 AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS AND MAPS
2.3 ROAD TYPES
2.4 ROAD STANDARDS
2.5 ROAD-NET DENSITY AND SPACING
2.6 INTEGRATED PLANNING OF ROAD NETS AND CABLE SYSTEMS
2.7 ROAD LOCATIONS IN HILL AND MOUNTAIN SIDE AREAS
The integrated planning of the opening up of mountain forest resources is essential in order to ensure a steady industrial roundwood supply on the one hand and to pursue forestry work in such a manner as to guarantee the preservation of the forests and the environment on the other. This is especially important with the introduction of modern machinery for both road construction and forest harvesting, and the ever increasing demand for wood.
Very often, in addition to these basic objectives, land tenure and local people's rights and requirements must be taken into consideration in such matters as the procurement of fuelwood and fodder or interests of a village, district, county or the country in such matters as water supply, scenery, wildlife, etc. For all needs, be they of a productive or protective nature, a well planned forest road-net is the basic ingredient needed to carry out the required work and to maintain the forests as a renewable resource.
2.1 ROAD-NET PLANNING
Generally, the layout of a road-net depends on the timber resources, terrain conditions, type of forest operations (afforestation, silvicultural treatment, fire protection, cutting system, logging and transport methods), technical equipment and machinery, labour techniques and costs, as well as other resource benefits to be considered. Careful attention has to be paid, when planning and locating roads in steep terrain, to avoiding and minimising the erosional impact of roads on the environment.
Forest roads should, as much as possible, be planned with the view of conducting wood harvesting operations (present and future). A road-net where manual extraction is to be used, has to be laid out differently from one where cable cranes and/or tractors are operated. Figure to determine the efficiency of a road net for a certain area are derived when relating the road length to total roundwood removals per year (m/m^3/year) or length of road net per hectare of forest area (m/ha).
2.2 AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS AND MAPS
When planning and surveying a forest road, the use of aerial photographs facilitates the location of forest roads as one may get some ideas about possible routes in the office by viewing the pictures through a stereoscope and unacceptable variants can be disregarded. In addition Global Information Systems are now more widely available. Therefore, the amount of labour and time consuming road survey work on the ground can be reduced considerably. However, field reconnaissance and field checks are required in any case to ensure that something has not been missed, and to arrive at an optimum road location.
For forest road planning, good topographical maps are essential, preferably with scale not larger than 1:10 000. If good contour maps are not available, then extensive field work is required to measure all main control points barometrically and to record detailed terrain features.
Figure 1 shows four different types of terrain, from easy to difficult, which can be recognised from the spacing and curvature of contour lines.
FIGURE 1
Easy to medium terrain
Medium terrain
Difficult terrain
Very difficult terrain
Example of different types of topography in Bhutan (Southern and Western, Central Region)
Scale 1: 50 000
Contour Interval = 40 m
2.3 ROAD TYPES
Within a forest road-net one can classify roads:
(a) According to their position:
- main valley roads
- secondary valley roads
- slope roads
- feeder roads
- mountain ridge roads
(b) According to the construction:
- earth roads
- gravelled roads (mechanically stabilized roads)
- chemically stabilized roads
- roads with bituminous or oiled surface
(c) According to the intended use:
- truck roads
- tractor roads
- purely opening-up forest roads
- access roads
- multiple use forest roads
(d) According to importance:
- main roads (permanent roads and all-weather roads)
- secondary roads, feeder roads (seasonal roads)
2.4 ROAD STANDARDS
2.4.1 Access Roads
2.4.2 Main Forest Roads
2.4.3 Secondary Forest Roads (Feeder Roads)
2.4.4 Skid Roads (Skid Trails)
The standard of a road depends largely on its proposed end use, on the amount of harvestable and marketable wood per unit area as well as on terrain conditions. The following road classification is suggested for steep terrain:
- Access roads
- Main forest roads
- Secondary forest roads, feeder roads
- Skid roads
- Skid trails
2.4.1 Access Roads
The main purpose of access roads, as their name suggests, is to provide access to the forests for the transport of people from villages to the forests and for the transport of roundwood from the forests to the wood processing sites or terminals. Very often these roads are the links between the public roads and the main forest roads.
2.4.2 Main Forest Roads
The basic road-net consists of main forest roads, usually where wood transport is possible during the whole year. The location of such roads must therefore be decided upon from the point of view of their use. Very often they are needed for long term intensive management, where they are the key to all forestry operations. Therefore, adequate engineering structures and drainage facilities are required. If the in situ road base material does not have enough bearing capacity to support heavy traffic throughout the year, it would need to be reinforced or entirely gravelled with adequately graded road material.
2.4.3 Secondary Forest Roads (Feeder Roads)
Secondary forest roads are the connective lines from the landings to the main roads. They are normally only used temporarily and therefore gravelling is generally not done. If the soil material is soft, a single truck can completely destroy the road surface by making ruts in the road which will become a source of heavy erosion, often leading to the total destruction of the road. Therefore, it is better to close down these parts of the road net during adverse weather conditions. Through careful planning, logging could be scheduled in bad weather for those roads which are surfaced and will not be damaged.
PHOTO NO. 1 Secondary Forest Road - truck loaded at log landing
2.4.4 Skid Roads (Skid Trails)
These are used entirely by wheeled skidders and/or crawler tractors for wood extraction only. The width of the road (trail) generally does not exceed 3.5 m. On skid roads with steep gradients water-bars^1 should be built into the road to prevent gully erosion caused by concentrated surface water flow before the rainy season or at least after logging operations have ceased.
^1 Ridges of packed earth formed diagonally across the surface of the skidding road.
Table 1 gives suggestions for a possible road classification in mountainous terrain
TABLE 1
Road Classification
Road Type
Road Use
Road Formation Width
(m)
Carriage Way Width
(m)
Maximum Gradient in
Transport Direction
Adverse Direction
Main Forest Road
Truck, Pickup permanent
Secondary Forest Road
Truck, Pickup temporary
Skidding Road
Wheeled skidder, Wheeled tractor, Crawler Tractor
() * maximum gradient for short distances only
2.5 ROAD-NET DENSITY AND SPACING
In hilly and steep terrain the road spacing and location is predominantly determined by the terrain and the wood harvesting system feasible under the prevailing conditions. Road construction and maintenance costs are generally higher in difficult and steep terrain than in flat and hilly areas. Formulae are often used for the estimation of optimal road spacing.
The basic formula visualizes a road net with parallel, equally spaced and infinite roads which of course deviates very much from the actual road patterns, especially in mountains. Various authors have introduced modifications of the basic model in order to adapt it to reality.
The need for roads, the standard of roads and the quantity of roading will vary for each site. What will not vary is the need to ensure that only the minimum financial investment is made to fulfil all of the criteria the manager has identified in formulating his roading policy. Roads are not cheap and due consideration must be given to the requirements for the user as well as the geometric and structural design to minimize the overall cost.
Roads are installed to improve the efficiency of the running of the site and to give access to undeveloped areas. Everything can be done without roads if there is sufficient labour and horses or cross-country vehicles and machinery. But labour can be expensive and long uncomfortable travelling, either on foot or on a tractor is non-productive and a poor use of skilled workers' or managers' time. There are also cases where other factors, such as opening up new land or providing avalanche protection where transport to and from the areas affected is a requirement.
It is therefore necessary to make a judgement on the benefits which can be obtained from the expense of constructing roads, which can be high in comparison to other activities, against the expense of the alternative methods of fulfilling the objectives of the site. In some cases this will be fairly straightforward, in others some guesswork may be involved, but the exercise should always be carried out to help in reaching final conclusions.
Planning for Roads
The object of a planning system is to minimize total transport costs. These include:-
a. cost of road, both capital and maintenance;
b. cost of carrying goods and materials from the point of growth or collection to the nearest roads;
c. cost of vehicle on the road;
d. cost of people's time.
The quantity of roading, generally, does not affect the number of times of handling the produce or transferring produce to the vehicle. Handling or transferring need not be taken into account in any appraisal, other than to provide the manager with an indication of the total cost of the operation.
The influence of terrain, landscape, material sources and social requirements may provide a number of alternative routes for new roads. It is necessary to examine these routes and to cost the variables listed above for each road network and the most economic will, in normal circumstances be the selected solution.
The Quantity of Roading with Forestry as the Prototype
Timber harvesting has been used for the example given of the need to give consideration to the total cost of the operation, but the formulae and type of exercise work equally well for other products.
Assuming parallel access roads across the site, the following can be derived:
h Cost of movement from stump to roadside ($/m^3/100 m travelled).
S Distance between roads (metres).
R Capitalised road cost, including allowance for maintenance in future years, ($/km).
V Total volume of product to be extracted during the life of the road, discounted to year of road construction (m^3/ha).
Road costs per hectare is:
If the discounted volume per hectare to be carried by the road is V m^3 per hectare:-
The best solution occurs when the total cost per m^3 is at a minimum ie when
This occurs when extraction costs and road costs are approximately equal.
Thus:-
Example:-
Let the road cost be $30,000 per km and h be $1.60 per m^3 per 100 m.
A crop of Yield Class 12 Sitka spruce discounted to 3 years after optimum timing of first thinning yields a volume of 202 m^3 per hectare.
Therefore optimum road spacing for parallel access roads would be just over 600 m.
An alternative method of calculating roading requirements is to consider the optimum density of roading. Where a block of land, because of geography and land form, does not lend itself to parallel roads, the use of a total economic length of road for the block, distributed in a manner which takes account of the land form, may be a better solution.
If the same figures are used as before.
The optimum density (m/ha)
By multiplying the number of hectares in the block of land by this density, the quantity of economic roading can be decided for the block. It can then be distributed to suit the crop and land form in the block.
From experience gained in mountain logging operations some guideline figure for road-net densities (truck roads) have been developed which may serve for planning purposes. However, these would have to be checked and modified according to local conditions before being used for purposes other than planning.
TABLE 2
Examples of road-net densities versus terrain features
Description of Terrain, Forest and Infrastructure Conditions
Road-net Density (Truck Roads) in Metres per Hectare
Hilly Terrain
Slopes of up to 40% with 60-80 m skid roads per ha
Steep Terrain
Use of cables cranes
Steep Terrain
With intensive forest management
2.6 INTEGRATED PLANNING OF ROAD NETS AND CABLE SYSTEMS
In steep terrain^2 the recommended road-net density is in the order of 20 m/ha, for economic reasons, productivity, erosion problems, forest protection areas, etc. In order to arrive at the most economical mix of road and off-road transport, the utilization of short-distance cable cranes, especially mobile and radio-controlled cable cranes, is a good supplement to forest roads for opening up of mountainous areas. The maximum possible skidding distance of a short-distance cable crane is about 500m; the lateral skidding distance on both sides of the cable is about 20m to 25m. By using tractor attached winches, wood can be skidded up to 150m uphill onto the road or landing.
^2 Slopes over 50%
In general, slopes over 70 percent have a tendency to landslides, especially after heavy rains and where soil and rock strata dip towards the valley; therefore, it is advisable to open up those forest areas by means of long-distance cable crane systems. Long-distance cable cranes (skyline length, generally more than 1500m) and medium range cable cranes (skyline, 700m - 1500m) may substitute partly or entirely for roads so that they more or less completely take over the function of timber transport, especially in extreme situations.
PHOTO NO. 2 A forest area opened up by a combination of forest roads and cable cranes
2.7 ROAD LOCATIONS IN HILL AND MOUNTAIN SIDE AREAS
Generally, nature and the harvesting system dictate the road-net pattern and there are endless variations of different road-nets as much as different terrain configurations. However, over the past years, some standard route patterns have been developed. Some of these are shown in Figures 2 to 7.
Valley Roads
These are usually main roads which are designed to open up the bottom of the valley. The road should be routed along one bank, as bridges are expensive.
FIGURE 2 Routing of Valley Roads
Valley road in steep terrain A
Valley road in steep terrain B
Valley Bottoms
These should be opened up by means of a circular road system, provided that the terrain is not too difficult. This system is used at the headwaters of a river. The road should be at least 50 metres from the water edge to prevent road debris affecting the water quality.
FIGURE 3 Circular Routing for Valley Bottoms
Slope Roads
These start from valley roads and subdivide slopes. A distinction can be made between serpentine and diagonal systems.
FIGURE 4
Routing of Slope Roads
Serpentine system (on steep, long slopes)
Diagonal system (on gentle slopes)
Ridge Roads
Ridge roads are often the best solution in hilly terrain insofar as logging with light cable systems is concerned; however, they often only open up the forest area to a very limited extent. In many developing countries they are frequently used in combination with skid trails and/or cable systems. Ridge roads should probably be constructed when hillside slopes are prone to erosion or valleys are inaccessible because of extremely wet and swampy terrain. Care should be taken with the drainage patterns to ensure that land slips are not encouraged.
FIGURE 5 Ridge Road
Logging Areas on Ridges
These should be opened up by crossing the ridge, then descending the other side.
FIGURE 6 Logging Areas on Ridges
Mountain and Hill Tops
Circular routing, starting from a saddle, should be used to open up mountain and hill tops.
FIGURE 7 Circular routing for Tops
(Figures 2 to 7 by O. Sedlak)
<section>2</section>
3. PARAMETERS INFLUENCING THE ECONOMIC OF ROADS (BY HEINRICH)
3.1 CLIMATE
3.2 TERRAIN AND SOIL
3.3 STAND AND TREES
3.1 CLIMATE
Road surveying, construction and maintenance should be limited to the dry period whenever possible because during the rainy period not only are erosion risks and dangers higher, but costs also increase considerably. In general, we can count on about 150-180 actual working days per year. What affects the work most is the intensity of precipitation within a certain period of time rather than the yearly amount of rain, so for instance it may very well be that within a short time some 150 - 300 mm of rain may fall. Therefore, when planning roads in high rainfall areas, attention should be paid to the exposure of the road in order that the road can be dried by sunshine as quickly as possible.
In high altitudes it should be realized that due to thinner air, labour productivity is less than in the low lands and more frequent pauses are required to combat fatigue.
3.2 TERRAIN AND SOIL
Road costs are heavily influenced by terrain, especially when the latter is broken and frequent gullies, creeks or small rivers occur. Careful attention should be paid to the stability of the terrain when planning and laying out the road (avoid soft and wet areas as much as possible). Very often there is a scarcity of road building material which has enough bearing capacity. Therefore, when surveying the road line, possible locations of natural gravel pits suitable for ballast material should be assessed. Very often the only suitable gravel material is found in river beds or in the vicinity of rivers. Care should be taken when extracting such material that the effect on fish stocks is minimised. Equally hard rock requires expensive blasting and crushing to be used successfully as road building material.
3.3 STAND AND TREES
The volume of logs to be harvested per unit area (m^3/ha) is a decisive economic factor for the road layout, design and road-net density.
In general, the roundwood volumes per hectare are higher in coniferous forests that in tropical broad-leaved forests. From the financial aspect, however, one would have to make comparisons from case to case.
If one assumes for instance a roundwood removal of 300 m^3/ha and a road-net density of 15 m^3/ha, road costs per m^3 would only amount to the equivalent cost of 0.05 m of road length of the forest road-net, whereas a removal of only 150 m^3 would result in an equivalent cost of 0.10 m.
<section>3</section>
4.0 ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS - FITTING NEW ROADS INTO THE LANDSCAPE
4.1 INTRODUCTION
4.2 BASIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES
4.3 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
4.4 ROAD LOCATION
4.5 VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT
4.6 THE ROADLINE SCAR
4.7 ROAD MATERIALS
4.8 CULVERTS
4.9 BRIDGES
4.10 CONCLUSIONS
4.1 INTRODUCTION
There is no doubt that the landscape is of vital concern to the majority of people. Rural landscapes are often perceived as unchanging, as 'natural' and as places to go to escape the stresses of city life. People care very much about the quality of the landscape and get very worried if changes occur which are to its detriment. A wide range of professions work in the countryside and many of their actions alter the appearance of the landscape. It is therefore important for the well-being of the landscape, for the satisfaction of those who love it and for its continual management that all activities - afforestation, buildings, utilities and roads - are well designed to fit into the landscape.
Successful design needs skill. It requires that those responsible for a development such as a new road understand how to evaluate the effect of their proposals on the landscape as well as they can evaluate their cost and functional efficiency. To do this an ability to 'read' the landscape is necessary. There is now a well recognised way of doing this, using a set of defined visual design principles. These principles allow us to analyse and describe the landscape and subsequently to design solutions which fit into it better. There are several major principles which are worth explaining before looking in detail at the methods of fitting roads into the landscape.
4.2 BASIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES
a. Shape
This has a very powerful influence on what we see. We pick out shapes often on the slightest evidence. Some shapes can be categorised as geometric, regular, artificial and man made while others are organic, irregular or natural. There are plenty of examples of geometric shapes in the landscape - early forests planted on hillsides, the surveyed grids used in field layouts, straight roads cutting across topography. By comparison organic shapes such as irregular natural woodland or sinuous curving roads seem to stand out less and be perceived as more compatible with the landscape around them.
b. Visual Force
When we look at a landscape our eyes are sub-consciously led around different parts of it in a pre-ordained way. It has been found that our eyes tend to be led up valleys, hollows and concavities and down ridges, spurs and convexities. Shapes which cut across or interrupt these flows or lines of visual force can produce unresolved, jarring effects which reduce the compatibility of that shape. A road cutting across a contour may fit less well than a more winding alignment.
c. Scale
The relative dimensions of the landscape and the amounts we can take in at one view determine its scale. Small elements can seem lost in large scale landscapes while large elements can dominate over small scale ones. Therefore it is important to work at the correct scale. This is complicated by the effect of different observer distances and between internal and external views, especially in forests.
d. Diversity
We respond positively to landscapes which contain certain amounts of variety. A landscape with very little diversity can be boring while one containing too much can be confusing. Additional elements can tip a landscape which is already very diverse into chaos.
e. Unity
Diversity has to be balanced against the need for unity in a landscape, where all the parts belong to the whole. An incompatible shape or an element creating a lot of contrast can fail to achieve unity with its surroundings and so look distinctly unhappy.
f. Genius loci or the Spirit of the Place
All landscapes are different although there might be general similarities. The sense of place is important to us in that it helps to identify a particular location and make it special. It is an intangible elusive quality easy to damage and difficult to repair. New elements introduced into a landscape should avoid damaging the genius loci and ideally should complement it.
4.3 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
Landscape design has been defined as "the organisation of a place in a way which reconciles the conflicting requirements of use while ensuring an attractive appearance".
It is fundamental to recognise that a good design is one which fulfils the 3 criteria of BEAUTY, UTILITY and EFFICIENCY. Each of these can be measured or defined to some extent. In the rural situation BEAUTY usually means adhering to the main principles outlined above, achieving unity, diversity and responding to the genius loci. Landscape design is not merely a cosmetic application to prettify something, nor screening or otherwise mitigating the worst effects of an ill-considered development. That is the province of 'landscaping' and is quite different.
Other papers in this conference will deal with the factors concerning utility and efficiency so the rest of this paper will deal with the visual quality part of the equation. It must be stressed that the 3 aspects should not normally be considered separately but integrated: this is really what design is all about. It is a process, starting with the objective of the development and the landscape it is to be placed in, achieving a mutually compatible solution.
At this stage we need to consider what the visual design objectives are likely to be when considering a new road development. In the countryside and particularly in wilder, mountainous areas, the qualities of naturalness are highly valued by our largely urban based population. Developments which contrast with this general character and more especially urbanise it are incompatible and should be avoided. The main aim should be to blend with the landscape and fit in with its character. That is not to say that certain engineering structures need be out of place or hidden. This partly depends on the scale, allowing the landscape to dominate, not the engineering structure. Sometimes the landscape quality can be enhanced by the contrast of a bridge spanning a ravine, for example some Swiss or Italian bridges in mountainous landscapes.
4.4 ROAD LOCATION
The first major decision which needs to be taken is the location of the road and the general route corridor. When choosing a roadline and surveying potential routes an appraisal of the landscape should be carried out. This may involve using sketches of photographs taken from significant public viewpoints and testing the impact of various general options. Computer analyses can also be used for this. The appraisal should include all factors to be taken into account, not only visual ones.
Important parts of a road alignment include those points where the road crosses a skyline; the geometry of the road at bends, hairpins and junctions; large-scale cuts, fills, culverts and bridges, all of which can increase the artificial qualities of the landscape, especially in close views. Natural qualities of the landscape should be reflected in the alignment. The aim is not to disguise the road but to reflect the scale and forms of the landscape in their design. If these factors are taken into account at an early stage the additional costs can be minimal with little or no effect on functional efficiency, yet the environmental benefits can be substantial.
The general location of forest roads should be planned to avoid important habitats and appear unobtrusive in the landscape. In agricultural landscapes access roads can be hidden behind hedgerows, dykes and walls or hollows amongst landform. Landscapes of particular quality or genius loci should be avoided, for example focal views, water edges and waterfalls. Watercourses of particular quality should be crossed at the least visible point. High standards of design and construction must be achieved in these sensitive locations.
The visible parts of the road should be in scale with the landscape, for example by not running close to the skyline for long stretches and avoiding routes which will result in large amounts of cut and fill in small scale, narrow valleys. The general alignment should run diagonal to the slope and not horizontally as far as technical constraints permit. Steeper slopes and summits should be avoided and skylines crossed at lowest practicable point, ideally in a hollow or saddle.
4.5 VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT
A road is a line in the landscape and its shape has a major effect on its appearance. The line should curve gently from side to side and up and down the slope. Straight lines in either direction tend to cut awkwardly across landform, especially where they conflict with lines of visual force. In order to blend with landform, roads should be deflected downwards on convex slopes and rise slightly in hollows and valleys. The degree of inflexion depends on the scale of the landform. Where this is large, generous curves are needed which will appear as simple engineering on the ground. In small scale landscapes over simple construction will obliterate landform detail if not carefully done.
In flat landscapes, especially in forests, roads have tended to be straight in the past. These can look artificial away from the built environment and can be daunting to walkers or cyclists. Curving alignments look more natural, taking advantage of any landform present.
The standard of the road determines the flexibility of the alignment. If the terrain is difficult yet the landscape is sensitive a lower standard may be the solution, for example reducing to a road capable of taking a 4-wheel drive vehicle instead of a car, or a tractor instead of a lorry. This is where a balance between all the objectives, environmental as well as functional, is necessary at the design stage.
Landings and turning points which require additional space should be located as far as possible where natural gradients provide more scope. Avoid prominent ridges. Hairpin bends and zigzag alignments on prominent slopes can look especially intrusive, made worse by large areas of cut and fill.
4.6 THE ROADLINE SCAR
Cuttings and areas of spoil produced by road construction on steep slopes add further to the potential landscape impact unless dealt with sensitively. Geometric shapes, light, raw colours and their scale are the main factors to consider. Alignments should firstly be planned to avoid them if possible.
In soft rocks areas of cut should be excavated into more rounded banks to reduce the engineered profile, blend into the contours and allow vegetation cover to develop faster. In hard rock it is better to imitate natural crags with ledges and shelves capable of holding vegetation produced at construction. Occasionally an irregular combination of these 2 treatments can be used to break the artificial line of a long cut.
Vegetation cover is not always practical, but in open and prominent landscapes may be important to the extent of employing hydraseeding or turfing to accelerate its establishment. The right choice of seed and turf is important, in case a bright green line replaces a grey one in a landscape of subdued colour. In landscapes of more varied vegetation, extending the existing pattern on to the cut and fill will help. Material such as turf and bracken rhizomes can be saved at construction and re-laid afterwards if thought is given to the method of construction and there is room for storage.
In severely limited topography the impact of cut and fill together is so great that it may be better to remove all fill from the site. The cut is left but is probably more stable and easier to deal with than the loose, erodable fill in such circumstances. Obviously costs will rise in these cases.
4.7 ROAD MATERIALS
Wherever possible road materials should be of local origin, ideally from the same location. This ensures that the colour and texture blend into the surrounding landscape. Brightly coloured or white stone can look very intrusive in many landscapes. Where the local stone is not suitable for the road then imported stone should be chosen for similarity of colour as well as for its cost and strength.
4.8 CULVERTS
Where the road crosses a stream and a culvert is an appropriate method then the design will depend on its scale. A small concrete pipe can be set into the fill and collect the water while the slopes above are vegetated. Larger culverts, perhaps those constructed from Armco or similar material, require retaining walls in many instances. Gabions are one solution which can work well if arranged so as to emulate natural rock formations and filled with local stone. If stepped back vegetation can grow on the ledges which further help to blend them into the surroundings.
4.9 BRIDGES
Where a stream has to be crossed by a bridge then further factors need to be taken into account.
a. Location
Siting a bridge should be very carefully thought out so that visual intrusion is avoided and genius loci protected. Because a bridge can be a substantial engineering structure in a fairly wild and remote location it should be sited away from rapids or waterfalls while providing a vantage point from which visitors may view them. A bridge can be a positive element in the sequence of experiences walkers may enjoy.
The alignment of the bridge to the river and the road leading to and from it should be designed so that there is a flow to it, across it and away from it. Cut and fill on the approach should be minimised and natural ground contours used wherever possible. The cut or fill around the bridge abutments should blend into the adjacent contours so that the bridge seems to grow out of the surrounding landscape rather than being placed upon it.
b. Bridge Design
The structure of the bridge itself needs careful thought. Concrete and steel can have a strongly urban feel while na