<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Country report - Forestry of Mongolia</title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia-Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being coordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories: country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies.
Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility; therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome, 00100, ITALY
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Email: < mafa.chipeta@fao.org >
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Regional Forestry Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200
THAILAND
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <Patrick.Durst@fao.org>
<section>2</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
AAC
Annual Allowable Cut
COMECON
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
IMF
International Monetary Fund
MNE
Ministry of Nature and Environment
T
Mongolian Tugriks, currency unit
US$
US Dollar, currency unit
USSR
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Former)
<section>3</section>
1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
1.1 Location
1.2 Land surface
1.3 Climate
1.4. Population
1.5 Land Resources
1.6 Soil
1.7 Water resources
1.8 Flora
1.1 Location
Mongolia is situated in Central Asia and its territory comprises 1.566 thousand square kilometres, which is 1.2% of the land surface in the world. The territory stretches 1,259 kilometres from north to south and 2,392 kilometres from east to west. The most northern point of Mongolia is Mongol Sharyn Davaa 52'09" latitude, 98'57" longitude. The most southern point is Orvog Gashuuny Bor Tolgoi 41'35" latitude, 105'00" longitude. The most eastern point is Mount Maant 48'53" latitude, 87'44' longitude, and most western point is Modtoi Hamar 46'43' latitude, 119'56' longitude. The total length of the border is 8,161.8 kilometres; 3,485.0 kilometres borders with Russia, and 4,676.8 kilometres with China.
1.2 Land surface
Mongolia is a mountainous country. There is a relatively small area of plain. The western part of Mongolia contains the Altai range, the largest mountain range in Mongolia. The Altai mountain range stretches 1,500 kilometres and splits into the Mongol Altai and Gobi Altai ranges. Mongolia is approximately 1,580 meters above sea level. The highest peak in Mongolia is Munh Hairhany Orgil (Altai mountains) at 4,653 meters above sea level and the lowest point is Hoh Nuuryn Depression (Dornod Mongol Plain).
Beautiful plains can be seen in the west and east of Mongolia. The largest of them is Dornod plain which is around 250 thousand square kilometres. The Gobi occupies a third of Mongolia territory and is known as the Thirty three Gobies of Zag, Suj and Nomin. Generally, this area is flat and stretches into Dorno Gobi, Altain Ovor Gobi, Zuun Garyn Gobi and Hoid Gobi. The Great Desert of Central Asia joins from the south.
1.3 Climate
Mongolia's geography highly influences the weather. Due to the distance from the sea the climate is continental. The temperature varies not only between seasons, but also within a day. The climate in the northern part of the country is extremely cold, in winter the temperature can reach -50 C, while it is +4C in the south. The warmest July day may be between 10C and 15C in Altai, Hangai, Hovsgol and Hentii, where as temperatures might reach 20C and above in the eastern part of the Dornod plain. Maximum temperatures can reach 35C in Hangai, and 41C in the Gobi. The coldest time in winter is the middle of January when temperatures drop to -25C to -30C in the northern mountains and -15C to -20C in Gobi. Extremely low temperatures of -45C to -53C in the northern part of the country have been recorded. The land is covered in snow for 40-60 days in South, and 150 in the North. The ground freezes down to 3 meters, and the total number of cold days is 160-220 a year.
1.4. Population
Mongolia has a population of 2.3 million. Most of the population (70%) is under 29 years of age. Population density in Mongolia is 1.4 people per square kilometre. The population is 49.9% male and 50.1% female. 56.4% of the population live in cities, and the remainder live in the countryside. 630 thousand people live in the capital city of Ulaanbaatar.
1.5 Land Resources
Mongolia has a huge territory of 1.566 million square kilometres. 80% of total area is for agricultural use; 0.1% is for special use; 11.2% for state forests; 1% for state water reserves and the remainder is state reserve. Total agricultural area is 122,381 thousand hectares, including 1,217 thousand hectares of arable land, 1,364 thousand hectares of working area, 119,434 thousand hectares of pasture.
1.6 Soil
Soil in Mongolia has been divided into the following classifications:
1. Black soil is found in Khangai, Khentii, Khovsgol provinces, Mongol Altai and Ih Hyangan Mountain ranges, and the in the Orhon, Selenge, Onon and Ulz river valleys which are in the forest steppe region. Black soil has 61.2%, 40-70 cm of thick humus.
2. Brown soil is in the forest steppe and steppe region 1,000-1,200 meters above sea level. The content of humus is 35% in dark brown, 23% brown, 1.62% in light brown soil. There is no need irrigate in brown soil.
1.7 Water resources
Mongolia's rivers total 67,000 kilometres in length. There are 4,000 lakes of more than 1 square kilometre and approximately 7,000 hot springs. Also Mongolia has a large resource of underground water. The largest river in Mongolia is the Selenge. The largest fleeting lake is Khovsgol which is the deepest lake in Central Asia and the largest lasting lake is Uvs Nuur (3,350 square kilometres). Fleeting water reserve is 39 cubic kilometres and 88% of it flows within the country. The lake water reserves are 180 cubic kilometres, and the underground water reserve is 12 cubic kilometres. There are many hot springs with varying mineral contents. The climate and geomorphology of the country influence water distribution in Mongolia. Lake and river flows increase due to heavy rainfall during the summer. There are numerous clear (limpid) waters in Mongolia. Water is used by both industry and households. It is, also used for generating electricity and there are possibilities to develop
this further. Boats crossing Khovsgol lake are used for commercial and tourist transportation.
There is potential to contract small size hydropower plants on some of the rivers. Using developments in science and technology, water resources can be used widely. The estimated reserve of underground water is considerable which is a reliable source of water supply. However the Gobi is short of water.
1.8 Flora
Passing from north to south, there are four major latitudinal zones; forest-steppe, steppe, semi-desert and desert. There are also high mountains particularly in the forest-steppe zone including taiga and taiga Alpine belts. Depending on geographical zones, belts and topography, territory of Mongolia is divided 4 main botanical geographical districts; Khangai, Khentii, Altai mountains, the Eastern steppe and the Gobi. Although the amount of vegetation and flora of Mongolia is proportionally small. It is distinctive and heterogeneous because of the country's vast territory and geography.
At present, the vegetation of Mongolia comprises 2,251 species of higher vascular plant united in 596 genus and 103 families; 293 species of mosses united in 119 genus and 40 families; 570 species of lichens united in 70 genus and 30 families; 218 species of tungi united in 34 genus and 12 families; and 574 species of algae united in 154 genus, 52 families 8 types. The largest ones among the higher vascular plants are families of Compositae, Leguminosae Juss, Grami Naseous, Miscanthus, Suaeda Glauca Bunge, Dianthus and Scrophularia incisa weinm.
The vegetation of Mongolia contents plants of 2 large florist regions; the Siberian taiga in the north and the Central Asian steppe-desert in south. The basic vegetation form in the taiga belt is cedar and larch forests. The prevailing types of steppe plants are various kinds of Faether grass; Miscanthus, Artemisia and Potentilla. Most important in Mongolia's desert are Piptanthus Mongolicus Maxim, Convolvulus Gorchacowa and Oxytrpic Grubow. Mongolia has abundant medicinal plants and 700 species are used for traditional medicine. Generally the flowers and leaves of medicinal plants should be gathered in July and September and their roots from October to the spring of the next year.
<section>4</section>
2. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SITUATION
2.1 History
2.2 Politics and Administration
2.3 Economic Situation
2.1 History
Archaeological finds have established the Mongols as a distinct people as early as the second millennium B.C. The primitive communal system gave way to the formation of the Hun state towards the 3rd century B.C. Between the third and the ninth centuries A.D. sovereign states were formed by a class of feudal lords which had steadily been gaining importance. The Turkish Empire formed during this period disappeared with the death of its leader, Toniukuk, in 730 A.D.
Chinggis Khaan unified the Mongols into a feudal state in 1206, and the Mongolian territory subsequently expended to cover most of modern-day China and reached well into Central Europe. By the mid 1300s, however, the Mongol Empire had disintegrated, and a prolonged period of internecine strife followed. Under the Convention of Dolonnor of 1691, Mongolia became a province of China. The next two centuries were characterized by tribal dispersions, colonization by foreign powers, especially of the southern lands, and the consolidation of theocratic power in the northern territories.
The 1911 Chinese revolution allowed Mongolia to claim independence until 1915, when it was scaled back to autonomy under Chinese suzerainty, and in 1919 Mongolia was fully reincorporated into Chine. In march 1921, independence was reasserted, and a brief period of constitutional monarchy followed, ending after the ruler's death. In 1924, the People's Republic was founded. Over the next three years, politics shifted from right to left and civil unrest was prevalent. Over this period, too, Mongolia increasingly aligned itself politically, economically and militarily with the former USSR.
2.2 Politics and Administration
The transformation of Mongolia in the last seven decades from a feudal agrarian society to a relatively modern and structurally diverse state was accomplished under a socialist regime and a system of centrally directed allocation of physical and financial resources. Under the Constitution of 1960, supreme political power rested in the hands of the People's Great Khural (upper house), comprised of elected representatives. Executive power was placed in the hands of a Presidium and Council of Ministers, whose election by the Great Khural was assured by the Central Committee of the MPRP, the sole political party. The Parliament, elected by universal suffrage at the national level, consisted of two chambers - the People's Great Khural (upper house) and the State Baga Khural (lower house).
Political reforms, following widespread dissatisfaction with the single-party system, resulted in April 1990 in various amendments to the 1960 Constitution allowing, among other measures, legal formation of political parties. In August 1990 the country held its first parliamentary elections, in which opposition parties gained 40% of the seats in the Baga khural.
The Great Khural was empowered to adopt or amend the Constitution; elect the country's President; and appoint the vice President, Prime Minister and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court on the President's recommendation.
A new Constitution passed by the Baga Khural in May 1991 was adopted by the Great Khural in January 1992. The new Constitution, which took effect on 12 February, changed the name of the country from the People's Republic of Mongolia to Mongolia. It also embraced democracy and a market economy.
The new Constitution makes Mongolia a democratic parliamentary state with independent legislative, executive and judicial branches, and quarantines its citizens freedom of speech, religious tolerance and other basic human rights. Citizens have been given the right to own property (including land) and to engage in business activities of their choice.
Mongolia is divided into 21 administrative units (aimags). Aimags are divided into sums (districts). Sums are comprised of bags. The latter are the lowest rural administrative unit. There are total of 324 sums and 1,600 bags in the country.
2.3 Economic Situation
The change from central planning to a market has over the past five years resulted in a strong contraction of the Mongolian economy. Between 1989 and 1993, GDP in 1986 prices declined 22.3. The only major sectors which escaped the overall downward trend were agriculture, where production remained stable, and the 'other services', which include catering and tourism-related activities, which grew by 18%.
Unemployment, virtually unknown before 1990, increased rapidly, with close to 72,000 persons being registered as unemployed at the beginning of 1994. Estimates however indicate that actual unemployment may be 200,000 out of a working force of approximately one million. In 1994 there were clear signs of an economic recovery. According to IMF estimates, GDP is likely to grow 2.5%. Inflation seems to be under control now, the monthly increase in the consumer price index having slowed down to 3.8% in September 1994. The average for 1993 was 9.1%. Building activity, though only a fraction of its 1988 peak, is increasing for the first time in six years.
Exports still exceeded imports during the first months of the year, but over the whole year exports are expected to equal imports. Unemployment is still increasing, but the increase was down to 5% during the first nine months of the year compared to 13% in 1993. The industrial sector accounted for 32% of gross domestic product in 1993, making in the largest single contributor to the national economy. It was followed by agriculture and 'other services ' each 23%, and trade with 19%. As indicated above the 'other services' sector has grown rapidly in recent years. Its share in GDP has increased by 10% points since 1989.
The state budget condition remains weak. Total expenditure was projected at US$0.23 billion while the total revenue was projected at US$0.20 billion in 1994. The government has introduced a number of new taxes and customs duties, e.g. duties on imported products such as petrol and private cars to increase its income.
Before the year 1990 Mongolia's currency was not convertible. There were different rates for commercial and non-commercial transactions. Its value was artificially high at both rates. In 1990 the government, after deciding that the Tugrik (T) should eventually become convertible, begged it to the US dollar at a rate of T 5.63/1 US$. Since then it has been devalued several times. The exchange rate was adjusted from T 40/1 US$ to T 150/1 US$ early in 1993, and a unified exchange rate was established. In early 1994 the rate was T 410/1 US$. After that the foreign exchange rate has more stable.
Macroeconomics policy in 1994 was directed at a legal basis for market economy relations, the implementation of an integrated package of fiscal and monetary policies, adjustments in key tariffs and prices and checking economic decline.
As a result of this policy a number of positive developments were achieved in the national economy. Substantial progress was made toward macroeconomics stabilization and a basis was laid for the implementation of the key tasks of the Government's Program of Action. The main economic indicators are given in Table 1
Table 1 - Main economic indicators
GDP growth rate*
Of which
-industry
-agriculture
inflation (CPI)
Registered unemployment (thous)
Imports (US$mln)
Exports (US$mln)
Foreign credits, aid
*In constant 1986 prices
** Prices increase after the exchange rate reform on 16 Jan, 1991
For the first time since 1989 there was an increase in Mongolian GDP. In 1994 GDP grew in real terms by 2.1%, including 2.7% growth in industry, 7.1% in agriculture, 3.7% in capital construction and 2.5% in the service sector. For the first time in recent years industrial production increased, and there was substantial improvement in agriculture. These contributed to the achievement of positive overall economic growth. Consumer price inflation in 1994 was 66.3%, which is one fifth of the 1992 rate and 36.5% of the 1993 level. The average monthly inflation rate in 1994 was 4.3%. That is three times down against the 1992 level.
<section>5</section>
3. MONGOLIAN FORESTRY SECTOR
3.1 Forest resources
3.2 Regeneration of forests
3.3 Forest Industries
3.4 Export and import of Processed Wood Products
3.5 Sawmilling
3.6 Sliced veneer
3.7 Plywood
3.8 Particleboard
3.9 Furniture and joinery products
3.10 Ger production
3.11 Development programme
3.12 Forest legislation
3.1 Forest resources
The total forest area of Mongolia is 17.5 million ha or 11.2% of the total land area. The area of potentially exploitable forest is estimated to be between 5 and 6 million ha. The average growing stock in the northern forests vary between 54 and 79 cubic meters/ha in the whole forest area, and between 100 and 154 cubic meters/ha in the exploitable forests by regions. The total growing stock is 1.3 billion cubic meters and the exploitable volume 6 million cubic meters. The average tree size in exploitable forests varies between 0.45 and 0.58 cubic meters. Shares of Tree Species gives in Table 2. The forests are mainly located in the northern parts of the country along the Russian border forming a transition zone between the Siberian taiga forest and the Central Asian steppe zones. The forest areas of Mongolia are given in Map 1.
Table 2 - Shares of Tree Species by Main Regions.
Tree species
Region
Central
Western
Eastern
Larch (Larix Sibirica)
Pine (Pinus Silvestris)
Cedar (Pinus cembra, var. sibirica)
Spruce (Picea obovata)
Birch (Betula spp)
Total
There are also significant areas of arid forest and shrub land in the southern and southwestern parts of the country. According to the year 1987 estimates this area consists of 90% Saxaul forest and 10% Tamarix spp. This forests are strictly protected and subject only to limited exploitation to meet local needs for fuelwood. The forest zone is located 800-2,500 m sea level. The forest area is divided into following slope classes;
Slope class
Percent of forest area
0- 10o
11-20o
21o +
All forests and land in Mongolia are state owned. The Ministry of Nature and Environment (MNE) has the main responsibility for the management of forests. The Forestry and Wildlife Research Institute under the MNE is responsible for forest resources inventory, and scientific and technological development in forestry. The Units of forest and Ranting under the provincial governments are responsible for forest management at local level.
The annual logging volume was on the level of 2.5 million cubic meters in the 1980s. The MNE reduced the annual allowable cut (AAC) to one million cubic meter to control deforestation in 1990.
According to MNE the forest area has decreased by 1.2 million ha during the last 20 years. Forest fires are damaging some 200,000 ha of forests annually. About 50,000 ha have been planted during the last 20 years, but parts of the cut-over and burned areas are regenerating naturally reducing the total losses.
The main objective of forest resource management would be to protect and develop the existing forests of Mongolia so that they make maximum contributions to soil and watershed protection, and conservation of existing ecosystems. At the same time the forests would produce, on a sustainable basis, increased volumes of industrial wood, fuelwood and minor forest products to the needs of people, and earn highly needed foreign currency through the export of wood products. The proper management and utilization of forests would create employment and income to people in the less developed parts of the country.
It is expected that the production of commercial wood and fuelwood could be increased from the current level of 1.0 million cubic meter a up to 3.0 million cubic meter a by the year 2010 by more intensive management forests, by regenerating the cut-over and burned areas effectively, by reducing logging waste, and by opening new forest areas for development though building and upgrading roads. However, this must be verified by forest management plans.
Forestry is a long-term activity which must be guided by far-sighted strategy and planning to ensure the balanced development of resources. Proper planning takes into account e.g. forestry, institutional, economic, environmental and social objectives of the country. Without an overall plan the different subsections will be developed without adequate integration.
There are some evident and urgent development needs which should be started immediately. Such urgent tasks include:
· Continuation of the national forest inventory
· Preparation of forest management plans for major forest areas
· Development and use of more effective regeneration methods
· Development of wood harvesting methods
· Construction and upgrading of access and forest roads
· Development of forest policies and institutional framework (including human resource development).
3.2 Regeneration of forests
It is estimated that during the period 1975-1995 only 10% of the harvested areas were regenerated by planting. The annual rate of new planting has increased from 4,000 hectares in 1991 to 5,000 hectares in 1994. In 1995 the Forestry and Wildlife Research Institute prepared a report forecasting new areas of planting to 2010. The report provides a medium term forecast describing the five years out to the year 2000. The report estimates new planting to be between 6,000 hectares and 8,000 hectares per year during this period with a best estimate of 7,000 hectares.
In the longer term, from the year 2001 to the year 2010, the report expects new planting to be between 8,000 hectares and 40,000 hectares with a best estimate of 24,000 hectares per year^1.
^1 This would be a major jump from the average of only 2,500 ha/year over the past 20 years (Editor).
Even if some areas regenerate naturally after logging the situation is not satisfactory. Without artificial regeneration the share of birch and aspen will increase, and some areas may be converted into grassland in the harsh climate. According to the Forest law of Mongolia the logging enterprises are responsible for the regeneration of cutting areas, but only the biggest logging companies have taken care of the regeneration, while the smaller ones have ignored it. It is still unknown, if the new Forest law will improve the situation, but in general the laws and regulations are ineffective if the economic base is missing.
The current regeneration method consists of piling and burning of logging waste, manual site preparation and planting of bare-root seedlings. The nursery grown seedlings are 2-3 years old. The most common planted species are pine and larch. The survival rate of seedlings is reported to be only 30-65%. The low survival rate is due to the following reasons:
· harsh and dry climate
· poor quality of seedlings produced in nurseries
· inadequate site preparation and poor planting techniques
· neglected maintenance of plantations
· uncontrolled grazing.
As the areas requiring reforestation are much larger than the available resources, the optimum working methods should be developed. In the first phase the whole regeneration system should be thoroughly analyzed. The conditions where natural regeneration gives acceptable results should be clarified, and natural regeneration be used in such conditions. Where natural regeneration of desired species cannot be achieved, planting or sowing should be used. The development of planting methods includes the following:
· seed selection and genetic improvement of planting material
· improved nursery techniques
· site preparation
· planting techniques
· maintenance of plantation.
The development of forest regeneration will require extensive research, which should be done simultaneously with the development. Foreign know-how and financing would be necessary to get the development started
3.3 Forest Industries
Under the centrally planned system most industries were state-owned or joint ventures with the former COMECON countries. The industrial development took place mainly in the north-central region where part of the forest resources are located and which had easy access to the Soviet Union which, at time, was the main trading partner of Mongolia. Mongolia's most important forest industry regions are the Selenge province and Ulaanbaatar.
Industry was strongly import-dependent in technology, industrial consumable and chemicals, and it was highly subsidized. The USSR, Romania and Poland were the joint venture partner in wood industry. Towards the end of the 1980s the forest industry production, with the help of the mentioned countries, grew rapidly. The collapse of cooperation arrangements and the subsequent recession in Mongolia, caused an economic crisis in the industry with decline in production volumes and investments. Currently the forest industry is utilizing less than 30% of its previous production capacity.
The forest industry was controlled before year 1987 by the Ministry of Forestry and Wood Industry. After that the management of natural resources was under the responsibility of the Ministry of Nature and Environment.
The management of the wood working sector was under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Industry. In the beginning of the 1990s the government formulated a reform programme for transition from centrally-planned economy to the free market economy. In the very beginning of the reform the forest industry was left aside, and attention was paid to more critical sectors of the industries. However, later on the reform was extended also to forest industries. This included the privatization of state-owned enterprises and many reforms in industry. Large industrial enterprises were divided into smaller production units of individual factories. These units and other previously state-owned enterprises have been reorganized into joint stock companies.
The number of wood working companies operating in Mongolia, according to the 1994 statistics, is 49 of which most are sawmills and small scale joinery or furniture factories. The other mills include one veneer slicing unit, one plywood mill and two particleboard factories. Besides these there is one tissue paper mill, one cardboard paper mill and one match factory. The locations of the main wood industry units are given in Map 2. The division of big mill complexes into smaller units for privatization caused an increase in the number of wood working enterprises. The number of enterprises has increased also through new companies established by private capital. The number of employees has decreased rapidly in forest industry after the restructuring and privatization program was started. During the last three years the number of employees has come down from 10,500 people to about 7,000 people. The number wood working units employees given in Table 3.
Table 3 - Number of Wood Working Units and Their Employees
item
units
employees
There is substantial difference between the operations of privatized companies and the new private enterprises established after the year 1990. One reason for the difference is that the privatized companies have still as a burden the old operating systems of the centrally planned economy. It takes time to reorganize the management, labour force and operations of the companies to cope with the market economy. The new private enterprises seem to have better organized management and operations than the privatized companies. The condition of private companies seems to be better financially as well as technically. These companies also achieve better productivity and product quality than the privatized companies. The production of main forest industry products in 1990-1994 is given in Table 4.
Table 4 - Production of Main Forest Industry
item
unit
Sawnwood
1000 cubic metre
Plywood
1000 cubic metre
Particleboard
1000 cubic metre
Windows and doors
1000 cubic metre
Furniture
Million T
Matches
Mill boxes
Cardboard
t
The consumption of industrial forest products per capita in Mongolia is very low. The consumption of sawnwood, which is the main industrial forest product, was 0.04 cubic metre per capita in 1994 while the average consumption in Europe is far higher. The consumption of other products such as plywood or particleboard is also low. The current economic situation in the country has hit hard the building industry which is one of the main consumers of wood products. Low contraction activity has a direct effect to the demand of forest products especially when the export of the products is small compared to the available production capacity.
3.4 Export and import of Processed Wood Products
The landlocked position of the country and the transport /transit problems are an obstacle to foreign trade, and the forest industry serves mainly home markets. Some trade, anyway, is existing. Previously the Soviet Union used to be the main trading partner, but recently Chine has taken its place as distension for export.
After the export of roundwood was banned in the beginning of 1995, the only export product, by volume and value, has been sawnwood.
The export volume of sawnwood was over 120,000 cubic metres in the middle of the 1980s, and declined to average level of 80,000 cubic metres a towards the end of the decade and in the beginning of the 1990s. In 1994 the export dropped down to 46,000 cubic metres.
The import of wood-based products consists of paper and wood-based panels which are currently not produced in the country. Some furniture is imported too. The import volumes of panels for construction or furniture manufacturing are rather small compared with the previously produced volumes. There is a big demand for imported products but high transportation costs and inflation in the country strongly limits the imports to the most critical needs and to some luxury furniture. The volumes and values of export and import of wood industry commodities are presented in Tables 5-6.
Table 5 - Export Volumes and Values of Fores