<section>b</section>
ANNEX III
Applications of Biotechnology Relevant to the CGIAR Mission
References
Applications of Biotechnology Relevant to the CGIAR Mission
1. Introduction
Some donors suggested that the Panel's report should not only analyze the issues for decision-makers, but should also be informative for the layman. This Annex has been prepared with the second of these requests in mind but makes no attempt to cover the whole spectrum of possible applications. It elaborates some of the statements made elsewhere in the report and provides a few specific examples of relevant biotechnological applications.
Some of those who responded to the Panel's questions on present and future contributions of biotechnology (see Annex II), did so primarily in relation to improved products (such as drought tolerant plants), rather than to new techniques that can be used in their development (such as marker assisted selection). The Panel has not attempted to forecast in detail what improved products are likely to emerge as a result of greater CGIAR investment in biotechnology. Rather, it has focused on the technology that will increasingly become available for accelerating the development of improved products, and on the steps that will be needed for such technology to become readily available for use by the Centres and the developing countries they serve.
2. Genomics, Synteny and Bioinformatics
Molecular biology is providing new insights into the structure of the genome at an exponential rate of growth. Such studies and the knowledge they generate are broadly referred to as "genomics".
The term "synteny" was originally applied to genes presumed, from the results of marker analysis, to occur on the same chromosome. More recently, however, the term has been used in the same sense as "collinearity of genetic maps" to mean the similarity in the order of genes that occurs along chromosome segments over a wide range of organisms.
The insights provided by genomics have been likened to the understanding of hieroglyphics provided by studies of the Rosetta stone. Thus, knowledge of the mouse genome, for example, provides valuable information on the human genome, while more closely related organisms, such as rice and wheat, show remarkable similarities in gene organisation, sequence and function. It follows that, because of genomic synteny, there is enormous potential for sharing and exchanging information across a wide range of organisations and individuals working on different organisms. The computerised accumulation and interpretation of this knowledge has acquired the new name of "bioinformatics".
3. The Relevance of Genomics
Just as classical genetics provides indirect knowledge of whether genes are linked or inherited independently, so genomics provides direct information on the sequence, function, activity, position and grouping of genes on the chromosome. The techniques of molecular biology and genetics that have evolved since the dawn of the recombinant DNA era have given rise to systematic, high throughput, whole-genome sequencing and associated activities, such as the development of molecular markers for detecting the presence of genes or groups of genes, directly or by genetic linkage.
The future will see substantial reductions in cost and increased speed of large-scale sequencing through automation, robotics and, eventually, microarray chip-based techniques. These offer the prospect of capturing vast amounts of genomic information on a single chip and using it to determine how the activity of each and every gene varies with the environment and genetic background.
Once the complete catalogue of all genes in a plant has been determined (year 2000) then it will be relatively simple to find the equivalent gene in any plant. Similarly, the sequence of the human genome will lead to relatively rapid identification of genes in the principal farm animals. Once a gene has been shown to play a role in controlling a trait in one species, it will be straightforward to investigate the equivalent trait in another species. The development of such activities is already accelerating and the Centres need to remain aware of the new opportunities that are constantly emerging.
4. Gene Transfer
Improvements in the technology required to design genes, insert them into plant cells and regenerate transformed, fertile plants, continue to be made, even for the more difficult crops such as wheat and maize. However, many of the orphan crops of critical importance to the CGIAR remain to be transformed efficiently and some general problems associated with the expression of inserted genes remain to be solved. Nevertheless, the recent commercial introduction of transgenic crops gives grounds for supposing that such problems will eventually be solved.
Although arguments have been raised against the release of transgenic crops, in many cases there is no reason why, ultimately, they should present a greater hazard to the environment than varieties produced as a result of classical hybridisation techniques. Perceived dangers, such as the use of antibiotic markers to select transformed cells, will be overcome by improved methods already in the pipeline.
The extent to which transgenic crops are now entering agriculture is illustrated by the following table extracted from ISAAA Briefs (1997), and by Annex IV.
Traits already Commercialised in Field Trials, and under Development for Selected Crops, 1997
Crop
Traits already commercialised
Traits in Field Trials/Development
Canola
1. Herbicide Tolerance
1. Improved disease resistance
2. Hybrid technology
2. Other oil modifications
3. Hybrid technology and herbicide tolerance
4. High lauric acid
Corn
1. Control of Corn-Borer
1. Control of Asian Corn-Borer
2. Herbicide tolerance
2. Control of Corn Rootwonn
3. Insect protected/herbicide tolerance
3. Disease resistance
4. Hybrid technology
4. Higher starch content
5. Hybrid/herbicide tolerance
5. Modified starch content
6. High lysine
7. Improved protein
8. Resistance to storage grain pests
9. Apomixis
Cotton
1. Bollworm control with single genes
1. Bollworm control with multiple genes
2. Herbicide resistance
2. Control of Boll Weevil
3. Insect protected/herbicide tolerance
3. Improved fibre/staple quality
4. Disease resistance
Potato
1. Resistance to Colorado Beetle
1. Resistance to Colorado Beetle + virus
2. Multiple Virus resistance (PVX, PVY, PLRV)
3. Fungal disease resistance
4. Higher starch/solids
5. Resistance to potato weevil/storage pests
Rice
1. Resistance to bacterial blight
2. Resistance to rice-borers
3. Fungal disease resistance
4. Improved hybrid technology
5. Resistance to storage pests
6. Herbicide tolerance
Soybean
1. Herbicide tolerance
1. Modified oil
2. High oleic acid
2. Insect resistance
3. Virus resistance
Tomato
1. Delayed/Improved ripening
1. Virus resistance
2. Insect resistance
3. Disease resistance
4. Quality/high solids
Vegetables & Fruits
1. Virus resistance
1. Insect resistance
2. Delayed ripening
Source: Clive James, 1997, Global Status of Transgenic Crops, ISAAA Briefs 5
A few transgenic farm animals have been produced but it will be some time before this technology is suitable for widespread use.
5. Applications to Germplasm Improvement
Knowledge of the genome enables molecular markers to be developed. Breeders make progress through selection among varying genotypes often based, during the early stages of selection, primarily on phenotypic differences. At best, they can only estimate the genotypic variation, using the results of replicated progeny tests. However, molecular markers permit direct assessment of genotypic variation and they can be used to detect the presence of both single genes and polygenic complexes. This applies whether the genes are dominant or recessive. Moreover they can be used at the juvenile stage, such as seedlings, to detect genes that are not expressed until maturity. Provided the marker techniques are reliable and can be applied on a large enough scale, they provide valuable tools for the plant breeder and accelerate selection processes. They are also extremely helpful in characterising germplasm collections (see below).
Numerous examples of how the tools of biotechnology are being used to improve crop varieties, have been given above and in Annex IV. In addition the following have been selected simply to give a few examples of the types of approach that are now possible across a wide range of crops and problems.
(a) Recognition of Valuable Genes and Marker Assisted Selection
The rapid break-down of single gene resistance through changes in the pathogen is well known. Its consequences are loss of yield, which can be avoided only through the use fungicides that may not be accessible to the poor. In the past, some progress has been made towards achieving "durable" resistance by breeding two or more resistance genes into the same variety, through prolonged schemes of crossing and selection. However, biotechnology gives new impetus to such approaches. Insights into the genomics of both host and pathogen are providing greater understanding of host-pathogen interactions which, together with techniques such as marker assisted selection, are providing new strategies for building multigenic resistance into crop plants.
For example, recent work on rice blast disease by CIAT scientists and their collaborators has focused on genes resistant to "lineages" of pathotypes rather than on those resistant to specific isolates, as revealed by traditional pathotype analysis. Biotechnology has provided ways of defining the genetic organization and distribution of diversity in the pathogen and has facilitated the incorporation of appropriate resistance genes into breeding lines. Such a strategy for attacking a formerly intractable problem could have wide application to other crops and diseases.
(b) Production of Transgenics
Although rice is the world's most important food crop, it is not a good source of vitamins or iron. Vitamin A deficiency is a serious problem in many rice dependent poor populations, with children who are weaned on rice gruel at particularly high risk. The carotenoid biosynthetic pathway is now well understood and genes for all steps have been cloned from plants and microbes. It is now possible to manipulate the pathway in rice through genetic engineering with the objective of increasing the beta carotene content of the grain. Similar approaches could be applied to other crops in which the harvested product is deficient in vitamin A.
Another example of nutritional improvement relates to the iron. Several different strategies are being pursued for increasing the bio-available iron in rice. The most advanced involves adding the gene for a protein such as ferritin which accumulates iron and makes it available. It has been shown that rice seeds transformed with a ferritin gene from soybean store up to three times more iron than normal seeds. Other strategies focus on phytate, a derivative of phytic acid, which binds iron in a non bio-available form. It may well be possible to reduce the phytate content in the grain or to introduce the gene for phytase which breaks down the phytate and releases iron in an available form.
(c) Rhizomania-resistant Sugarbeet
Although sugar beet does not feature strongly in the agriculture of developing countries, recent work on Rhizomania provides a good example of the application of molecular techniques to breeding for resistance to a disease in which expression is strongly influenced by the environment.
Rhizomania (root madness or bearded root) is a destructive disease of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) caused by the beet necrotic yellow vein virus whose vector is a soil borne fungus. Rhizomania is widespread in the temperate regions of Europe and Asia and occurs in USA. The disease causes losses as high as 80% in some parts of Europe and reductions of 20-50% in sugar yield and juice purity are common in infested fields. Viruliferous resting spores of the vector have been reported to survive in uncultivated fields for as long as 15 years. No chemical control of the virus is possible.
Breeding for resistance to Rhizomania began in the eighties when a single source of tolerance to the virus was discovered. Tolerance was weakly expressed and the trait was found to be inherited through many genes. The level of tolerance was difficult to maintain when introducing it into the then elite lines. Early recognition of the environmental hazards of using fungicides and the then intractable nature of breeding for high levels of tolerance led Kleinwanzlebener Saatzucht (KWS) to mount a two-pronged effort, one through conventional breeding methods and the other through molecular approaches, to search for a means to introduce Rhizomania resistance into sugarbeet. Both methods have since yielded results.
New sources with higher levels of tolerance found later were used successfully to introduce, through backcrossing, Rhizomania tolerance into elite varieties. These varieties suffer no significant damage when the crop is attacked by the virus. However, they do not inhibit virus replication. With the development of molecular techniques, investigations showed that plants expressing viral coat protein genes interfere with the multiplication of this virus. A viral gene that synthesizes the beet necrotic yellow vein virus coat protein and inhibits its replication has been successfully incorporated into sugarbeet. Transgenic sugarbeet now offers cross protection against Rhizomania. These transformants compare well with the results of classically bred sugarbeet hybrids for plant growth and yield. Early tests have shown that hybrids that combine transgenic resistance and classical tolerance perform better than current classically bred Rhizomania-resistant varieties under heavy
infection.
The basis for Rhizomania-resistance breeding at KWS was and continues to be the identification of genetic sources of high level resistance that can be inherited easily, an efficient selection for resistance which includes both screening methods and marker-aided selection, and short breeding cycles. Through the use of various kinds of molecular markers closely linked to the Rhizomania resistance genes, screening for the presence of the gene and fingerprinting parental genotypes is achieved. Conventional breeding techniques combined with biotechnological ones offer an efficient means to produce Rhizomania-resistant varieties that have high yield and sugar content.
Biosafety aspects related to the release of transgenic sugarbeet have been investigated by independent agencies. No negative effects have been reported.
6. Applications to Germplasm Banks
Genomic knowledge is fundamental to the classification and utilisation of germplasm collections. Without such knowledge, germplasm banks have been likened to "stamp collections" which spend most of their time in unopened albums. Over the next few years, there will be major technical advances that will facilitate the automated screening of chromosomal segments in large numbers of samples.
Molecular genetics also opens up entirely new avenues for the transfer of desirable genes from germplasm accessions to advanced cultivars, through transformation and marker assisted selection. Recent work has shown that, as well as providing genes for resistance to pests and diseases, primitive ancestors of crop plants also contain genes, not present in advanced cultivars, that can enhance yield and quality. These can be recognised through molecular assays.
In this general context, IPGRI comments on the rapid technical advances in gene transfer, in-vitro conservation and diversity analysis. Key technologies include cryopreservation and artificial seed development, as well as a range of molecular genetic methods. Further advances in sequencing technologies and in chip-based analyses are likely to be of considerable significance in the analysis of diversity and in determining useful traits. Other important applications relate to the rationalisation of germplasm management, such as the identification of duplicate samples within and between collections, as well as the development of core collections.
7. Applications to Agroforestry
The following outline is based on information supplied by ICRAF.
An important aspect of agroforestry is the domestication of tree species, in contrast to the unsustainable exploitation that has typified their use in the past. Some 2,500 tree species are known to be used in agroforestry systems in one way or another, making it essential to focus on a few carefully chosen species. The large number of species involved is only one of several ways in which the problems of agroforestry differ from those of crop productivity.
ICRAF does not see biotechnology as being amongst its top priorities in the immediate future but recognises the potential for biotechnology to contribute to certain specific problems.
For example, most trees are outbreeding and heterozygous and also have a prolonged generation time. The most useful techniques in the foreseeable future are likely to be molecular markers for selection at the juvenile stage, methods for the large-scale multiplication of selected trees, such as by cloning or apomixis, and techniques for inducing flowering to shorten the generation cycle.
8. Applications to Livestock Improvement
ILRI points out that, in considering the future exploitation of biotechnology for livestock research and development, it is important to note the major differences between livestock and plants. Many aspects of biotechnology that are relevant to crop improvement also apply to livestock improvement. These include genome analysis, molecular genetics and marker assisted selection. These techniques are even more beneficial in livestock improvement, however, because the generation time for livestock is generally longer than in crops, the number of offspring per generation is relatively small and the consequent cost of breeding programmes is high.
Other important applications to livestock improvement include a wide range of diagnostic techniques, vaccines and new drug technologies, as well as transfection/transgenics for livestock, forages and rumen micro-organisms.
9. Applications to Aquatic Organisms
The following outline of applications of biotechnology to aquatic organisms has been condensed from information provided by ICLARM.
ICLARM draws attention to the growing importance of molecular markers for biodiversity research, genome mapping and trait selection in fish and other aquatic organisms. International groups are already collaborating on genetic maps of tilapia and common carp (of most direct relevance to ICLARM) as well as maps for salmonids, cattish, zebrafish and pufferfish. Maps for commercially important invertebrate species including shrimp and oysters are being initiated.
ICLARM is not currently working on transgenesis, but several other institutes and companies in the fisheries and aquaculture sectors are conducting such research on various species including tilapia. It is anticipated that there will be an increase in the number of species and strains into which genes are introgressed, and the number of gene constructs available for transgenesis (governing biological functions in addition to growth) will also be increased. Transgenesis may become a cost effective means of enhancing indigenous species important to one or a few countries and not covered by international breeding efforts.
Sex manipulation (e.g. the production of all male populations of fish, especially tilapia) is also an active area of research, designed to avoid the detrimental production effects of early maturation and cessation of growth. In carp species, however, all-female populations are required and are being requested by developing countries. It is also anticipated that sex reversal will be used more widely in breeding programmes to increase the speed of production of inbred lines. Haploid fish will be important for similar reasons.
A wide range of diagnostic techniques is being developed for applications such as disease diagnosis, sexing of juvenile fish and for assessing progeny relationships in large populations of fish raised together to reduce environment-specific variations in production. Other techniques include tissue culture, or other manipulations of embryos or embryonic cells, for the isolation of viruses, bacteria and fungi pathogenic to fish.
10. Additional Information
To supplement the information in this Annex, the reader might wish to refer to some of the earlier reports and publications that cover relevant biotechnology in the context of developing countries. Among these, a paper by Gary Toenniessen (1995) and two reports edited by Gabrielle Persley (1990) are particularly informative in the context of this report. Other reports are mentioned in the introduction to the main text.
References
Persley, G. J. (ed.) (1990a). Agricultural Biotechnology: Opportunities for International Development. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Persley, G. J. (1990b). Beyond Mendel's Garden: Biotechnology in the Service of World Agriculture. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Toenniessen, G. H. (1995). Plant Biotechnology and Developing Countries. TIBTECH 13, James, C. (1997). Global Status of Transgenic Crops in 1997. ISAAA Briefs 5.
<section>c</section>
ANNEX IV
Executive Summary of Global Status of Transgenic Crops in 1997
Executive Summary of Global Status of Transgenic Crops in 1997
C. James
Excerpts from ISAAA Briefs 5, 1997
Transgenic Field Trials 1986-1997
During the twelve years period 1986 to 1997, approximately 25,000 transgenic crop field trials were conducted globally on more than 60 crops with 10 traits in 45 countries. Of this a total of 25,000 tests, 15,000 field trials (60 percent) were conducted during the first ten year period, 1986 to 1995, and 10,000 (40 percent) in the last two year period, 1996-1997. Seventy-two percent of all the transgenic crop field trials were conducted in the USA and Canada followed in descending order by Europe, Latin America and Asia, with the few conducted in Africa limited to South Africa. The most frequent crops featuring in transgenic crop field trials during the period were corn, tomato, soybean, canola, potato, and cotton. The most frequent traits were herbicide tolerance, insect resistance, product quality and virus resistance.
It is noteworthy that 25,000 transgenic crop trials were conducted without encountering any significant constraints that did not lend themselves for successful and responsible management during experimentation at the field level. This reflects well on regulators and experimenters who worked together effectively to conduct and manage 25,000 trials in a responsible manner and ensured that the results were communicated in a transparent mode and open for scrutiny and discussion by the scientific community and the lay public. The continued sharing of information from transgenic crop trials and their performance during commercial deployment is important and will contribute to a better understanding of transgenic crops and enhance public acceptance of products that can make a critical contribution to future global food security. As of year-end 1997, 48 transgenic crop products, involving 12 crops and 6 traits, were approved for commercialization in at least one country by 22
proprietors of technology, of which 20 were private sector corporations.
1996 Commercialized Transgenic Crops
The People's Republic of China was the first country to commercialize transgenics in the early 1990s with the introduction of virus resistant tobacco, which was later followed by a virus resistant tomato. In 1994, Calgene obtained the first approval in the USA to commercialize a genetically modified food product, when the company marketed its Flavr Savrä delayed ripening tomato. By 1996, approximately 2.8 million hectares of 7 principal transgenic crops were grown commercially on a significant area in the following 6 countries, listed in descending order of area planted with transgenics: USA, China, Canada, Argentina, Australia and Mexico.
In 1996, on a global basis, 57 percent of the area of transgenic crop was grown in the industrial countries and 43 percent in the developing countries. USA grew most of the transgenic crops, equivalent to 1.5 million hectares (51 percent), followed by China, 1.1 million hectares (39 percent), with Canada and Argentina at the same level of 0.1 million hectares (4 percent), and the balance in Australia (1 percent) and Mexico (1 percent).
In 1996, the principal transgenic crop grown was tobacco which accounted for 35 percent (equivalent to 1.0 million hectares) of the global area, followed by cotton (27 percent) on 0.8 million hectares, and soybean 18 percent (0.5 million hectares); the balance of 20 percent was made up of corn (10 percent), canola (5 percent), tomato (4 percent), with less than 1 percent of global transgenic area occupied by potatoes.
By trait, virus resistance accounted for 40 percent of the 1996 acreage of transgenic crops, followed by insect resistance, synonymous with insect-protected (37 percent), herbicide tolerance (23 percent), with quality traits accounting for less than 1 percent.
1997 Commercialized Transgenic Crops
In 1997, the global area of transgenics increased 4.5 fold from 2.8 million hectares in 1996 to 12.8 million hectares with 7 crops grown in 6 countries, as in 1996, with 48 transgenic crop products approved in at least one country. The countries listed in descending order of area of transgenic crops were: the USA, with 8.1 million hectares representing 64 percent of the global acreage with transgenic crops, China with 1.8 million hectares equivalent to 14 percent, Argentina with 1.4 million hectares representing 11 percent of global acreage, Canada with 1.3 million hectares representing 10 percent of global area and Australia (50,000 hectares) and Mexico, 30,000 hectares, both representing less than 1 percent of the global acreage with transgenic crops.
On a global basis, the proportion of acreage with transgenic crops grown in industrial countries increased from 57 percent in 1996 to 75 percent in 1997, and it decreased accordingly in developing countries from 43 percent in 1996 to 25 percent in 1997. The largest expansion in area of transgenic crops in 1997 occurred in the USA (6.7 million hectares) where the increase was more than fivefold (5.6) the 1996 levels, followed by Argentina (1.3 million hectares) where there was a 13 fold increase, and Canada with an increase of 1.3 million hectares, representing a 9.2 fold increase. The USA continued to be the principal grower of transgenic crops in 1997 and its share of global acreage planted to transgenic crops increased from 51 percent in 1996 to 64 percent in 1997, equivalent to 8.1 million hectares. Whereas China, in 1997, still retained its 1996 ranking as the country with the second largest area, its percentage of global acreage of transgenic crops decreased sharply
from 39 percent in 1996 to 14 percent in 1997. Argentina's area of transgenic crops increased from 4 percent of global area in 1996 to 11 percent in 1997, and similarly Canada expanded its share from 4 percent to 10 percent,
There were also significant changes in the absolute and relative area occupied by the 7 transgenic crops in 1996 and 1997. Transgenic soybean ranked first in 1997, accounting for 40 percent of global acreage sown to transgenic crops, and replaced tobacco (13 percent in 1997) which was the highest ranking crop in 1996 with 35 percent of the global area. Corn, which only ranked fourth in 1996 (10 percent of global area of transgenics) moved up to second position in 1997 with 3.2 million hectares, equivalent to 25 percent of the global area planted to transgenic crops. The share occupied by transgenic canola increased from 5 percent in 1996 to 10 percent in 1997, whereas the area of cotton decreased from 27 percent to 11 percent, and tomato fell also, from 4 percent to 1 percent.
The relative areas occupied by the four transgenic traits were also significantly different in 1996 and 1997. Herbicide tolerance, the third ranking trait in 1996 and occupying 23 percent of the area, in 1997 moved to the top ranking position with 54 percent of the global area. Insect resistance was fairly stable with 37 percent in 1996 and 31 percent in 1997, with virus resistance decreasing sharply from 40 percent in 1996 to 14 percent in 1997; quality traits occupied less than 1 percent in both 1996 and 1997.
Major Changes 1996 to 1997
Considering the global share of transgenics for the respective countries, crops and traits, the major changes between 1996 and 1997 were correlated with the following features: growth in area of transgenics between 1996 and 1997 in the industrial countries was significant and almost 4 times greater than in developing countries (7.9 million hectares versus 2.0 million hectares); soybean and corn contributed 75 percent of the global growth in transgenics between 1996 and 1997; herbicide tolerance was responsible for 63 percent (6.2 million hectares) of the global growth in transgenics between 1996 and 1997, with insect resistance contributing 30 percent and virus resistance only 7 percent.
The principal phenomena that influenced the change in absolute area of transgenic crops between 1996 and 1997 and the relative global share of different countries, crops and traits were: firstly, the enormous increase in 1997 of herbicide tolerant soybean in the USA and to a lesser extent in Argentina; secondly, the significant increase in 1997 of insect resistant corn in North America; and thirdly, the large increase of herbicide tolerant canola in Canada in 1997. Collectively, these three phenomena resulted in a global acreage in 1997 that was 4.5 times higher than 1996, and the relative importance of transgenic tobacco and tomato in China, which was significant in 1996, decreased markedly in 1997 in a global context. In 1997, transgenic soybean, corn, cotton and canola represented 86 percent of the global transgenic area, of which 75 percent was grown in North America with herbicide tolerant soybean being the most dominant transgenic crop followed by insect resistant corn
and herbicide tolerant canola.
Estimated Benefits from Transgenic Crops
More detailed information on the benefits associated with new transgenic crops will be available following a comprehensive analysis of 1997 data, when a substantial acreage of transgenics was planted globally. An initial assessment of the benefits from transgenic crops is reported here. Virus resistant tobacco in China increased leaf yield by 5 to 7 percent and resulted in savings of 2 to 3 insecticide applications. Insect resistant Bt cotton in the USA in 1996 resulted in insecticide savings, with 70 percent of Bt cotton planted in 1996 requiring no insecticides to control the targeted insect pest, and an average yield increase of 7 percent, this resulted in a net benefit of about US$ 80 per hectare for a total national benefit of US$ 60 million for the 730,000 hectares of Bt cotton in the USA in 1996.
Borer-resistant Bt corn in USA produced an average yield increase of 9 percent in 1996 and 1997. The benefits from the use of Bt corn on 285,000 hectares in the USA in 1996 were estimated at US$ 19 million and US$ 190 million for the 2.8 million hectares of Bt corn planted in 1997. About 50 percent of the 32 million hectares corn acreage in the USA, equivalent to 16 million hectares have been reported to be infested with European corn borer, with an estimated annual loss of US$ 1.0 billion.
In 1996, in the USA herbicide tolerant soybean resulted in 10 to 40 percent less herbicide requirements, improved yield dependability, no carry-over of herbicide residues, more flexibility in agronomic management and better control of weeds and soil moisture conservation.
In 1996, in Canada herbicide tolerant canola lowered herbicide requirements, increased yield by an average of 9 percent, with no carry-over of herbicide residues, more flexibility in agronomic management, and with a higher proportion of Grade #1 canola, i.e., 85 percent versus 63 percent, as well as better soil and moisture conservation. The benefits to Canada from the use of 125,000 hectares of herbicide tolerant canola in 1996 were estimated to be Can$ 6.0 million.
In 1996, in the USA insect resistant Bt potatoes resulted in effective control of Colorado beetle, with yield/quality benefits of US$ 34 and additonal insecticide savings of US$ 12, for a net benefit of US$ 46 per hectare. This translated to a total benefit of US$ 170,000 for the 3,650 hect