<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Report of the CGIAR Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology. SDR/TAC:IAR/98/7.1</title>
<section>1</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE REPORT OF THE CGIAR PANEL ON PROPRIETARY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
TAC is grateful to Timothy Roberts, Panel Chair, and to members of the Panel that prepared the report on the future role of the CGIAR in proprietary science and technology. The Committee particularly appreciates the wealth of synthesized information on the protection of intellectual property (IP) as it relates to the CGIAR and the broad spectrum of opinions reflected in the report. The report significantly advances our understanding of the issues confronting the CGIAR with respect to intellectual property rights (IPR).
TAC recognizes that the Panel's Terms of Reference were difficult to satisfy, given the diversity of views on the issues and the uncertainty of the legal environment. Against that background, TAC supports the recommendations made, but wishes that the Panel had reviewed more fully the advantages and disadvantages of various policy options.
In what follows, TAC first reaffirms specific areas of agreement, expands on some points made by the Panel, and then supplements aspects of the Panel's recommendations.
Reaffirming Panel Observations
The Panel made several observations aimed at setting a context for their recommendations:
· IPR will have an ever-stronger influence on the CGIAR's access to the IP of others (see below: Expanding on Panel Observations).
· IPR can be significant in managing the IP developed by the centers (both improved germplasm and enabling technologies) and in supporting center commitments for genetic resources held in trust (see Expanding...).
· The CGIAR must attend closely the evolution of international agreements on genetic resources, e.g., the obligations under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the International Undertaking for Plant Genetic Resources.
· In the future, other rights, which the Panel has called alternative rights regimes (e.g., farmers' rights and national sovereignty) may become dominant considerations for some classes of genetic resources.
· To manage effectively the three broad groups of material of concern to the CGIAR (that in trust; IP belonging to others, and IP developed by the centers) access to relevant legal and negotiating counsel is essential. (see below: Supplementing the Recommendations).
· CGIAR centers are now using biotechnology-based IP belonging to others (see Supplementing...).
· The CGIAR has an interim working document "Guiding Principles for CGIAR Centers on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources" which orients current work (see Supplementing...).
Expanding on Panel Observations
The Panel was charged to deal with proprietary science; it concentrated its attention on patents and plant variety protection. TAC accepts the idea that the CGIAR must be concerned with genetic resources held in trust, the IP developed by others, and the IP-developed by the centers; and that some situations will favor the application of legal rights to IP developed by centers. The Panel set out criteria which could guide the CGIAR in deciding about protecting intellectual property emerging from its work. These suggest several situations in which such protection might be conducive to attaining CGIAR goals:
· to assure ready access to the IP by others,
· to support public and private partnerships,
· to facilitate commercialization, utilization and technology transfer,
· to assure that center-developed IP might be traded for the protected IP of others, and
· to generate revenue
With respect to IP emerging from the work of the CGIAR, and where publishing is not thought to offer adequate protection, TAC joins the Panel in favoring the arguments for acquiring protection in three situations: access, partnerships, and technology transfer. TAC notes that establishing protection through patents is costly and that protecting rights claimed can entail heavy costs. TAC went on to consider arguments against claiming IPR for tradeables and for revenues. Three concerns were prominent. One was that encouragement in those areas might lead to the diversion of effort from the System's primary goals with relatively low probabilities of success (to judge by the success rates of others). The second was that such pursuits might threaten working relationships with primary partners in the south. The third was that the economic surpluses on which revenues would be based might better be transferred to producers and consumers than to the CGIAR.
TAC's conclusion, like that of the Panel, is that center research and development should not be undertaken explicitly for the purpose of generating IP for trade or for revenue. Even so, and recognizing that such circumstances will be exceptional, center research aimed explicitly at CGIAR goals might lead to IP that could be traded or could generate income, were it protected. In such cases, and where publishing does not offer adequate protection, TAC believes CGIAR policy should permit an assessment of patenting while assuring that advantages and disadvantages (e.g., see above) are accounted for.
Like the Panel, TAC did not discuss in detail the arguments some make about ethical issues, following the Group's MTM97 suggestion to look to the findings of the Genetic Resources Policy Committee (GRPC). TAC did, however, note that, for the CGIAR, the ethics of the case for IPR are rooted in the CGIAR's people-centered strategies for poverty alleviation. TAC notes that biosafety, another theme of abiding concern in the biotechnology arena, is treated in its commentary on the findings of the General Biotechnology Panel.
Supplementing Panel Recommendations
TAC supports much of the first recommendation, especially the need to base policy on the goals of the CGIAR. TAC believes that the recommendation should be expanded to include:
1. more emphasis on the need to take into account commitments made by the CGIAR to duties that will emerge from the implementation of international agreements, e.g., CBD, dealing with genetic resources;
2. more emphasis on the need for all decisions about protection for CGIAR - developed IP to be made on a case-by-case basis;
3. the possibility to decide about protection for IP developed in direct pursuit of CGIAR goals but seen to further CGIAR goals if used to trade for the protected IP of others or for revenue.
In the case where revenues ensue from CGIAR IP, TAC's view is that such revenues (net of the costs centers incur in obtaining protection) should be assigned to a freestanding agency, e.g., a foundation, whose objective would be to ensure that obligations emerging from international agreements are met and to support research consistent with CGIAR goals.
In deciding about protection for center-developed IP:
1. Decisions should be decentralized to centers.
2. Center decision-making should be strongly supported by expert legal and negotiating counsel, especially that provided by a centralized service (see below), in addition to whatever expertise centers access directly.
3. For all such decisions, the underlying logic should be made transparent.
TAC supports the Panel's second recommendation, notes the urgency of the matter, and notes that the experience gained from reviewing and normalizing present CGIAR use of the IP of others will help the CGIAR to assess its future options and policies. TAC favors more emphasis on the management of legal and negotiating expertise for dealing with others whose IP is of interest to the CGIAR, for the IP emerging from the CGIAR efforts, and/or for materials in trust.
With respect to the third recommendation. TAC agrees with the points made there. Moreover, TAC notes the tentative tone of the present "Guiding Principles..." and wonders if events during the years since its first drafting do not favor a more positive view about the role of IP and a more neutral view about IPR as the CGIAR pursues its goals. The CGIAR will carry out its mandate in a world in which proprietary claims are evolving rapidly; to perform effectively for the poor will require great sensitivity to the issues and opportunities emerging from intellectual property.
Beyond this, given its understanding about the concerns of others, TAC recommends a review of circumstances under which the use of material transfer agreements (as required by the agreements with FAO about genetic resources held in trust) will ensure that access to the original genetic resources (as distinct from products derived from those materials, e.g., improved varieties or isolated and assayed genes) held in trust can be maintained in the public domain and readily available to all. TAC recognizes that cross-cutting concerns will emerge as international treaties incorporating national sovereignty and farmers' rights are implemented (e.g., CBD), and that CGIAR policy must be reviewed in the light of such concerns.
<section>2</section>
Executive Summary
Introduction
Increasingly knowledge, and its application, is becoming proprietary. This impacts on all research and development. The CGIAR has always aimed to produce-international public goods, available freely for all to use. How should the system respond to these changes in the management and application of knowledge?
Proprietary rights, in agricultural biotechnology and equally in germplasm are being claimed by both private firms and public institutions. They include patent rights; plant variety rights; and contractual rights arising from material transfer agreements (MTAs). There are also other rights, as yet not so clearly defined as intellectual property: obligations imposed (or to be imposed) by the CBD; Farmers' Rights; and traditional resource rights. We term these "alternative rights regimes".
Our Panel, to advise on these matters, was deliberately constituted with a range of expertise and viewpoints. Because our views differ strongly, we can neither endorse the current systems of rights nor oppose them. The same goes for biotechnology: generally, or in specific applications. But we have been able to agree on some practical steps that the Centres should now take.
The Panel's Work
Our mandate assumes that Centres may want to use at least some proprietary technology. To find out more, we made some brief surveys
· To what extent are CGIAR mandated crops already affected by proprietary claims? We surveyed the broad pattern of trade in harvested crops between developed and developing countries.
· What are Centres doing already? We polled seven of the Centres about their detailed use of proprietary science.
· Will owners make their proprietary science available? We asked some owners of proprietary agricultural biotechnology (private companies and universities) about their willingness to license their technology to the CGIAR and its clients.
Proprietary Science of Others
We are concerned by the results of our poll of Centres. In nearly half the cases in which the Centres were using proprietary biotechnology, they were uncertain whether the results of their research could be applied freely (or at all). In such cases, the process or product used was believed covered by a patent, in at least some countries: or material (germplasm or vectors) used had been obtained under an MTA for research use only. Use by the Centres' clients of the results of such research may only be possible with the permission of the owners of the technology, in such countries and under such conditions as they allow. Without such permission, the Centres, or their clients, may be sued.
These cases need professional investigation, to check if there is a problem and to help resolve it. Even if their own actions are lawful, Centres cannot release material which may be subject to constraints on use without, as a minimum, warning recipients fully of possible problems. Also, lack of experience in IP hinders the Centres in obtaining access to proprietary technology. Centres must have access to skilled professional advice on intellectual property: we recommend setting up a central function to offer this service. This will be a significant expense.
Access to Proprietary Science
Will owners of intellectual property be prepared to make it available for the use of the poor? In our very limited survey, they said they would. We cannot take this encouraging response at face value. Owners will hardly act against their own interests. However, some factors give hope. There are reasons why owners may benefit from licensing their technology, even at no cost (demonstration of the technology, creation of demand, provoking introduction of regulations, development of partnerships). Owners will not license, however, where losing control of the technology damages them, technically or financially. Ability to segment markets is crucial. The CGIAR cannot hope to acquire rights to technology for use on behalf of the poor, if the resulting products then compete in commercial markets, forcing prices down.
Proprietary Science of Centres
The Agreements between FAO and the CGIAR oblige Centres to exclude intellectual property protection over "in trust" germplasm, so no question arises about this. However, developments may, and sometimes should, be protected. The overriding principle here is that such protection should only be applied for if it furthers the mission of the CGIAR, and subject to the proviso that such developments must be accessible, and if possible delivered, to the poor.
Subject to this overriding requirement, there are several situations in which protection might be appropriate. We discuss these. We do not believe that generating income should ever be the main reason for seeking protection. Some of us believe that it will sometimes be appropriate to protect 'bargaining chips'.
After discussing the appropriate IP policy for Centres, we reviewed the existing policy. Most of us find it broadly in line with our conclusions, though with some differences in emphasis.
Organisation
We suggest how the CGIAR centres should organise themselves to receive intellectual property advice from a central IP function. The long-term aim will be to develop complementary expertise in individual Centres. The central function must report at a high level, to give it support for implementing difficult decisions.
Implications
We have not been able to reach consensus about implications of our findings. We list some options. Some think that the CGIAR system should seek to influence policy at world level. In TRIPs and the CBD the needs of poverty alleviation, food production, food security, and the conservation of agricultural biodiversity may not get the emphasis they deserve. The CGIAR should be a voice for agriculture, and a voice for the poor. Others doubt whether the CGIAR can reach persuasive conclusions on policies to be followed, and are concerned that such intervention may damage the CGIAR's ability to give the poor technical help.
<section>3</section>
Recommendations
1. In dealing with proprietary science, the CGIAR must be guided by its mission. How it advances the mission will determine the need for:
· Access to the proprietary science of others;
· Protection of the CGIAR's developments;
· Preventing misappropriation by others of CGIAR material held in trust;
· Selection and design of research programs.
Above all, research and development should never be undertaken as part of a strategy to, or simply in the hope that it will, generate either cash to support CGIAR work, or bargaining chips for acquiring rights to technology from others. On protection, Panel members are divided: some would never approve seeking protection primarily to produce bargaining chips, while others would find it appropriate in certain situations.
2. The CGIAR must promptly acquire relevant expertise to enable it to deal confidently with technology transfer, intellectual property and alternative rights regimes. It should, as a minimum, set up a central office to deal with such matters, with a manager reporting at high level. An immediate review of current proprietary science used by the Centres should be undertaken, so that any irregular situations can be put right as appropriate. It is needed to ensure that the Centres can deliver to clients the benefits of the research they undertake.
3. The Centres' existing Guiding Principles on IP should be revised, formalised and enforced. Most of the Panel is reasonably happy with the existing Guidelines, having independently arrived at similar conclusions, but feels that some inaccuracies need to be corrected and some changes of emphasis made. In particular, decisions to seek IP protection should be governed by clear mission-based rules. Unless this is done. Centres will follow inappropriate and inconsistent policies, causing confusion, legal liability and loss.
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The Panel recognizes that its mandate is not to offer advice on whether or not the CGIAR ought to increase its use of proprietary technology or of biotechnology in general, nor is it to judge whether the current proliferation of intellectual property claim is beneficial or detrimental to the ultimate aims of the CGIAR. However, the Panel holds a range of views on these matters, and the various interpretations by different Panel members of the relationship of the CGIAR mandate to intellectual property and to biotechnology yield differing emphases with regard to recommendations about how the CGIAR ought to deal with intellectual property issues in agriculture. While some Panel members believe that the CGIAR can further its mission by helping to "break the taboo" against the use of intellectual property by public institutions, others feel equally strongly that the CGIAR's mission would be better served pointing out the dangers of the increasing use of intellectual property to
the poor, and to the ability of public and other institutions to cany out and deliver research that will benefit the poor
In spite of this wide divergence of views, the Panel has been able to reach consensus on a number of general points and practical conclusions.
<section>5</section>
2. SITUATION
For the purpose of this report, proprietary science means any process or product derived from scientific and research and development (R&D) activities that is legally owned or protected by intellectual property rights.
There are various established forms of intellectual property applied to scientific and research developments, and these may include patents, plant breeder's rights, trademarks, copyrights and trade secrets. There are also developing alternative rights regimes, including Farmers' Rights, traditional resource rights, sui generis property regimes at national and local levels, collective property rights, and systems for managing resource use and access that are not based on property rights. Some of these are not fully implemented, so that it is uncertain how they will work in practice: for example, the implications of the rights of the States to regulate access to their genetic resources and information are still being discussed by parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Others are not yet well defined: these include rights which are under negotiation in the process of the revision of the FAO International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (Farmers' Rights ^1). Both intellectual property rights and alternative rights regimes can potentially impact the way IARCs co-operate with national programmes and other partners in developing countries, and must be taken into account by the CGIAR system in developing policies and guidelines on this subject.
1 The concept of Farmers' Rights, as it is stated by FAO resolution 4/89, means "rights arising from the past, present and future contribution of farmers in conserving, improving, and making available plant genetic resources". There are many views on the true meaning of Farmers' Rights, and how to implement them.
The increased utilization of biotechnology and the strengthening and enforcement of intellectual property rights throughout the world have dramatically influenced the collaboration among research institutes in both nature and intensity. A recent survey among university scientists conducting projects funded by the private sector reveals that 12% of them reported that industry support generated a trade secret from their university research; 24% said that their results could not be published without the previous consent of the sponsor; 44% said that, at least to some extent, industry support undermines intellectual exchange; 70% said that, at least to some extent, such support shifts towards too much emphasis on applied research; and 30% admitted that the future commercial application had influenced the choice of research topics ^2.
2 Editorial. The Lancet 342 (8885), December 11, 1993
Research and development in biotechnology are now seen by some in the international scientific community to be important for the integration of both conventional and biotechnological breeding activities for food production. Data compiled by the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications (ISAAA)^3 show that during 1986 to 1997, approximately 25,000 transgenic crop field trials were conducted by 45 countries on more than 60 crops and 10 traits. Of this total, 15,000 field trials were conducted during the first 10 year period, and 10,000 in the last two years. The global acreage planted with transgenic crops has changed from 7.0 million in 1996 to 31.5 million in 1997. Main transgenic crops in terms of the 1997 acreage are soybean (40%), corn (25%), tobacco (13%), cotton (10%), canola (10%), tomato (1%) and potato (<1%). The most frequent traits being incorporated into plant varieties in the US are herbicide tolerance (30%), insect resistance (24%),
product quality (21%), viral resistance (10%) and fungal resistance (4%). Traits such as marker genes, selectable markers, bacterial resistance and nematode resistance accounted for the other 4% of applications. The significance of these trials is disputed: for some, they suggest that the technology is useful and safe, while others doubt their utility and are concerned that safety cannot be guaranteed and that environmental impacts are not fully understood.
3 James, C..1997. Global Status of Transgenic Crops in 1997. ISAAA Briefs N° 5. ISAAA: Ithaca, NY. 31 p.
Due to the changing intellectual property environment, the issue of Farmers' Rights, and the advancement of biotechnologies, the CGIAR at its ICW96 adopted a set of guiding principles on intellectual property and genetic resources for its Centres, for their use on an interim basis (see Appendix D-1). Among other principles, it is stated that "The Centres will not claim legal ownership nor apply intellectual property protection to the germplasm they hold in trust, and will require recipients of the germplasm to observe the same conditions, in accordance with the agreements signed with FAO" ^4. It is understood that, based on this principle, genetic resources accessions delivered by the Centres from their 'in trust' collections are to be sent to users under Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs) imposing such obligations: this practice appears to be followed in most, but not all, cases.
4 Hawtin, G and Reeves, T. 1997 Intellectual Property Rights and the Access to Genetic Resources in the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Paper presented to the workshop on Intellectual Property Rights III - Global Genetic Resources: Access and Property Rights. 4-6 June, 1997, Washington, D.C., USA.
In a series of informal interviews conducted for the Panel, private companies responded that the CGIAR should be a forum for discussion about IPR and public use issues on a world-wide basis, and it should bring the interests of the private sector into the discussions. The CGIAR Centres should continue to adapt technologies to regional needs and act as a technology conduit to access proprietary technologies. These private sector interviewees also believe that the role of the CGIAR will diminish unless ways are found to access proprietary technologies. However, they believe that as the Centres get involved in IPR and their enforcement, they should not try to become businesses but, rather, continue to serve the public interest. Another set of questions responded to by technology transfer officers at selected US land grant universities revealed that they are not aware of ever having received a request for proprietary materials from any CGIAR Centre. However, all acknowledged
that it is likely that there are direct scientist-to-scientist exchange of materials that occur informally. All these universities would be willing to make proprietary materials available to the centres under standard MTAs (i.e., limited to research use, no transfer to third parties, new inventions must be reported, and ownership is based on inventorship).
The use of biotechnology at selected CGIAR Centres was investigated by ISNAR in a study commissioned by this Panel ^5 The purpose of this study was three-fold: 1) to provide an assessment of the extent to which proprietary applications of biotechnology (technologies and materials) are being used at the IARCs; 2) to identify the potential legal implications regarding use of these proprietary technologies and materials, and 3) to provide a synthesis of findings and recommendations which stimulates further discussions. These technologies and materials were grouped according to their crop applications in cereals, non-cereals and other, and in eight categories as follows: transformation systems; promoter genes, insect-resistance genes, disease-resistance genes, selectable markers genes, genetic markers, diagnostic probes, and others.
5 Appendix C-1. ISNAR - The Use of Proprietary Biotechnology Research Inputs at Selected CGIAR Centres. Report of an ISNAR Study Commissioned by the CGIAR Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology.
The results, based on responses from seven IARCs ^6, show that some Centres are using "state-of-the-art" proprietary technology. A total of 166 applications of proprietary technologies being used were identified, according to the following: 45 selected markers (17 cereals, 26 non-cereals and 2 others), 35 promoters (18, 14 and 3), 29 transformation systems (12, 14 and 3), 19 insect-resistance genes (8, 11 and 0), 11 disease-resistance genes (6, 5 and 0), 10 genetic markers (4, 4 and 2), 3 diagnostic probes (0, 0 and 3), and 14 other applications (6, 6 and 2).
6 An essential condition for conducting the survey in a timely manner was the explicit guarantee of confidentiality. For that reason, IARCs are not identified in this report.
The majority of the categories of proprietary technology used by IARCs are protected by patents, though may be not in the countries where the CGIAR's clients operate. Concerning the permission for use, authorizations were mainly formalized by means of MTAs, licenses and sublicenses. It is worth mentioning that for nearly 40 research applications, the type of permissions were not known or lacking in the questionnaires. The survey also showed the need for immediate action by the IARCs to determine whether, and if so how, they need to revise or renegotiate licenses on the use of patents and other categories of protection. Also, where results are derived from proprietary science, some IARCs anticipate difficulties in dissemination, especially in the case of improved varieties or germplasm of mandate crops. Some Centres are also expecting to file for protection of new products. Examples are the potential patenting of an improved crop line with virus resistance; apomixis; and one
vaccine. In addition, licensing is being considered for 11 different types of diagnostic probes.
A preliminary analysis of trade flows (imports and exports) for CGIAR research crops showed relatively minor proportions of such crops being exported from developing to developed country markets. This indicates that, while there will be specific difficulties in particular cases, problems of intellectual property infringement (by crops protected in developed but not in developing countries) may generally not be too serious (and for some crops, non-existent). This could of course change in the future. ^7
7 Eran Binenbaum and Brian D. Wright. On the significance of South-North trade in IARC crops. Study commissioned by the Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology, CGIAR, 1998.
In conclusion, some Centres may be operating in a risky situation due to limited information and knowledge of IPR management and are in need of immediate IPR consultation for at least half of the technologies and materials identified. Also, Centres are relying primarily on MTAs generally issued for research purposes and not for development activities. Also, Centres are often unfamiliar with the implications of proprietary technologies regarding possibility for liability and implications for collaborative research.
<section>6</section>
3. RATIONALE
3.1 Access to Proprietary Science of Others
3.2. Intellectual Property Protection for the CGIAR Developments
The Panel has agreed that proprietary science can impact, positively or negatively, the effectiveness of the CGIAR in addressing its mission. Currently, most of these impacts are inhibiting its effectiveness. If properly managed proprietary science can provide benefits, otherwise opportunities are being missed.
3.1 Access to Proprietary Science of Others
Given the fact that the IARCs are already using proprietary technologies and materials in their research programmes, there are significant risks in not obtaining the rights to use these properties in applications important to the mission of the CGIAR. The primary risk of unauthorized use is not the threat of legal action against the IARCs, but rather the reluctance of intellectual property owners to share potentially useful properties with the Centres in the future. In order to obtain authorized access to such properties, the CGIAR will need expertise in the management of technology transfer and related intellectual property issues. Establishing such a function will require significant personnel and financial resources. This may require diversion of resources (money, staff, effort) from work more directly related to the CGIAR's mission. Further, to the extent that these activities would require such diversion, there is a risk that donors, partners and clients will object.
On the other hand, there are a number of potential advantages from the establishment of CGIAR expertise in managing issues relating to intellectual property rights and alternative rights regimes. Such expertise will assure that the CGIAR has an effective voice in international discussions concerning these issues where they affect the utilisation of genetic resources. It will also be helpful in maintaining good relationships with various institutional and private partners, by demonstrating that the CGIAR recognizes and respects the rights of these partners in the territories where they are entitled to such protection. Good working relationships with these partners will be key to obtaining future access to technologies and materials which may be important to the CGIAR mission. In the event that the CGIAR cannot obtain authorized access to specific rights or resources, the IARCs will avoid making research investments in the development of technologies and materials which they
cannot distribute. In the event that access to a specific resource is acquired for one centre, the CGIAR technology transfer staff should be able to negotiate for multi-centre access to that resource.
If and to the extent that the CGIAR centres decide to use proprietary science, the following recommendations can be made based on the findings of the ISNAR study and the Panel's discussions. There is a need to:
(i) Acknowledge the use of proprietary technologies and materials by the IARCs.
(ii) Review MTAs with regard to research, development and dissemination. There needs to be a system wide policy concerning MTAs with regard to their review and execution.
(iii) Provide legal advice now for those areas noted as needing immediate attention, and increase awareness of legal implications regarding improved materials and genetic resources for the CGIAR system.
(iv) Provide diverse expertise in intellectual property and alternative rights regimes for CGIAR centres.
(v) Rectify, where necessary, the current situation by either negotiating appropriate (preferably, multi-centre) access to proprietary scienc