<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Fourth External Review of CIMMYT (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research - CGIAR - SDR/TAC:IAR/97/9)</title>
<section>1</section>
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Donald Winkelmann, Chairman
17 April 1998
Dear Mr. Serageldin,
It is our pleasure to submit to you the report of the Fourth External Programme and Management Review of CIMMYT which was conducted recently by a Panel chaired by Dr. Graham Jenkins of the UK. The Review report and the CIMMYT response to it were considered by TAC at its 74th meeting held in Hyderabad in March 1998. The Panel Chair was present at the meeting, and CIMMYT was represented by the Board Chair and the Director General.
In addition to the Panel's report, there are two attachments to this letter. The first contains the TAC commentary, which summarises the Committee's reactions to the Panel's report and to the response of CIMMYT's Board and management; the second is CIMMYT's response to the review report.
We are pleased with the Panel's favourable Review of the Centre. The EPMR concludes that CIMMYT conducts high quality science, has an impressive record of achievements, and is well governed and managed. TAC supports the Centre's current emphasis on multi-commodity projects. It believes that CIMMYT's emphasis on biotechnology, economics and NRM research can be further exploited to generate increased synergy among its maize and wheat research projects; and that the Centre could further improve its internal priority-setting processes.
We are particularly pleased with the leadership role CIMMYT is playing in the management of intellectual property rights, given the importance of this topic for the System as a whole.
Mr. Ismail Serageldin
CGIAR Chair
World Bank
1818H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC, 20433
USA
355 E. Palace Avenue, Santa Fe, NM 87501 · (1-505) 988-1284 · FAX: (1-505) 988-1285
· tacwink@newmexico.com
We also note the comments made by CIMMYT on the implications of the CGIAR's new financing arrangements for Centre management and governance, and agree with these in general.
CIMMYT continues to be a high-return investment. We highly recommend that the CGIAR maintain its strong support of this flagship Centre.
Yours sincerely,
Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
Donald L. Winkelmann
TAC Chair
<section>2</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE FOURTH EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF CIMMYT
Overall Statement
TAC is grateful to the Chairman, Dr. Graham Jenkins, and Members of the CIMMYT Fourth External Programme and Management Review Panel for a comprehensive and constructive report. The Panel chose the 1993 IER as the starting point for this Review, considering that the last EPMR was conducted in 1988. The Committee notes with satisfaction the Panel's extremely favourable view of the Centre, that it conducts high quality science, has an impressive record of achievements, and is well governed and managed. TAC also notes the projections of high demand for maize and wheat in developing countries and the implications this has for the expansion of CIMMYT's work.
The Committee considers the organization of the Review to have been exemplary, and is satisfied that the Centre was given the opportunity to check factual aspects before the report was finalised. The report must be read in full because references to the same theme are in some cases found in different chapters and the many useful suggestions are not highlighted or grouped together in the text. In the course of planning future reviews, TAC will take into account the Panel's opinion on the use of consultants, and on the earlier interim and centre-commissioned external reviews.
TAC notes that the Panel made 20 recommendations, 17 of which have been endorsed by CIMMYT and action already taken in many cases. The three others were endorsed with qualification. TAC, in general, endorses the Panel's recommendations and offers the following additional commentary which was prepared with inputs from the CGIAR Secretariat.
Priority setting and Resource Allocation
The Review has suggested that priority setting processes be improved at CIMMYT, with better information provided to the Board and a more active role of the Economics Programme in this area. TAC encourages the Centre to clarify its priority setting procedure and looks forward to seeing the more explicit links between priorities and resource allocation, which CIMMYT is proposing to make.
Research Programme
· TAC strongly supports the Centre's transition from a programme- to a project-based approach to management, which was also encouraged by the Panel. It concurs with the Panel on the need to finalise the project write-ups and include precise and realistic milestones. The Committee particularly looks forward to seeing the synergies resulting through the projects from closer collaboration within CIMMYT in areas noted by the Panel including biotechnology, breeding, economics and natural resource management research.
· The Committee concurs with the Panel's recommendations that a global monitoring Programme for rusts be established by CIMMYT and that breeding strategies are developed to incorporate durable resistance traits. TAC notes that the Centre has made significant progress along these lines and that it is firmly committed to this goal which is essential to the sustainability of wheat.
· TAC is impressed by the leadership of CIMMYT in its move to incorporate biotechnological tools such as molecular markers, developed by the Applied Biotechnology Centre in its maize and wheat breeding programmes. TAC notes that such work on wheat lags that on maize and encourages CIMMYT to press further the integration of biotechnology in the Wheat Programme also.
Partnership with NARS
The Committee notes the Panel's observation that CIMMYT serves many audiences (e.g. NARS, host country, the scientific community, financial partners and the CGIAR System). It is recognized that CIMMYT has successfully involved NARS in the development and implementation of its research, training and networking programmes. TAC shares the Panel's concern that some weaker NARS will deserve special attention and support. The Committee is impressed by the role of CIMMYT's outreach staff, in the four regional locations, as excellent conduits between the regions and headquarters. TAC encourages CIMMYT to consider stronger NARS as full partners in the implementation of its activities, particularly in areas which NARS have a comparative advantage.
Training
TAC observed CIMMYT's initiative to expand its investment in training for 1998 and beyond. This would allow NARS scientists working on wheat and maize to gain cutting-edge knowledge in their specific disciplines and research interests. TAC urges CIMMYT to give special attention to specialist training to meet the growing needs of NARS in areas such as biotechnology, genetics, economic analysis of research, impact assessment methodologies, GIS and modelling for natural resource management.
Management
The Panel gave relatively little attention to the dramatic implications of domestic inflation and the rising value of the Mexican peso for the Centre's operation which, together with a simultaneous reduction in CGIAR funds, necessitated substantial downscaling and led to declines in staff morale in the recent past.
TAC notes with satisfaction the Panel's very favourable opinion of CIMMYT's management. The Committee fully agrees on the importance of optimising financial and information management and encourages CIMMYT to continue its efforts in these areas. TAC is particularly pleased that, in the Panel's view, CIMMYT shows strong leadership in the area of management of intellectual property rights, because of the current importance of the subject to the System as a whole.
Governance
In its response to the recommendations of the EPMR, CIMMYT has made observations regarding the implications of new finance arrangements in the CGIAR for the management and governance of the Centre. TAC has considered these observations with great interest and agrees with them in general. Active involvement of the Board in formulation of strategy and priorities is essential to provide the framework within which management would have greater operational flexibility. Board performance should be considered in the light of these funding realities. TAC commends CIMMYT's Board of Trustees for already responding positively to the Panel's recommendations on its operation.
Monitoring Progress
TAC concurs with the Panel that it is too early to assess the effectiveness of the new project-based approach to research management and endorses the Panel's recommendation that a CCER be conducted by mid 2000 to assess progress in its implementation. The Committee expects to be kept informed of the outcome of this review.
System Issues
The Committee considers that one of the important contributions of this Review, and CIMMYT's response, was to draw the attention of the CGIAR to the urgent need for Centres and members to ensure full cost recovery, especially in view of the rapid proportional increase in restricted funding. TAC concurs fully and notes that the CGIAR's existing general policies call for full cost recovery. The CGIAR Guidelines for preparing allocation proposals require centres to fully allocate all costs to project budgets.
INTERNATIONAL MAIZE AND WHEAT IMPROVEMENT CENTER CENTRO INTERNACIONAL DE MEJORAMIENTO DE MAIZ Y TRIGO
Sustainable Maize and Wheat Systems for the Poor
Professor T. G. Reeves
Director General
12 February, 1998
Ref.: TGR-L042.98
Dr. D.L. Winkelmann
Chairman
TAC
Rome, Italy
fax: (39-6) 522 53298
Dr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary
CGIAR
Washington, DC
Fax: IVDN 6908110
Dear Dr. Winkelmann and Dr. von der Osten,
Enclosed herewith is CIMMYT's response to the Center's 4^th External Program and Management Review. Overall, we found the Review report to be extraordinarily positive, and highly supportive of the continuing importance and impact of CIMMYT's work for the resource-poor. You will see that we agree with the vast majority of the recommendations made.
The review process was carried out in a highly professional manner and we wish to record our sincere thanks and congratulations to Dr. Graham Jenkins and his team. We found their approach to be extremely thorough, often 'hard hitting' but also fair and open. Both CIMMYT staff and management appreciated the inputs and interactions of the review team.
We are already in the process of addressing the Review's recommendations and implementing them accordingly, although it is fair to say that for some we were already in the process of change.
Thank you to both of you and Secretariat staff for your contributions to this favourable review of CIMMYT. We particularly thank Dr. Guido Gryseels for his superb organization and devotion to duty.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Professor T.G. Reeves
Director General
Walter P. Falcon
Chairman, Board of Trustees
cc: Dr. Graham Jenkins, Chair, EPMR Panel, fax (44-1223) 87 15 39
TGR/plm
Lisboa 27, Apdo. Postal 6-641
06600 Mexico, D.F., MEXICO (Mexico City office)
Fax: (52)(5) 726-7585
Email: TReeves@CIMMYT.MX
Internet: http://www.cimmyt.mx
Telephones
@ Mexico, D.F.: (52)(5) 726-9091
@ Texcoco: (52)(595) 5 4400
<section>3</section>
CIMMYT's Response to the Fourth External Programme and Management Review
A. Response to Recommendations
B. Other Comments by the Chairman, on behalf of the Board of Trustees
A. Response to Recommendations
1. The Panel recommends that the Wheat Programme initiate an integrated global programme to monitor the racial composition of the populations of stem, leaf, and stripe rust in the major epidemiological regions of the developing world, and help develop complementary research capacity in key NARS.
ENDORSED:
The Wheat Programme proposes a strategy to launch an integrated global epidemiology based on nine regions, each with a coordination centre and laboratory base. Pathogenicity surveys through race analysis and adult plant reactions would then be used for monitoring through a system of trap nurseries. NARS, in many cases, have trained pathologists and CIMMYT will seek to enhance this capacity.
2. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme move to develop breeding strategies that guarantee CIMMYT germplasm carries effective combinations of genes to all three rust diseases.
ENDORSED:
Significant progress has been made; for example, it is widely recognized that CIMMYT's breeding programme already combines the effective minor genes for stem rust and leaf rust derived from McFadden's Hope and Brazilian's Frontana. In the past twenty years, no major epidemic of the stem rust or leaf rust has been reported. Our genetic analyses indicate that we have incorporated six genes (including Sr2) to stem rust and at least ten minor genes to leaf rust. CIMMYT is now developing conventional pathological markers and molecular markers to identify top crosses with yellow rust durability.
3. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme develop full costing of the output of its present wheat, triticale, and barley breeding programmes and examine potential cost benefits of the incorporation of double haploid and marker assisted selection technologies in these breeding programmes.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT believes that the approach described in this recommendation is part of effective research management. We also note recommendations 7 and 9 in which it is implicit that biotechnology and genetic engineering will be incorporated into mainstream maize and wheat breeding efforts. Recent studies at CIMMYT have shown encouraging results for the double haploid system, and we believe that it may be efficient for characters such as quality and disease resistance.
4. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme make a concerted effort to seek additional funding for triticale and barley research without which the future viability of these programmes is at risk. In the case of barley this needs to be done in close collaboration with ICARDA. If this is not possible, or not successful, then serious consideration will need to be give to the discontinuation of the breeding of these crops.
ENDORSED WITH QUALIFICATION:
CIMMYT agrees that extra funds are needed for the barley and triticale programmes particularly in the area of adaptive research however we also consider that the current effort is viable.
5. The panel recommends that the Maize Programme place greater emphasis on the development of new heterotic populations that incorporate both improved yield potential and increased stress tolerance and make these populations available to NARS and the private sector.
ENDORSED WITH QUALIFICATION:
CIMMYT agrees that the development of populations in heterotic pairs increases the possibility of obtaining lines from each population that are heterotic to each other however notes that this is not guaranteed. We have accumulated substantial evidence that a high and acceptable level of heterosis can be obtained between lines from the same population. Nonetheless, we plan to augment heterosis by pairing populations and using reciprocal recurrent selection to improve the probability of heterotic combinations between lines derived from that pair.
6. The panel recommends that the Maize Programme increase the flow of information and germplasm between maize researchers in Regional projects and at Headquarters by convening an annual meeting that includes maize scientists involved in germplasm improvement.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's new project structure ensures that there are better working links between regional-based and Mexico-based maize researchers. For example leadership of Global Project 4, concerned with increasing maize productivity and sustainability in stressed environments resides in Zimbabwe, with a large number of headquarters staff included in the project team.
In addition, we plan to conduct an annual meeting of all CIMMYT researchers at headquarters - the first of these meetings is scheduled for November 1998. We also anticipate that a program wide database of genotype-specific data will be established, allowing more timely and efficient exchanges of information between locations.
7. The panel recommends that the Maize Program fully incorporate marker-assisted breeding approaches into the mainstream maize breeding effort, which will require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the Maize Programme and the Applied Biotechnology Centre.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's maize programme is committed to using the new plant breeding tools provided by biotechnology using two guiding principles:
a) CIMMYT will test new techniques in a practical maize breeding program as they become available; we need to be in the position of providing responsible advice on their use to NARS.
b) the choice of crop improvement techniques will always take into account the cost effectiveness of a technique.
One of CIMMYT's new MTP projects, Frontier Project 6, will undertake an analysis of the cost effectiveness of marker assisted breeding and genetic engineering vs. conventional approaches.
8. The panel recommends that the Maize Program thoroughly investigate the reason for lack of adoption of improved maize OPVs and hybrids on more than 40% of the maize area in developing countries.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT accepts the challenge to identify factors affecting the degree of adoption of improved maize although the substantiation of this recommendation is not clear to us. We expect to develop further and teach participatory maize breeding methodologies to meet specific community needs in areas where there has been a major investment in maize breeding yet adoption rates are much lower than expected.
A study of factors affecting adoption rates is timely and it is anticipated that such a study may result in region specific breeding strategies and products and in a better definition of the comparative advantage of the Maize Programme vis-a-vis the private sector.
9. The panel recommends that the Applied Biotechnology Centre, in collaboration with the Wheat and Maize programmes, develop clear joint research plans with agreed priorities and focus for wheat and maize biotechnology and genetic engineering. Particular emphasis should be given to how these technologies will be incorporated into the CIMMYT wheat and maize breeding activities.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees with the recommended joint priority setting process. See also our comments on recommendations 3 and 7.
10. The panel recommends that the Natural Resources Group make conservation tillage and related soil and crop management practices the primary research focus of the NRG, with the goal of quantifying the effects of conservation tillage on water and nutrient use efficiency, soil quality, and productivity of maize and wheat based systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT endorses this focus and notes that the conservation tillage and residue management themes are already central to its work in Natural Resources. They are the key elements of Frontier Project 7 which is concerned with resource degradation issues in maize and wheat systems.
11. The panel recommends that the Natural Resources Group establish a critical mass of scientific expertise in Frontier Project 7 to improve research efficiency and the complementation of strategic and applied research on conservation tillage systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees to strengthen the input of Maize and Wheat Programmes in Frontier Project 7. In addition, CIMMYT proposes to continue with the innovative use of consultants, associates and collaborative projects in pursuing priority themes within this project.
12. The panel recommends that the Economics Program determine, in discussions with the RCC, the balance of its research activities in institution-wide activities, support to other programmes, support to NARS, and its own frontier research.
ENDORSED PARTIALLY:
CIMMYT agrees that there should be a balance of activities under these headings however we also maintain that, under the new MTP project structure, the role of the Economics program and the input it makes is appropriate and balanced and has been determined following extensive consultation with partners, including NARS.
13. The panel recommends that the Economics Programme strengthen its presence in the Asian region through a greater use of affiliate economists working in close collaboration with NARS and ARIs.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and we are taking steps to increase our presence in the region through special project funding. We have developed proposals for a strengthened presence in the Asian region following a similar recommendation made during the Centre Commissioned External Review of the CIMMYT Economics Program, conducted in June 1997.
14. The panel recommends that the Economics Program, in view of the increasing importance of macroeconomic policies as they affect maize and wheat, gradually place more emphasis on this aspect of research focusing on a few selected countries.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and has commenced the development of proposals to examine macro policy issues in key maize and wheat countries including those in the Asian region.
15. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management establish a regular annual review of issues of common interest between INIFAP and CIMMYT, with each organization represented by a small group of senior administrative and research officers.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and conducted a series of meetings during December 1997 and plans to follow up on key issues on a regular basis.
16. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management prepare all future budget proposals on the basis of full project costing, showing both income and expenditure for all project outputs.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's Board and Management agree with the need for full-project costing within CIMMYT and, indeed, within all other units of the CGIAR. Some of what needs to be done on full-costing can be done within CIMMYT itself; however, to be truly effective, such efforts will also need to be supported-intellectually and financially-by donors to the various projects.
In CIMMYT's view, a commitment to full-cost accounting is far from trivial. Such a commitment embraces six distinct components, not all of which are under CIMMYT's direct control. It will be necessary: 1) for CIMMYT's auditors to work with CIMMYT management (as they are now doing) to verify the scope and quantitative estimates of costs components in the indirect cost rate(s); 2) for CIMMYT to plan for flexibility in project preparation to accommodate various donor rules for including legitimate costs in proposals. Some donors, for example, will not permit a line entitled 'indirect costs' as a specified percentage, but will allow a line or lines showing direct charges for elements (such as space charges) that might typically be included in indirect charges; 3) for the Board policy (which CIMMYT now has) to embrace full cost recovery as the goal of the Center (yet knowing that in some instances that such recovery will not be forthcoming), thereby shifting the burden of
proof and argument to those projects that do not cover full costs; 4) for the Board and Senior Management to use indirect cost recovery as one component in judging performance of managers; 5) for all Centers in the CG System to move toward recovery of full-costs to prevent 'cost cutting' on indirect costs from becoming a destructive element of competition among Centers; and 6) for donors to face up to the legitimate nature of indirect costs in their funding of projects and understand that it is basically self-destructive for a Center to use unrestricted funds to cover the indirect costs of special projects. CIMMYT also notes that non-payment of indirect costs on projects leads to tensions and suggestions of 'free-riding' within the donor community itself.
CIMMYT's Board and Management believe that implementation of the principle of full-costs pricing, especially for special projects, is critical for the entire CG System and hope that a discussion of this principle will be an element of the System Review now in progress.
17. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management take all the necessary steps and obtain the necessary expert input to develop and implement an integrated strategy for information technology and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and notes that it's Board of Trustees has approved a major review and consultancy of CIMMYT's information technology requirements. A consultants report is expected by late-1998.
18. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management implement a policy of full charging for all samples processed by the various laboratory services and evaluate the relative cost effectiveness and analytical quality of outsourcing the supply of the different types of laboratory analysis.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT management has commissioned a review of the soil and plant analytical facility and a Users Group has been established to help set policy that will include consideration of charge back systems and provision for equipment upgrading.
19. The panel recommends that the CIMMYT Board ensure that adequate information on the budget and important policy decisions is provided to all Board members irrespective of the specific committee on which they serve; and that the flow of information from committees and Board be improved.
ENDORSED:
The CIMMYT Board concurs completely with this recommendation. Henceforth, all Board members will receive materials for each of the Board Committees, whether or not they are members of a particular committee. Procedural changes were made in 1997 to ensure that all Board members are sent quarterly financial statements and audit reports. The financial reports themselves have been amplified and redesigned, and arrangements have also been made for a specific Trustee on each committee to take lead responsibility for assessing CIMMYT's financial health (currently A. Gregson for the Audit Committee, J. Holmberg for the Program Committee, and W. Falcon for the Executive and Finance Committee)
20. The panel recommends that the CIMMYT Board commission an external review (CCER) to be conducted by mid-2000 to assess progress in implementing the project based approach to research management as outlined in the MTP. This review should include the assessment of progress towards the attainment of development of management systems to support these projects, integration of financial and human resource databases, the implementation of a strategy on information technology, and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
ENDORSED:
The CIMMYT Board concurs with this recommendation and commits itself to an externally commissioned review (CCER) to assess implementation of the project-management approach outlined in the MTP. The Board understands that the 1997 EPMR occurred at a time of transition for the organizational structure within CIMMYT and believes that a serious review of the new approach is appropriate in two years. The current thinking of Board and Management is to name external reviewers in the autumn of 1999 (perhaps during Center's Week) and to compete the review before September 2000.
B. Other Comments by the Chairman, on behalf of the Board of Trustees
1. On page 92 of the draft report the EPMR Panel suggests that Trustees not be included in CCERs if those reviews are to have validity for later EPMR evaluations. CIMMYT's Board understands the importance of arm-length evaluations, but also recognized the need for increasing Trustee involvement in certain substantive areas of a Center and for using certain specific talents that a particular Trustee may possess. CIMMYT believes that CCERs serve many purposes and that the right Trustee on the right issues in the right review need not compromise the validity of CCERs for almost any purpose. In short, CIMMYT would have preferred a less categorical statement in the EPMR report on the role of Trustees in reviews.
2. In a separate consultancy, John Griffith provided the EPMR Panel a report on CIMMYT Board issues. In addition, he interacted informally on several occasions with Trustees and Management on a series of financial issues. CIMMYT found virtually all of his suggestions to be helpful, and wishes to record its appreciation for his assistance in these comments.
3. On page 69 of the draft report, the EPMR Panel indicates that 'progress needs to be made in clarifying the connection and relationship between mission and strategy and decisions being taken by the Board, especially related to the budget...'. At one level of generality, this observation is appropriate for all Boards of all organizations at all times. Even more than that, however, the CIMMYT Board accepts this comment as being specifically appropriate and useful. The Board has already made some changes in this regard, such as having a 'lead' Trustee on each of the Board committees with particular responsibilities for assuring appropriate program/funding linkages. More can and will be done in this general area in the future.
That said, CIMMYT's Board feels uneasy about prevailing views within parts of the current CGIAR system as regards funding and governance. The CGIAR financial system of the late 1990s is very different than the one that prevailed fifteen years ago. In the 1980s, there could be (and was) much more centralization of fund raising and fund allocation. Centers could 'book' budgets on January 1^st; most of these funds were certain and unrestricted; January budgets tended to be relevant for most, if not all of the year; and a Board meeting twice each year could monitor expenditures against budgets rather easily.
By the early 1990s. however, the situation had become quite different. Fund-raising had become much more decentralized and market-driven; funding became, at the same time, more uncertain and more restricted; budgets made in good faith on January 1^st often had shelf-lives of only a month or two because expected income and concomitant expenditures both changed; and monitoring became a weekly or monthly task, with many options, and not a semi-annual look at variances from the January 1^st budget. Research managers dealing with market-driven systems in many parts of the world have grown to understand these points well; however, they appear to have been less easily grasped by individuals who have worked only in bureaucracies and whose experience and focus historically have been only on the expenditure side.
CIMMYT's Board raises this point, not because the Board's financial oversight has been perfect, but rather because the Board believes that parts of the CGIAR system are still 'living in the financial world that prevailed in the 1980s. In the old system, expenditures could be 'controlled' by TAC, Center Boards and/or Management with great precision. In the new system, Management must have more flexibility to operate on both income and expense sides of the ledger and to move unrestricted funds so as to maximize the total research output of the Center. This conclusion, in turn, has important implications for governance issues, including how a Center Board should approach its fiduciary responsibility.
The CIMMYT Board's view is that Trustees, with the assistance of TAC and other System-level Committees, should define carefully the boundaries of what research it regards as legitimate. The Board should also make clear to Management what it expects at year's end with respect to reserves, or reserve draw-downs, i.e., a 'bottom' line, which may or not be zero (meaning the differences between income and expenditures) for a given year. Within these boundary and bottom-line parameters, however. The CIMMYT Board feeds that Management must have considerable financial discretion. Moreover, it is unlikely that a Board can become sufficiently well informed to monitor decisions on a monthly basis, without at the same time intruding into questions that rightfully belong to Management. For example, it may be impossible to specify with precision the amount of expenditures for a given commodity or area of inquiry, if the financial 'market' for research in a particular area says otherwise.
Clearly the Board needs to monitor research objectives and to press Management towards preferred outcomes. But when the income situation for a Center may be very unclear as late as September, new budget and budget-control processes are required. These circumstances emphasize the need for astute financial capability in the Center's Director-General, for in some fundamental sense, a Board can only monitor the 'bott