<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Third External Review of IFPRI (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research - CGIAR - SDR/TAC:IAR/98/2)</title>
<section>1</section>
CONSULTATIVE GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND CGIAR SECRETARIAT
SDR/TAC IAR/98/2
Report of the Third External Programme and Management Review
of the
International Food Policy Research Institute
(IFPRI)
TAC Secretariat
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
April 1998
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Donald Winkelmann, Chairman
10 April 1998
Dear Mr. Serageldin,
We are indeed pleased to submit to you the report of the Third External Programme and Management Review of IFPRI, which was conducted recently by a Panel chaired by Dr. Samuel Paul of the Public Affairs Centre in Bangalore, India. The Review report and IFPRI's response were considered by TAC at its 74th meeting at Hyderabad in March 1998. The Panel Chair was present at the meeting, and IFPRI was represented by its Director General.
Besides the Panel's report, there are two attachments to this letter: the TAC commentary, which summarises the Committee's reactions to the Panel's report and to the response of IFPRI's Board and management; and IFPRI's response to the Panel's report.
TAC is pleased that EPMR Panel considers the overall quality of work, outputs and performance of IFPRI during the review period to be impressive. Since the last EPMR, IFPRI's senior management has done an outstanding job of restoring organisational cohesion, morale and stability. The Review Panel found IFPRI's research programmes to be of high quality and relevance, and notes the Institute's solid reputation among its peers and collaborators. IFPRI intends to re-examine its priorities later this year; and TAC has made a number of suggestions regarding possible future directions of IFPRI's work, including attention to institutional economics. It also concurs with the Panel that the Institute needs to develop a better strategy for its Outreach Programme and to integrate it effectively with research.
Mr. Ismail Serageldin
CGIAR Chair
World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
USA
355 E. Palace Avenue, Santa Fe, NM 87501
FAX: (1-505) 988-1285
tacwink@newmexico.com
Overall, we endorse the Panel's view about the sound leadership of IFPRI and the effectiveness of its governance and management. IFPRI is in excellent shape, and folly deserves continued strong support from the CGIAR community.
Yours sincerely,
Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
Donald L. Winkelmann
TAC Chair
<section>2</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF IFPRI
TAC is grateful to the Chair, Dr. Samuel Paul, and Members of the Panel that conducted the third EPMR of IFPRI, for an excellent report which contains a powerful analysis of IFPRI's programmes and management. The Committee is pleased about the very positive findings of the Review Panel and that the overall quality, outputs and performance of IFPRI during the period under review have been found to be impressive. Leadership of the Institute has done an outstanding job of restoring organizational cohesion, morale and stability after a period of internal turmoil and uncertainty at the time of the last EPMR.
The Committee notes that not all of the important considerations made in the analysis are fully reflected in the conclusions of the Panel and therefore encourages readers and IFPRI to consider the report in its entirety. TAC is pleased that the Panel conducted its Review against a background of the 1996 Strategic Study on Policy and Management Research in the CGIAR. TAC endorses the recommendations made by the External Review Panel and notes that the Institute also is in full agreement with all of them.
The Committee offers the following commentary, prepared with inputs from the CGIAR Secretariat, to supplement the Panel's report.
Strategy and Priorities
TAC is pleased with the Panel's findings that IFPRI's current mission and priorities are on the whole consistent with CGIAR goals and priorities, and that the research issues on its agenda and its major research outputs are pertinent to poverty alleviation, food security and environmental sustainability in the developing countries. The Committee agrees with the Panel that the priority-setting process used for the 1998-2000 MTP is appropriate and pragmatic but that IFPRI should more fully exploit the means available to gain greater input in its priorities setting from developing country policymakers. TAC notes that IFPRI intends to interact during 1998 with stakeholders to identify major emerging policy issues as an input for a new round of priority-setting. The results of this exercise will be reflected in IFPRI's subsequent medium-term plan. TAC expects IFPRI to give careful consideration both to the findings of the Panel and the Committee's commentary.
Programmes
TAC is pleased about the Panel's findings of the high quality and relevance of IFPRI's research programmes and the solid reputation IFPRI holds among its peers and collaborators.
In response to reading the Panel's report, TAC raises the following two general issues:
1. IFPRI bases much of its current work on multicountry analysis. Following this approach is clearly one of IFPRI's comparative advantages and it has proven highly beneficial. However, TAC wonders whether this approach needs to be so systematically pursued as it can lead to the over-dimensioning of projects and over-burdening of the scientists involved for sometimes only marginal additional information provided by increasing the number of countries and delays in completing the research. For each particular project, IFPRI may want to carefully consider whether reducing the number of countries, eventually down to one, would allow making projects leaner and quicker, without necessarily compromising the international public goods character of the results obtained. It may also enhance the relevance of results for the particular country chosen and their use in policymaking.
2. IFPRI should consider mechanisms to enable it to become more actively involved in emerging policy debates given the long lag that currently exists between initiation of research and availability of results in its traditional research activities. On the basis of its research experience, the Institute should explore mechanisms to make its expertise available to illuminate options in major debates on important current policy issues, perhaps by organizing special task forces as one element of its Outreach Programme.
As it engages in a new round of priority-setting, IFPRI may want to carefully consider the following suggestions for research. TAC does recognize that IFPRI already has more than a full agenda and that its staff justifiably claim to suffer from over-commitment and "time famine". Any addition to its research programme may, therefore, have to be accompanied by a corresponding reduction elsewhere.
1. Research on agrarian institutions for the rural poor. The trend in reducing the role of the state, following structural adjustment and redefinition of the role of the public sector in transition economies, has left large institutional gaps in important areas such as credit, insurance, marketing, technical assistance, and contracts with agro-industries that seriously constrain the competitiveness of many smallholders. Research should be directed at identifying best institutional responses for specific settings to fill these gaps. For this purpose, the Institute may benefit from a greater emphasis on applications of the New Institutional Economics as was already recommended by the Stripe Review Panel.
2. Research on new approaches to rural development. While IFPRI gives substantial emphasis to food nutrition and consumption issues at the household level, perhaps insufficient attention has been given to the implications of alternative income generation activities for poverty alleviation strategies. In particular, a major effort is required to systematically investigate the link between sources of growth and poverty reduction and their implications for the design of effective approaches to rural development consistent with the emerging roles of the globalized market, new forms of governance, organizations in civil society, and institutional circumstances.
3. Research on intellectual property rights (IPR). Given recent major changes on the privatization of research results in biology, IFPRI could play a more important role in research on IPR so as to enable the international agricultural research community to develop more informed options for policymaking on this subject.
4. Research on low-income transitional economies. The transformation from socialist to market economies has led to considerable problems associated with food security in transition countries. IFPRI should consider a more in-depth involvement with policy research and advice on low-income transitional economies about how to institute a functioning market economy which allows for improvements in the welfare of the poor.
Outreach
TAC agrees with the Panel that IFPRI needs to develop a better strategy for its Outreach Programme. It recalls that similar observations were made in the 1990 Review and in the 1992 Mid-Term Review. TAC considers that the IFPRI Outreach Programme still lacks an integrating philosophy and concurs with the Panel that the outreach function has to be well integrated with research with mutual reinforcements. Outreach should be the partial responsibility of every scientist, with senior scientists assuming a relatively larger role. The Committee also wonders about the extent to which outreach could perhaps be better facilitated if research were more country rather than only multicountry focused.
Quality of Science
TAC is impressed with the high quality of science at IFPRI and the high regard peers generally have for the Institute's work. The Committee is also very pleased that the Panel benefited from an Internally Commissioned External Review (ICER) of IFPRI's research methodology. TAC notes, however, that the Panel identified some degree of variation in the performance of IFPRI's different divisions. This is no doubt inevitable, but IFPRI should make an attempt to learn positive lessons through systematic analysis of why some divisions are more successful than others.
The Committee endorses the Panel's recommendation that there is a need for IFPRI to amplify its skill mix by recruitment of persons with both research and policy experience. TAC is also concerned about the large predominance of economists among the Institute's staff. The Committee appreciates IFPRI's efforts to make up for this imbalance in skill mix through partnerships but encourages IFPRI to improve its internal skill mix, while maximizing complementarities and overlaps between disciplines.
Governance and Management
TAC endorses the Panel's view about the strong leadership of IFPRI and acknowledges the Director General's contributions to reshaping the Institute. The Committee is also pleased that governance in IFPRI is efficient and that the Board has responded positively to the Panel's recommendations and suggestions. TAC notes the Panel's suggestion that the Board increase the number of its meetings but suggests that the Institute carefully weigh the benefits and costs of following this suggestion.
<section>3</section>
IFPRI - INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
March 6, 1998
Dr. Donald L. Winkelmann
Chairman
Technical Advisory Committee
355 East Palace Avenue
Santa Fe, NM 87501
USA
Dr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
701 18^th Street, NW
Room J-4073
Washington, D.C.
USA
Dear Dr. Winkelmann and Dr. von der Osten:
On behalf of the IFPRI Board of Trustees and Management, we are pleased to submit our response to the Third External Program and Management Review of the International Food Policy Research Institute.
IFPRI's Board of Trustees and Management want to express their gratitude to the EPMR panel for its professionalism and for its extremely positive and constructive report. Our thanks also go to you, the Secretariat staff, particularly Selcuk Ozgediz, and Guido Gryseels, for your assistance in ensuring the success of IFPRI's Third EPMR.
Our response is attached.
With kind regards,
Per Pinstrup-Andersen
Director General
Martin Piñeiro
Chairman, Board of Trustees
1200 Seventeenth Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036-3006 USA.
Tel: 202-862-5600
E-mail: ifpri@icgnet.com
Web: www.cgiar.org/ifpri
<section>4</section>
IFPRI'S BOARD AND MANAGEMENT JOINT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAM AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW
(March 1998)
Overall, we found the report to be an accurate reflection of the Institute's work and contribution during the five-year period under consideration and we are pleased by the panel's positive assessment of IFPRI. We are delighted by the panel's recognition of the high quality of IFPRI's work, staff, and published output. The report's acknowledgment of IFPRI's significant contribution in heightening worldwide awareness of food policy and environmental issues through its research and outreach activities, including the 2020 Vision initiative, is also appreciated. We are also gratified to see the panel's recognition of IFPRI's thorough internal review and quality control systems, processes that we feel have enriched IFPRI's research and outreach work during the past five years.
We agree with the panel's suggestion that to improve the utilization of our research results, IFPRI should enhance its collaborative efforts with developing country partners. The Institute works collaboratively with over 120 organizations. Our priority is to improve the effectiveness of these collaborations. The 2020 Vision networks that we are facilitating in East and West Africa, for example, were established so that countries can learn from IFPRI and each other for the purpose of improving the knowledge base for policymaking in the regions. IFPRI, too, will benefit from the improved linkages with developing country researchers and from the feedback we receive about emerging issues for which more research is needed. We are launching a major review of emerging food policy issues and needs for future food policy research in 1998. Stakeholders from developing countries will play a major role in this review.
IFPRI concurs with the EPMR report's suggestion that the Institute's role in identifying inter-sectoral research priorities should be strengthened. IFPRI needs to be at the forefront of emerging issues in order to set priorities for the Institute and to meet the future information needs of our developing country partners, donors, and others.
To ensure the relevance of our work, almost all of IFPRI's research and outreach work is carried out in close collaboration with policymakers in developing countries. However, the Board and Management endorse the panel's suggestion that IFPRI make a more concerted effort to strengthen policy experience on our staff and further diversify disciplinary input into our research. IFPRI plans to consider strengthening staff diversity through innovative exchange programs that will enhance the intellectual debate at the Institute and bring in more policy-making experience.
Conforming with the Panel's suggestion, the Board of Trustees will assess whether it should hold more frequent meetings, whether the Executive and Finance Committee should rethink the agenda of its meetings, and the role it should play in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. The Board will also consider whether it should undertake self-assessment.
We are in agreement with the Panel's suggestion that IFPRI improve the integration of its research and outreach activities. We are in the process of reassessing the Institute's outreach activities and the most appropriate role of the Outreach Division. In order to meet our goal of improving food security and nutrition, reducing poverty, and contributing to the sustainable use of natural resources we recognize that our outreach activities must become more proactive, as suggested in the internally-commissioned external review.
The number of IFPRI's outposted staff has increased significantly during the last several years. Thus, we agree with the Panel that we should develop more standardized procedures for outposted staff to facilitate their continued high quality field work.
We share the panel's belief that the Agricultural Research Indicators Project, co-convened by IFPRI and ISNAR, should be more centrally funded by the CGIAR as it is producing information that will be useful across the CGIAR system.
Our response to the four recommendations follows.
Recommendation 1
With respect to IFPRI's research work, the Panel Recommends that:
(a) notwithstanding the present difficulties in obtaining funding for work on water resources, IFPRI should redouble its efforts in raising such funds since it is an area identified as a priority by the CGIAR (Section 2.1); and,
(b) in designing its research every division within IFPRI should bear in mind that developing countries now have increasingly open economies, and that the planned research should take into full account the country's interactions with the rest of the world. (Section 2.3)
ENDORSED: We are in agreement with the EPMR panel regarding the importance of policy work on water resources for IFPRI and the CGIAR, and we are already putting a significant amount of unrestricted funding into our water project, relative to other projects. IFPRI will make every effort to attain additional restricted funding to at least double the Institute's activities in this critical area. IFPRI places high priority on research to assist governments and international institutions in the development of appropriate policies and institutions for water management, including appropriate mechanisms for water allocation among competing demands, within and among countries. Such work links closely with IFPRI's research priority on watershed management policies and institutions. Research by IFPRI and others clearly demonstrates the increasingly critical role of water in assuring food security and sustainable use of natural resources for the future. Appropriate water management is
critical to the success of improved agricultural technology, and therefore to the achievement of the goals of the CGIAR. Collaboration with IIMI and interaction with policy research on related topics within IFPRI provides an ideal environment for IFPRI to undertake additional research on water management policies and institutions.
IFPRI also agrees with the second part of the recommendation by the EPMR panel. As globalization, international trade liberalization and integration, and the opening up of individual low-income economies proceed, IFPRI's research must increasingly incorporate and take into account the study countries' interactions with the rest of the world.
Recommendation 2
In redesigning its outreach activities, IFPRI should ensure that:
a) the respective roles of the research divisions and the outreach division in outreach activities are clarified and that the outreach function is well integrated with research;
b) there is mutual reinforcement of research and outreach, with research driving outreach on the dissemination of research findings and outreach influencing research on the identification of research problems;
c) if a country programme format is used, it recognizes the need for integration of research and outreach, provides an efficient mechanism for management, and is reasonably consistent across countries in which IFPRI operates (Section 2.5)
ENDORSED: IFPRI agrees with this recommendation. At the time of the visit by the EPMR panel, IFPRI was in the process of reassessing the Institute's outreach activities and the appropriate role for the Outreach Division. In response to recommendations by the Internally-Commissioned External Review, IFPRI's outreach activities will become more proactive in an attempt to further enhance the impact of IFPRI's research on the ultimate goals of improving food security and nutrition, reducing poverty, and contributing to sustainable use of natural resources. While most of IFPRI's outreach activities have been and will continue to be undertaken within the research divisions as integral parts of research projects, we visualize that the Outreach Division will play the dual role of supporting such outreach activities while undertaking other outreach activities that are more appropriately done outside the research divisions, such as capacity strengthening and information dissemination
that cut across divisions. In order to assure a high level of impact of IFPRI's research, we must assure effective two-way communication between the intended clients of IFPRI's research and IFPRI. Both the outreach and the research divisions participate actively in assuring such two-way communication. During the last five years, IFPRI has sought new ways of improving the effectiveness of IFPRI's research output through a variety of means such as short policy briefs, reports written in less-technical language, and through the 2020 Vision initiative activities. IFPRI will continue to seek further gains in this area in order to enhance impact. We also agree with the EPMR panel that the current review of the Country Programs Office must be brought to a logical conclusion in a way that produces more effective mechanisms for integrating IFPRI collaborative research at the country level to assure enhanced interaction with intended clients and enhanced impact in study countries.
Recommendation 3
With respect to impact assessment. IFPRI should:
a) continue to assess the impact of its activities mainly in terms of the outputs for which it can be held accountable (intermediate impacts of its publications and capacity strengthening efforts, for example);
b) continue its activities related to developing improved understanding of, and means for assessing, impacts of policy and social science research; and develop further in-depth case studies of its impacts in partner countries, and also surveys of the use of its outputs in other, non-partner countries. (Section 3.3.5)
ENDORSED: We greatly appreciate the EPMR panel's recommendation that ongoing work to assess impact be continued along the lines currently pursued. We agree that impact assessment of IFPRI's research should focus on the Institute's output or intermediate variables. As recognized by the Panel, it is extremely difficult to establish reliable causal links between IFPRI's research and the ultimate impact variables, such as an individual's food security and nutritional levels. We also agree that ongoing activities aimed at the development of improved understanding of how the impact of policy and social science research can be improved should be continued, and we will continue in-depth case studies along the lines mentioned in the recommendation.
Recommendation 4
With respect to enhancing the relevance of its activities, IFPRI should:
a) further strengthen its mechanisms for priority setting by seeking new ways to identify and take account of developing country policy concerns;
b) diversify its skill mix by recruiting persons with both research and policy experience, -with greater flexibility in appointments, if necessary; and,
c) the IFPRI Board should play a more active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. (Section 5.2)
ENDORSED: As further outlined in IFPRI's current medium-term plan, IFPRI's research and outreach priorities are heavily influenced by developing-countries' needs for information that can be generated by policy research. However, we agree with the EPMR panel's recommendation to enhance the effectiveness by which developing-country concerns are translated into mechanisms for priority setting, and we will launch a major effort during 1998 to accomplish this for use in future medium-term plans.
While senior research staff members are hired primarily for their qualifications in the area of relevant food policy research, some of our senior researchers have significant policy experience. We agree with the EPMR panel recommendation that policy experience adds a very critical component to good policy research, and we will seek to enhance the policy experience of IFPRI's senior research staff by assuring that policy experience is specified as a desirable qualification of new hires. IFPRI will also explore innovative exchange programs to bring more policymaking experience into IFPRI's research and internal debate.
IFPRI also agrees that the Board must continue to play an active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. The Board sees this role as being an extremely important part of its overall mandate and, in response to the EPMR panel recommendation, the Board will review ways in which it can be even more effective in this role and will devote more time to fundamental issues of major importance to the long-term directions of the Institute. The Board has already begun the process of developing concrete responses to this recommendation and other observations in the report concerning the Board.
Washington D.C., USA - 27 February 1998
Dr. Donald L. Winkelmann
Chair, Technical Advisory Committee/CGIAR
355 East Palace Avenue
Santa Fe, NM 87501
USA.
Mr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
The World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington D.C. 20433
USA.
Dear Don and Alexander,
I take pleasure in submitting to you the report of the Panel you commissioned to conduct the Third External Programme and Management Review of IFPRI. My colleagues on the Panel and I enjoyed this assignment, partly because we found in IFPRI a vibrant institute with strong achievements, and in part because this gave us an opportunity to debate several thorny questions that surround evaluation of policy research.
Our overall impression of IFPRI is very positive. IFPRI scores high in terms of all four major criteria we were asked to apply to our assessment: there is good evidence of impact from IFPRI's work; in the most part, the strategic thrusts of the Institute are clear and the work is highly relevant to the objectives of the CGIAR; the quality of the science practised is high and the internal mechanisms for quality control are effective; and the Institute is very well managed.
We have made four sets of recommendations to assist IFPRI's evolution. These concern integrating research and outreach activities, giving greater stress to two programmatic concerns (the context of open economies and research on water), strengthening impact assessment, and furthering infusion of developing country perspectives into IFPRI's work.
I would like to flag one special area for the attention of TAC and the CGIAR. At IFPRI we saw firsthand the effects of increased levels of targeted funding on the work of the individual scientists and the overall functioning of the Institute. To the extent that targeted funding coincides with the priorities of the Institute, this does not present a significant problem. But if it does not, a major shift towards more targeted funding (from the current 50-50 ratio of unrestricted vs. restricted) could limit the overall effectiveness of the Institute.
We had excellent co-operation from IFPRI. The documentation provided was excellent and the Board, management and staff were very open with the Panel on all issues. We also had strong professional support from both the TAC and the CGIAR Secretariats. This facilitated our task and increased the efficiency of our work as a panel.
I would also like to express my thanks to my fellow Panel members for their many insightful contributions and overall professional judgement.
Last, I thank you for providing me this opportunity to learn about a first-rate research institute and contribute to the thinking about its future. The CGIAR needs IFPRI and IFPRI deserves continued support from the CGIAR.
Yours sincerely,
Samuel Paul
Chair, IFPRI EPMR
<section>5</section>
REPORT OF THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IFPRI)
Review Panel:
Dr. Samuel Paul (Chairman)
Mr. Gerald Bourrier
Dr. Jean-Marc Boussard
Dr Catherine Geissler
Dr. Hans Gregersen
Dr. Ammar Siamwalla
Ms. Maureen Robinson (Consultant)
Dr. Selcuk Ozgediz (CGIAR Secretariat)
Dr. Guido Gryseels (Panel Secretary, TAC Secretariat)
TAC SECRETARIAT
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
February 1998
<section>6</section>
Summary and Recommendations
This report summarizes the EPMR Panel's major findings and recommendations on IFPRI's overall performance during the review period 1992-97. It includes an assessment of the Centre's research and outreach activities, its governance and management, and a discussion of the cross cutting issues and themes that emerge therefrom. The Panel has offered a number of suggestions on the different aspects of the Centre's operations in the different chapters in addition to the major recommendations given below.
Recent Progress
This is the first comprehensive external review of IFPRI that has taken place since the second EPMR of 1990 which coincided with an extremely difficult period in the Centre's history. By 1992, IFPRI had turned around and many positive changes had taken place. The Panel is pleased to note that during 1992-97, the Centre had built further on this foundation and made steady and impressive progress in its research as well as overall governance and management. IFPRI is now a well-managed institute and continues to be a producer of high quality research output.
IFPRI has four research divisions and an outreach division. An assessment of the work of the research divisions shows that their outputs, both in terms of empirical findings and methodological contributions are relevant to developing countries, other partners and the research community at large. Some divisions have built up large collections of data sets that can be used for inter country and intertemporal comparisons. The volume of final research outputs has varied across divisions, but is significant and has been judged to be of high quality by the ICER as well as by other professional peers. There are priority areas such as water on which the Centre has not able to do significant research mainly due to lack of funding.
IFPRI's Vision 2020 and its outputs have not only given its work a high degree of visibility, but also contributed significantly to heightened awareness, worldwide, of global food policy and environmental issues. The dissemination of these outputs has resulted in several requests for IFPRI's advice and assistance from developing countries. The 2020 study has also helped integrate and highlight the different strands of research at IFPRI.
The outreach division is still in a state of flux, being relatively new in its present form. The expansion of the scope and thrust of outreach is moving in the right direction, but several gaps remain in terms of integrating research and outreach, ownership of the activities, and clarification of the organizational mechanisms for effective implementation.
Cross Cutting themes and Issues
The Panel is satisfied that the Centre's priority setting process and the research agenda it has adopted are on the whole appropriate and timely, given its own comparative advantage, the outputs available from other policy research bodies, and the uncertainty about donor resources IFPRI's resource allocation across major activities is generally in line with CG goals and priorities. The original rationale for establishing IFPRI as a policy research centre within the CG System continues to be valid today.
IFPRI's work is of good quality at all stages of its research process. The selection of research problems is in general carefully done and the quality standards applied are appropriate. The internal quality control system is efficient and working well. Its outputs such as policy briefs, project briefs and other information materials are widely disseminated and are of high quality. The staffs achievements in respect of peer reviewed publications is impressive, but their co-authors work and audiences are largely in the developed countries.
A quantitative assessment of the impacts of policy research on goals such as poverty alleviation is difficult in the present state of our knowledge. It is necessary therefore to depend o