<title>A Strategic Reassessment of Fish Farming Potential in Africa - Index</title>
<section>1</section>
ABSTRACT
The present study is an update of an earlier assessment of warm-water fish farming potential in Africa, by Kapetsky (1994). The objective of this study was to assess locations and areal expanses that have potential for warm-water and temperate-water fish farming in continental Africa.
The study was based on previous estimates for Africa by the above author, and on estimates of potential for warm-water and temperate-water fish farming in Latin America by Kapetsky and Nath (1997). However, a number of refinements have been made. The most important refinement was that new data allowed a sevenfold increase in resolution over that used in the previous Africa study, and a twofold increase over that of Latin America (i.e. to 3 arc minutes, equivalent to 5 km x 5 km grids at the equator), making the present results more usable in order to assess fish farming potential at the national level.
A geographical information system (GIS) was used to evaluate each grid cell on the basis of several land-quality factors important for fish-farm development and operation regardless of the fish species used. Protected areas, large inland water bodies and major cities were identified as constraint areas, and were excluded from any fish farming development altogether. Small-scale fish farming potential was assessed on the basis of four factors: water requirement from ponds due to evaporation and seepage, soil and terrain suitability for pond construction based on a variety of soil attributes and slopes, availability of livestock wastes and agricultural by-products as feed inputs based on manure and crop potential, and farm-gate sales as a function of population density. For commercial farming, an urban market potential criterion was added based on population size of urban centres and travel time proximity. Both small-scale and commercial models were developed by weighting the
above factors using a multi-criteria decision-making procedure.
A bioenergetics model was incorporated into the GIS to predict, for the first time, fish yields across Africa. A gridded water temperature data set was used as input to a bioenergetics model to predict number of crops per year for the following three species: Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus), African catfish (Clarias gariepinus) and Common carp (Cyprinus carpio). Similar analytical approaches to those by Kapetsky and Nath (1997) were followed in the yield estimation. However, different specifications were used for small-scale and commercial farming scenarios in order to reflect the types of culture practices found in Africa. Moreover, the fish growth simulation model, documented in Kapetsky and Nath (1997), was refined to enable consideration of feed quality and high fish biomass in ponds.
The small-scale and commercial models derived from the land-quality evaluation were combined with the yield potential of each grid cell for each of the three fish species to show the coincidence of each land-quality suitability class with a range of yield potentials. Finally, the land quality-fish yield potential combinations were put together to show where the fish farming potential coincided for the three fish species.
The results are generally positive. Estimates of the quality of land show that about 23% of continental Africa scored very suitable for both small-scale and commercial fish farming. For the three fish species, 50-76% of Africa's land has the highest yield range potential, and the spatial distribution of this yield is quite similar among the species and farming systems.
However, the spatial distribution of carp culture potential was greater than for Nile tilapia and African catfish. Combining the two farming system models with the favourable yields of the three fish species suggest that over 15% of the continent has land areas with high suitability for pond aquaculture.
The final fish farming potential estimates for the three species together show that about 37% of the African surface contains areas with at least some potential for small-scale farming, and 43% for commercial farming. Moreover, 15% of the same areas have the highest suitability score, and suggest that for small-scale fish farming, from 1.3 to 1.7 crops/y of Nile tilapia, 1.9 to 2.4 crops/y of Africa catfish and 1.6 to 2.2 crops/y of Common carp can be achieved in these areas.
Estimates for commercial farming range from 1.6 to 2.0 crops/y of Nile tilapia, 1.3 to 1.7 crops/y of Africa catfish and 1.2 to 1.5 crops/y of Common carp.
From a country viewpoint, the results are also generally positive. For small-scale farming of the three species, 11 countries scored very suitable in 50% or more of their national area. The corresponding results for commercial farming were that 16 countries scored very suitable in 50% or more of their national area.
Farm location data from Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda and Malawi were used to verify the GIS-based predictions of fish farming potential, from the standpoint of the farming system models combined with fish yields. This verification procedure indicated that the models used in the study are in general fairly accurate for strategic planning of aquaculture development.
<section>2</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
AGLS
Soil Resources Management and Conservation Service
AGLW
Water Resources, Development and Management Service
AML
Arc Macro Language
AVHRR
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
CIMMYT
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre
CR
Consistency ratio
CRES
Center for Resource and Environmental Studies
CRSSA
Center for Remote Sensing and Spatial Analysis
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
DCW
Digital Chart of the World
DEIA
Division of Environmental Information and Assessment
DEM
Digital Elevation Model
DM
Dry Matter
DSMW
Digital Soil Map of the World
ECMWF
European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
ESRI
Environmental Systems Research Institute
EROS
Earth Resources Observation Systems
ET0
Reference Evapotranspiration
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FTP
Anonymous File Transfer Protocol
GIS
Geographical Information System
GPS
Global Positioning System
GRID
Global Resource Information Database
GSI
Japan's Geographical Survey Institute
GTOPO30
Global Topography at 30 arc/seconds
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit
IIASA
International Institute for Applied System Analyses
ICLARM
International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IGBP
International Geosphere-Biosphere Program
INEGI
Mexico's National Institute for Statistics, Geography and Information
IUCN
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
LA
Latin America
LGP
Length of Growing Period
LUC
Land Use Change Project
MCE
Multi-Criteria Evaluation
MT
Metric tons
NASA
United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NCGIA
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
PET
Potential evapotranspiration
SSA
sub-Saharan Africa
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USGS
United States Geological Survey
W
Kendall coefficient of concordance
WCM
World Conservation Monitoring Center
<section>3</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Overview and objectives
Overview
With the rapid increase in population and continuing expectations of growth in the standard of living, pressures on natural resources have become intense.
The World Food Summit in Rome, in November 1996 organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) endorsed the previously agreed Summit Declaration and Plan of Action for a renewed global commitment to solve the problem of chronic food insecurity causing over 840 million people, mainly in developing countries, to remain undernourished (FAO, 1996a; Fertilizers and Agriculture, 1997).
Africa is an area of the world in which chronic hunger continuous to be widespread. Two hundred and four million people were affected in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) by malnutrition in 1990. According to the Human Development Report (1996), 22.5 million African children are malnourished. It is estimated that 40 percent of the population of SSA goes hungry, and that the figure will increase by the year 2000 (FAO, 1996b).
Fish are an important source of both food and income to many people in developing countries. In Africa, as much as 5 percent of the population, some 35 million people, depend wholly or partly on the fisheries sector for their livelihood (FAO, 1996c). While capture fisheries based on species that are presently exploited seem to have reached their natural limits (FAO, 1996c), there is considerable potential to expand aquaculture in Africa in order to improve food security (Kapetsky, 1994, 1995; Engle, 1997).
Even though there is potential for fish farming in Africa, very few African countries have a quantified long term or even mid-term national plan (Coche, Haight and Vincke, 1994), it has therefore been difficult to develop production targets for their aquaculture sectors which could be used to set realistic actions and financial commitments. The only two regional assessments that may serve as a guidelines for strategic planning are those by Coche, Haight and Vincke (1994) and Kapetsky (1994).
The present study is based on the development of analytical strategies that could be used to stimulate improved planning for aquaculture development in Africa. This was done by developing Geographical Information System (GIS)-based models aimed to gain a better understanding among siting criteria required for fish farming. This study is built mainly on two GIS studies: the analysis of factors important for aquaculture development and operation (Kapetsky, 1994); and the development of farming system models and fish yield models in Latin America (Kapetsky and Nath, 1997).
Objectives
This study was aimed at stimulating and/or supporting the development of two important planning schemes:
1.2 Assessments of aquaculture potential in Africa
The first GIS study that evaluates inland fish farming potential in Africa was that by Kapetsky (1994), who found that 40 out of 49 countries, in the continent have areas with some potential for warm-water fish farming at small-scale and commercial levels. It was estimated that about 31% of the land area in Africa is potentially suitable for warm-water fish farming at a small-scale level, and that about 13% of the land area is suitable for commercial farming. These results clearly indicate that the availability of land area for warm-water fish farming is apparently not a constraint for aquaculture development.
Kapetsky (1995) estimated the potential contribution of African warm-water fish farming to food security by the Year 2000. He found that an increase in pond surface area per farm would provide a significant increase in fish production. Thus, warm-water fish farming could play an increasingly important role in filling the gap between fish supply and demand. Most certainly, it was concluded that, from those few countries where fish farming is already well established, significant contributions could be made to food security by warm-water fish farming by the Year 2000.
In addition to the above, economic studies for fish farming development in Africa have also proven that fish farming in African can be a good source of income. Findings by (Molnar, Rubagumya and Adjavon (1991) and Engle, Brewster and Hitayezu (1993) showed that fish production in Rwanda represented the main cash crop for over 50% of the group members and private pond holders. Engle, Brewster and Hitayezu (1993) indicate that fish farming provides cash to a family in addition to supplementing the diet of Rwandan farmers. Finally, Engle (1997) used a mathematical programming model to demonstrate how fish can be an important cash crop, even for limited-resource Rwandan farmers.
The above studies thus demonstrate that fish farming can be a viable enterprise for African producers and that gains in economic and food security goals can be achieved at reasonable costs.
1.3 Study justification and enhancements
The motivation for the current study was to provide a more thorough assessment of the potential for inland aquaculture in Africa compared to that provided by Kapetsky (1994) both by building upon the methodological framework developed by Kapetsky and Nath (1997) for Latin America, and by the use of more comprehensive spatial datasets currently available for Africa. Differences between the current study and the previous fish farming GIS effort for Africa (Kapetsky, 1994) are summarized in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 Enhancements to the first African fish-farming study (Kapetsky, 1994).
(See page xv for an explanation of the abbreviations used in the table)
SUBJECT KAPETSKY (1994) THIS STUDY
Resolution 10 minute grid (18 km x 18 km). 3 minute grid ( 5 km x 5 km).
Date range of data sources used. 1931 - 1988 1920 - 1997
Factors included in the analysis. Water temperature (air temperature), water availability (water from rainfall runoff and water from streams and rivers), soils (texture and topography), inputs (LGP), local market demand (population density), and roads. Water temperature (air temperature and wind velocity), water requirement (precipitation, potential evapotranspiration and seepage), soils (soil type and topography), inputs (manure and crops), farm-gate sales and urban market size (population density) and proximity (roads).
Constraints Water bodies (main lakes). Protected areas, water bodies (main lakes), and major cities.
Farming system analyzed Small-scale and commercial. Small-scale and commercial.
Farming System Models Simple. Only farming system models.
Factors are not assigned weights for integration of the models.
Complex. Based on experience from Latin America study (Kapetsky and Nath, 1997) and Sinaloa study (Aguilar-Manjarrez, 1996). Fish yield models, farming system models and overall models (fish yield models combined with farming system models). Factors assigned weights for model integration.
Bioenergetics model Not used Bioenergetic model adapted from the Latin America study (Kapetsky and Nath, 1997).
Fish species used Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) and Catfish (Clarias gariepinus). Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus), African catfish (Clarias gariepinus) and Common carp (Cyprinus carpio).
Basis of water temperature estimates Air temperature alone used to estimate water temperature using interpolation and regression. Annual estimate. Air temperature and annual wind velocity data used as input variables into a simulation model to estimate monthly water temperatures.
Basis of fish yield estimates Water temperature thresholds for the model species. Water temperature, food consumption rates, feeding levels, feed composition, fish size, fish biomass and photoperiod.
Water requirement Based on annual rainfall runoff, and water from perennial streams and rivers. Function of monthly precipitation, monthly potential evapotranspiration, and seepage.
Soils Soil texture and topography (slope), based on the FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of Africa at 1:5 million scale (FAO-UNESCO, 1977). Slope thresholds imposed by FAO-UNESCO soil classification. Soil texture, effective soil depth, gravel and stones %, salinity and pH. Derived from DSMW, CD-ROM (version 3.5, FAO, 1995).
Slope thresholds chosen from a 1 km DEM.
Inputs from agricultural by-products. Crop yield and variety estimated using the LGP. Inputs estimated by manipulating manure and crop data.
Manure availability estimated from livestock data.Cropland areas extracted from a land cover image.
Local market demand Function of population and the occurrence of fish farms. Farm-gate sales of population size.
Urban market size and proximity based on road conditions and population size respectively.
Road infrastructure (paved and motorable roads) Important only for commercial fish farming. Important only for commercial fish farming.
1.4 History of aquaculture in Africa
Although the history of aquaculture is relatively recent in sub-Saharan Africa compared to Asia, it is not new to the majority of the countries. In fact, most known aquaculture systems have been introduced over the last 35 years (FAO Fisheries Department, 1996a; 1996b).
During the 60's, aquaculture development not only stopped but regressed sharply. Most ponds were abandoned because of limited security of land tenures, reluctance of farmers to adopt technology, labor shortages, lack of stocking material, drought and political unrest (Harrison, 1994; Coche, 1994). It is since the late 60's that aquaculture has started to develop again, on more solid basis following the increased technical assistance financed by multilateral and bilateral donors.
To date, aquaculture in Africa is still essentially a rural, secondary and part-time activity taking place in small farms with small freshwater ponds. The continent contributes only 0.2 percent of total global production (FAO Fisheries Department, 1996a). Extensive to semi-intensive cultural systems produce limited fish yields which are mostly consumed directly, bartered or sold locally as cash crop. Almost all fish farming is carried out by rural small-scale operators in small freshwater ponds as a secondary activity to agriculture (Coche, Haight and Vincke, 1994).
Aquaculture development in most African countries has primarily had social objectives such as nutrition improvement in rural areas, generation of supplementary income, diversification of activities and income, and creation of employment especially in rural communities where opportunities for economic activities are limited. Only in recent years has aquaculture also been viewed (only on a relatively small scale) as an activity likely to meet national shortfalls in fish supplies thereby reducing fish imports, as well as a direct source of foreign exchange mainly through the production of high value marine finfish, crustaceans and molluscs.
Aquaculture production in Africa has more than doubled during the period of 1985 to 1995, the year of the most recent data (Figure 1.1). However, the contribution of aquaculture production in absolute terms is still very small in comparison to that from inland fisheries. In 1995 inland aquaculture amounted to 35,000 tonnes, while mariculture provided less than half this amount (16,000 tonnes). Inland fisheries at 1,990,000 tonnes, exceeded both types of aquaculture by a wide margin.
The major species cultured include finfish (tilapias, catfish, and carp), molluscs and shrimp. Freshwater fish make up over 80 percent of the total aquaculture harvests.Inland aquaculture is dominated by Nigeria (15,489 tonnes) and Egyt (5,645 tonnes) which together accounted for 56% of the total production in 1995 (Figure 1.2). There are only 5 additional countries (Zambia, Madagascar, Togo, Kenya and Sudan) that each produce 1,000 tonnes or more.
1.5 Planning of aquaculture development
There is a lack of regular aquaculture development planning exercises in most African countries. However, there is a growing recognition of the need for proper planning of the fisheries sector in general and the aquaculture sub-sector in particular (Text Box 1.1).
In 1983, the FAO Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the Fishery Resources and Environment Division embarked upon a medium-term programme to collect updated information useful in the preparation of national aquaculture development plans for 12 African countries with the highest potential for aquaculture (Coche, 1994). These 12 national reports are a good source of environmental and socio-economic information. However, they are essentially catalogues of information rather than a set of integrated information that can be used to develop clear policies and strategies for aquaculture development.
The national reports cited above have been assembled into a single document thus making a useful summary of the data collected in the original reports (Coche, 1994). Additionally, the original reports have been also used to develop an indicative plan for aquaculture development and research (Coche, Haight and Vincke, 1994). However, all of these studies could have or may still (i.e. since some data might still be useful if not outdated) benefit from the use of computers, particularly with regard to electronic databases and GIS. The former provide support for storing large and diverse kinds of information, and the latter a powerful mechanism of manipulating and integrating spatial information into a format that can be very useful for decision-making (Meaden and Kapetsky, 1991).
<section>4</section>
2. METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
2.1 Overview
The basis of the present study is in many ways similar to traditional studies for assessing aquaculture development (Muir and Kapetsky, 1988; Born, Verdegem and Huisman, 1994). The primary difference is that the use of a GIS in this case greatly enhanced the evaluation. Most certainly, one of the greatest advantages of GIS over manual techniques is the capability to quantify the predicted potential.
This study examines how well sites satisfy criteria for small-scale and commercial fish farming and how well three index fish species (Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus; African catfish, Clarias gariepinus and Common carp, Cyprinus carpio) perform under such farming systems.
Two important limitations were placed on this study to save costs: firstly, only already digitized or computer ready data could be used for the analysis and secondly, field verification was limited to using the location of fish farms in four countries (Zimbabwe Kenya, Uganda, and Malawi). Another limitation was that the data had to be comparable for all countries. Consequently, because the most important gridded data sets for this study(mean monthly daily minimum and maximum air temperature, and mean monthly precipitation) were not available for Madagascar, it was not possible to include this country in the evaluation. Similarly, the main focus of the evaluation is "land-based" due to the dependency of the data available to it.
In overview, there are three major analytical procedures in this study:
a) Criteria score classification, standardization and thresholds;
b) Integration of primary criteria; and
c) Development of the models which manipulate and integrate the selected criteria together.
A summary of the terms and methodology used in this study are summarized in Table 2.1. Tab2.1.gif (13292 bytes)
a) Criteria score classification, standardization and thresholds
This first major analytical procedure was carried out by revising the primary spatial datasets for Africa whereby each factor was given a physical score from 1 to 4. Such a classification method was applied throughout this study in order to keep the analysis manageable and to make the results more easily comprehensible and comparable. Specifically, this classification system was used to standardize the different scales upon which raw data were measured.
The scoring levels (1 to 4) were: very suitable (VS), suitable (S), moderately suitable (MS) and unsuitable (US). This classification proved to be appropriate for three main purposes. Firstly, it was found that most raw data were classified within a range of four values. Secondly, such classification matched the FAO classification in terms of suitability of land for defined uses, and thirdly, it is the same methodology that has been used in previous GIS-aquaculture related studies (Kapetsky, 1994; Aguilar-Manjarrez, 1992;1996; Kapetsky and Nath, 1997). The level of suitability interpretation in the current study is similar to that of Kapetsky and Nath (1997), i.e., "the VS level provides a situation in which minimum time or investment is required in order to develop fish farming. For a level classified as S, modest time and investment are required, while if MS, significant interventions may be required before fish farming operations can be conducted. If the suitability level
is US, the time or cost, or both, are too great to be worthwhile for fish farming".
In accordance with the suitability classification scheme, ranges of data (or thresholds) that pertain to a desired level of suitability for each criteria had to be selected. The selection of such thresholds involved interpretation of the data selected and such interpretation was guided with literature research (e.g. soils types) and opinions from expert staff at FAO. For example, for the farm-gate sales factor, the range that gives very suitable (VS) market opportunities for farmed fishes in this study, was 150-300 (inhabitants/km^2).
Certain factors shared two different classifications or interpretations. In the present study, factor interpretation was dependent on how these data were assessed, on a type of farming system (i.e. small-scale and commercial fish farming), and how the factor was integrated with other factors to model a particular query.
Constraints were developed as a Boolean map (image containing ones and zeros), and were incorporated in terms of the physical space available, meaning that there are many areas in Africa which are already being used for other purposes (for example, it would not be possible to construct fish ponds in large water bodies or in urban centres), and therefore these areas were considered to be constraints. Protected regions comprising areas of conservation, wildlife and additional forest, large inland water bodies and major cities were excluded from the evaluation.
b) Integration of primary criteria
The selected and scored criteria were developed into a series of submodels (Aguilar-Manjarrez, 1992; 1996; Aguilar-Manjarrez and Ross, 1993; 1995a; 1995b) or categories of criteria (Kapetsky, 1994; Kapetsky and Nath, 1997) which logically group certain factors together within a general model. For example, some factors were grouped to form sub-models naturally (e.g. in a FAO soil classification, soil texture and soil type factors were grouped into a submodel called soils), whilst some other factors were grouped into sub-models to enable a better understanding (e.g. precipitation, potential evapotranspiration and seepage were grouped to form a water loss submodel). Mathematical expressions were used to integrate the primary criteria in this study.
c) Development of the models
The third major analytical procedure involved the development and evaluation of the models. In this study, four GIS-based models were developed:
Finally, and as an important part of the whole procedure of using a GIS, existing fish farm locations were used to assess the accuracy of the results. A schematic of the analytical procedures used in the study is provided in Figure 2.1, which is followed by a brief description of these procedures. Detailed descriptions of the models and GIS procedures are provided in the appendix for readers interested in the methodology used.
fig2.1.gif (16485 bytes)
2.2 Identification of the most important criteria for the development and operation of fish farms
The selection of factors and constraints involved in a GIS is vitally important because they are the basis of the evaluation. To determine the suitability of locations for fish farming development in this study, it was necessary to establish the factors and constraints in Africa that were essential for the activity. It was also important to investigate whether the necessary data were available.
For clarity, the criteria were grouped into three categories (Table 2.2). The first category corresponded to the constraints. The second category was primarily concerned with the factors that assess the quality of the land for small-scale and commercial farming. This category was subdivided into two parts: physical and environmental factors, and land uses and infrastructure. Finally, the third category reviewed factors that dealt with the estimation of fish yields. Details regarding data sources for the various criteria are presented in Table 2.3.
Tab2.2.gif (10452 bytes)
Table 2.3 Sources of data for the African database
2.3 Criteria score, classification and thresholds and integration of primary criteria
In all, five submodels (or categories of criteria) were considered to assess potential for small-scale fish farming:
1. Constraints
2. Water requirements,
3. Soil and terrain suitability,
4. Inputs, and
5. Farm-gate sales.
For commercial farming, an urban market size and proximity submodel was added.
CONSTRAINTS
2.3.1 Constraints
The constraints included in this study were geographical areas that were excluded for any fish farming development altogether, and were represented by the spatial area they occupied, which in turn was dependent upon the cell size used in this study (i.e. 5 km x 5 km). These areas were assigned a score of zero. The constraints were represented as a single submodel by combining all of them together.
Areas unavailable for inland fish farming development included protected areas (i.e. areas of conservation, wildlife reserves and forests), large inland water bodies and major cities, all of which were considered as constraints (see also Appendix 8.2).
FACTORS
PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES
2.3.2 Water requirements
Water is essential for all forms of aquaculture and is a key factor in determining where aquaculture may develop. However, growing demands for water from an expanding aquaculture industry are resulting in increased competition with other water users for this limited resource (Muir and Beveridge, 1987; Phillips, Beveridge and Clarke, 1991; Nash, 1995).
The distribution of water in Africa represented a major determinant factor in the spatial analysis of this study. Latest predictions by the FAO (1996b) state that: "...by the year 2000, six out of seven East African countries and all five North African countries bordering the Mediterranean will face acute water shortages".
Water for levee and contour ponds may originate from several sources: precipitation, runoff, pumped or gravity water from perennial water bodies such as streams, rivers, lakes and reservoirs and pumped groundwater. However, to our knowledge, the data for these potential water sources are not available in a format that can be used to assess water requirements for a continental-level study of fish farming potential such as this one. An alternative approach (Kapetsky and Nath, 1997) with minor revisions was therefore used in the current study. This refined approach is summarized below.
Precipitation is considered the main source of water for small-scale fish farming. Other water resources such as perennial streams and rivers would exceed the economic limitations associated with small-scale farming. Kapetsky (1994) estimated water availability for small-scale farming in Africa on the basis of annual rainfall. However, rainfall in Africa is variable throughout the year (Nicholson, 1981; Lamb, 1982; Nicholson, Kim and Hoopingarner, 1988; Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1993; Gommes and Petrassi, 1994), so it is difficult to know which areas would not have sufficient water during the dry months of the year. Therefore, for this study, an estimation of monthly net water requirement from ponds was used. The main objective of the water requirement estimation was to balance inputs from precipitation against losses due to evaporation and seepage from levee ponds.
The investigation is based on a study described in an internal FAO report (FAO Water Resources, Develoment and Management Service (AGLW), 1996). This approach has a three advantages. Firstly, with this method it was possible to identify critical areas, or periods of the year, in which there would be a water deficit. Secondly, the approach indicates the amount of water that would have to be supplied in order to keep the ponds full without pre-determining the source of water and thirdly, water requirement is estimated in centimetres and therefore no assumption about the area of the pond was necessary.
In comparison to the Latin America study (Kapetsky and Nath, 1997), this study did not use evaporation; instead, it used potential evapotranspiration estimates obtained from IIASA. These estimates are based on the Penman-Monteith method, which is the most widely accepted formula and yields errors below 10%. Reference evapotranspiration (ET0) is by definition the rate of evapotranspiration from an extended surface of an 8 - 15 cm tall green grass cover, actually growing, completely shading the ground and not short of water (Doorenbos et al. 1986). Methods to calculate ET0 are, among other, the Penman-Monteith method and the Pan Evaporation method. With the latter method, ET0 is estimated from t