<section>e</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
The study was conducted in Burkina Faso, Senegal, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Focus Group Discussions (FGDs), a qualitative research technique, were used separately with women and men farmers, who totalled more than 1,500 in number. The FGDs were complemented by 52 interviews with key informants in the government, non-government, and commercial sectors. The research took place in areas of relatively poor agriculture, where women were assuming an ever-increasing role in farm work, mainly because of migration to towns and cities by men.
The lowly social and economic status of women in rural Africa impinges strongly on the production tools and implements they use. Women's direct access to cash from their work on the family holding is usually minimal because of the traditional control by men of most of the cash crop revenues, and credit is virtually unavailable to women. In fact credit is hardly available for any small farmer, man or woman, in any of the five countries, although Senegal is on the point of relaunching credit schemes. But for women farmers it is even less available than it is to men. This is because land and cultivation rights are ascribed almost exclusively to men, and so women can offer no collateral for loans. In addition, they are usually too burdened with farm and family chores to be able to travel to town and spend time in the bureaucratic process of obtaining credit. And their skills in literacy and numeracy are often lower than those of men, thus adding to their difficulties.
In present circumstances, women's only real opportunities for land and credit is through women's groups, and such groups were active in all five countries. However, land allocated to women's groups by community authorities tends to be distant from the village, of low quality, and the women are seldom allowed to use it for more than one or two years to prevent them acquiring permanent rights to it.
In some countries of the study there bad been a backlash from men resulting from what they saw as an excessive and exclusive emphasis on women in development programmes in the last decade or so; in other countries such a backlash seems to be building now. A few of the countries appeared to be avoiding or solving this problem by developing a family focus for development, rather than a solely women's focus. In some of the countries, women's groups were even inviting a few men to join them.
In the past, there were quite clear distinctions between what was considered men's work and women's work in farming, but these distinctions have now blurred, with women carrying out all of the operations when their men are away. The improved status and recognition that women might logically expect to accrue to them for their increased responsibility and workload has not yet materialized, and rural society still generally treats them as second-class citizens. For their part, most women continue to accept that it is natural for them to work ever harder with little benefit, either of a material or status nature.
There were significant differences in the levels and types of production tools being used in the different countries. The lowest level of technology was found in Burkina Faso where the few animal draft implements and all the hand tools encountered in the study area had been made by blacksmiths using low-quality scrap materials. The highest quality tools and implements were found in Zimbabwe, whether produced by industrial concerns or blacksmiths. Blacksmiths had access to high-quality scrap, mainly from old plough shares and defunct tractor-drawn implements.
The hand hoe remains the primary farm implement for primary cultivation and weeding in all of the countries. Not much can be done to improve its design, but its quality and durability are often poor.
The spread of animal traction is slow at best, and is blocked, or has actually retreated in some countries, because of animal diseases, unfavourable weather conditions that have crippled farm economies, lack of credit, and taboos on women using cattle in some areas.
Many of the groups consulted stated that the hand hoe imposed strict limitations on production, and that as long as they could not gain access to animal traction, they could never progress. Indeed, animal traction, in every area where it was known, was widely seen by people as the solution to their problems.
Nowhere are their taboos against women working with donkeys, which are low prestige animals, with low initial cost compared to bovines, and are therefore more accessible for poor women
In all of the countries, axes, slashers, and harvesting tools were much the same, but there was wider variation among implements and tools for tillage, planting, and weeding. The basic African hoe of the chop-downwards-and-pull type showed variations in length of handle and width and weight of blade, as well as in the method of fixing the blade to the handle.
Only in Senegal was an entirely different type of weeding hoe found, a very long handled push-pull hoe that allows the user to stand upright. It was being used by almost all people working the land in the central part of the country, and short-handled, more traditional hoes that require a squatting or crouched position had been almost totally abandoned
In all probability, the traditional African hoe has evolved locally over time to take into account the particular soil conditions and the tasks to be performed, but there is now a cultural conditioning almost everywhere, except in Senegal, to the effect that work can only be properly performed when bent double with a short-handled hoe. This is an obstacle to the introduction of long-handled implements that would be more comfortable to use, such jab planters and the like, since standing upright to work projects an image of laziness.
Among the groups consulted, the opinion that women needed different tools to men was widespread and so was the notion that manufacturers should differentiate between them as they do, for example, for bicycles. But manufacturers and importers of tools and implements generally do no market research, have no follow-up links with their clients, do little to ensure that a full range of their wares are available at sales points, and seem to ignore the fact that the main users of their products or imports are now women.
As a result, many implements, especially animal draft cultivators, are simply too heavy for women to use easily. And people have to buy whatever they can find, without being able to chose, say, a lighter model of hand hoe that would make weeding easier for women.
Nor are there any consultation processes between blacksmiths and their women clients that might lead to more suitable tools.
Of all the tasks carried out by women on the land, weeding with a hand hoe was said, almost unanimously, to be the most punishing and time consuming, causing exhaustion and back pains. Passing an animal drawn inter-row cultivator through a crop, thus leaving only the spaces between the plants in the row for hand weeding, can reduce the weeding time per acre from 2 - 4 weeks to 2 - 4 days. However, this obviously requires the prior use of animal-drawn planters or hand planting in rows.
Government services and institutions still concentrate their support on men. Thus the majority of participants in animal traction training courses are still men, though * is the women who now really need those skills.
In conclusion, there is no quick and simple solution to improving the production tools and implements used by women. However certain actions need to be taken by governments, development agencies, and NGOs which could start to bring change. They are:
· Start deliberate, well-planned, and sustained communication efforts to create fuller awareness about the enormous role women now play in African farming and about their special needs in production tools and implements
· Study closely, in participation with development project and programme beneficiaries, the weeding problem and examine the possibility and acceptability of promoting row planting and the use of donkeys with light-weight weeders, but taking into account the concomitant need for animal care and veterinary services.
· Continue to promote women's groups, but also involve some men in them, and adopt a family development focus rather than an exclusive focus on women.
· Work in closest cooperation with private sector producers or importers of tools and implements, induce them to do market research, and involve them constructively in meeting farmers needs, especially those of women.
· Become pro-active in ensuring that women farmers are involved in demonstration and training activities concerning for example, animal traction.
· Intensify training programmes for blacksmiths and promote forums for consultation between blacksmiths and their women and men clients.
· Have extension services add advice on farm tools and implements to their traditional message content concerning production techniques, seeds, fertilizers, etc.
· Accentuate the issue of production tools and implements in development projects, create a demand-led Environment for them, and establish the linkages necessary to deliver them.
· Encourage enabling tax and duty policies for local producers and distributors of tools and implements.
· Promote ergonomic research projects, which could be conducted by Makerere University, Uganda, into women's energy use with different types of tool, beginning with different weights of hoe, different width of hoe blades in different soils, etc.
· Working in the closest consultation with potential users at all stages, import and farm test exogenous tools, (for example jab planters, seeders that can be attached to ploughs, etc.). If they are not accepted by potential users, carry out a thorough enquiry as to why not, in order to learn for the future.
<title>The potential for improving production tools and implements used by women farmers in Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Findings, conclusions, and recommendations
Background
Acknowledgements
Scope of the study and the methods used
Principal findings
Differences between countries of the study and some general observations
The role of women in agriculture
The issue of working posture
Draft animals for women
Small tractors and other motorized equipment
Women's access to land
Credit for women
The role of women's groups
The institutional sector
Ergonomic studies
The NGO sector
Blacksmiths
The commercial and industrial sector
What women and men farmers say
The hardest job women do
Differences in tools used by men and women
Replacement of tools
Preferences for blacksmith or industrially-made tools and implements
Prices
Who decides what tools to buy?
Improvements women would like for their tools
Willingness to work with technicians to develop better tools and to pay more for improved versions
Conclusions and recommendations
The constraint of resources available to women
Weeding as women's hardest job and a major constraint to increased production
The constraint of lack of information flow between importers/producers of tools and farmers and the general isolation of this commercial sector.
Lack of training animal traction for women
Lack of research into women's production technology
Attempts to introduce exogenous technology
Findings, conclusions, and recommendations
Background
This study was instigated by the International for Agricultural Development (IFAD). IFAD staff, particularly those concerned with gender issues in agriculture, were of the opinion that progress was being achieved in Africa in the area of post-harvest technology for women, especially with equipment such as cereal mills, but little if anything had been done in respect of tools and implements used by women for agricultural production, up to and including harvest. And when attempts had been made to introduce new tools for cultivating or other operations, they had often been rejected by rural people. Yet, with more than 70 percent of food production work now being done by women in Africa, and with household food security hanging in the balance in so many countries, increasing productivity and reducing women's work load could be central to improving family welfare.
As a first step, however, a study was required to establish the social, cultural, economic, and technical context for attempts to improve the production tools used on the land by African women. The Government of Japan agreed to finance the cost of an international consultant for a period of three months to conduct such a study.
IFAD contacted FAO's Agricultural Engineering Branch (AGSE) to ascertain its possible interest in cooperating in the study. In fact, the proposed study coincided perfectly with AGSE's increasing concern in recent years with gender aspects of agricultural engineering, and also with its emphasis on all aspects of farm power, whether human, animal or motorized AGSE therefore agreed to support the study in all ways possible. Specifically, it financed the salaries, subsistence, and travel of eight local researchers in two countries of West Africa; it arranged for the FAO/SIDA-supported programme of Farm Level Research Methods in Eastern and Southern Africa (FARMESA) to assume similar costs in three countries of that part of the continent; it assigned its Associate Professional Officer (APO) from FAO's Regional Office for Africa to work in the field with the international consultant in two West African countries; and it assigned its Headquarters-based APO to work with him in three
countries of Eastern and Southern Africa, and also to follow up with him in the processing of the research results and in the writing of the reports.
The team responsible for the study and this report was made up of Colin Fraser of Agrisystems (Overseas) Ltd. (communication and participatory research specialist and in overall charge of the study), Gert van der Meijden (agricultural engineer and APO based in Accra), and Josef Kienzle (agricultural engineer and APO based in Rome). For the countries of Eastern and Southern Africa, the team was joined on a voluntary basis by Sonia Restrepo-Estrada, also a communication/participatory research specialist who assisted with the training sessions, with the field work, and with the subsequent analysis. Eight field researchers worked in each country. Their names are in the Appendix at the end of each country report. The field work took place between August and November 1997.
It must be stressed that this study used a qualitative research approach Its aim was not to gather statistical or numerical information, and d where groups of rural people were asked provide such information - for example the number of days women spend in the field doing various operations - it was mainly to ascertain their perceptions of their work and thereby identify which operations, seen from their point of view, should perhaps take priority for possible improvements.
Acknowledgements
The team that conducted the study wishes to acknowledge the excellent preparatory work and support of the Study Co-ordinators in each country, whose names appear in the Appendix to each country report. The research teams in all of the countries were outstanding for their interest in the study, for their ability to learn the participatory research methods used, and for their commitment to seeing the field work properly done. Their contribution was outstanding.
Thanks are also due to people in FAO Country Offices, IFAD projects, and FARMESA for their interest and support. Special gratitude must go to Mona Fikry, the IFAD staff member who launched the idea of the study, for her open-mindedness when she said during the early planning phase, 'I am quite prepared for the results of the study to be negative, that nothing can be done, but we need to know what the situation is.' There was similar open mindedness from Lawrence Clarke, the Chief of AGSE in FAO, who supported the team wholeheartedly through the whole study but always gave it full independence to work as it thought best.
Scope of the study and the methods used
The study was conducted in Burkina Faso, Senegal, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. These countries were selected as providing a fair cross-section of Sub-Saharan Africa, as well as being the site of IFAD and FAO-assisted projects that could provide support in the field.
The consultant advised that, given the factors of culture and tradition that surround tools used by rural people, research based on normal interviews would probably not provide the frank and full information needed; for people with low levels of formal education usually feel too conditioned by an interviewer to reveal what is truly in their hearts and minds. They tend, therefore, to reply on the basis of what they think the interviewer wants to hear. So the consultant proposed a participatory research technique based on Focus Group Discussions with rural women and men separately.
Focus Group Discussions bring together 8-12 people of similar, educational, economic and social level who share the same lifestyle and problems. They may also be segregated by sex when it is likely, as for this study, that different positions exist between men and women and that men might dominate the women during discussions. A facilitator and an observer are present, and the aim is to create an informal and intimate atmosphere in which the group members talk among themselves about themes put forward by the facilitator. He or she uses a basic question guide but must also use follow-up questions that provoke the group into deeper analysis of the issues they are discussing. The method has much in common with group therapy. For it to function well as a process, and to record faithfully the group's ideas and opinions, calls for special techniques from the facilitator and observer.
For this study, Focus Group Discussions would be backed up by key informant interviews with people in governmental, non-governmental, and private sectors concerned with agricultural production, related gender issues, and farm mechanization.
In each country, the consultant, supported by one of the APOs, trained eight local researchers in Focus Group Discussion techniques. There were always at least four women among the eight researchers, and usually more. They were almost all field staff from various institutions ant they all had detailed knowledge of their country's agricultural production systems and women's role in them. The training lasted 2-3 days in a workshop situation followed by 2-3 days of supervision and reinforcement training in the field.
To demonstrate the participatory research technique, the workshop began with the consultant facilitating a group discussion among the trainees who, in effect, constituted a focus group. The APO was the observer who, after the discussion, conducted a restitution to the group of the information that had emerged, obtaining the group's point by point confirmation that what he had noted was correct, and writing the information on flip charts.
The trainees then conducted Focus Group Discussions among themselves, and after each there was an analysis of the way the facilitator and observer had performed. Thus, the training was a learning-by-doing, highly practical experience.
All of the discussion themes used during the workshop training sessions were deliberately related to women and agriculture so that the information that emerged provided the consultant and the APO with a broad picture of the national situation in this respect. It also focused the trainee's attention on the topic, and in this way the scene was effectively set for the study.
For the 2-3 days of training work in rural communities, the researchers worked under the discreet supervision of the consultant and the APO, with a post mortem after each Focus Group Discussion to help the facilitator and the observer refine their command of the technique. The researchers then worked for another week in the field, without the consultant and APO so as to eliminate any possible distortion caused by the presence of foreigners.
The question guides for the Focus Group Discussions, which were drawn up by the consultant before going to Africa, were discussed with each of the research teams, modified slightly to facilitate translation into the local languages or to suit local conditions, and if necessary modified again after the first practical use in the field Thus, the question guides did evolve to some extent, mainly in the first two or three countries, but the changes were of a detailed nature and the overall thrust of the research was unchanged from country to country.
A total of 155 Focus Group Discussions were conducted in the five countries, and of these, 119 were with women, and 36 were with men. A total of about 1,530 people were involved Local languages were used for all of the Focus Group Discussions with rural people. Key informant interviews were conducted by the consultant, the APOs, and the Study Co-ordinators. These interviews totalled 52 in number and they included: government staff concerned with agricultural development, gender matters, and mechanization; representatives of banking and credit services; university and research staff; representatives of NGOs; blacksmiths; and importers and industrial manufacturers of tools and implements.
The study was generally conducted in areas of relatively poor agriculture, where there had been a high level of male exodus to find work in urban areas, and where women, therefore, were assuming an ever-increasing role in farm work. The agricultural economy in these areas was mainly at subsistence level, with consequent limitations in the availability of resources for investment in improved production technology.
Principal findings
Differences between countries of the study and some general observations
There were significant differences in the levels and types of tools and implements being used in the five countries. Although there were strong similarities among the axes, harvesting sickles, and slashers found everywhere, some countries had tools that others did not have at all. For example, there were no rakes or multiple-tined forks for composting in Burkina Faso, and no wheelbarrows were seen in Senegal. But Burkina Faso was the only country with a simple home-made row marker - like a large rake with three spikes set at the desired row width - that could be pulled across the field by hand before planting. Row planting by hand in countries of Eastern and Southern Africa is achieved with the much more cumbersome technique of stretching a marking wire or cord across the plot. And in Uganda, women had adopted a flexible steel strip, normally used to strap roof timbers together, as a tool for weeding millet.
The lowest end of the production technology scale - with the exception of the very practical row marker - was found in the Central Plateau of Burkina Faso. Most of the nation's people live there, but the conditions are so difficult that few farmers can rise above the level of the hand hoe as their prime production tool. The few animal draft implements that were found in the Central Plateau were all blacksmith-built and were generally fitted with a duckfoot tine for inter-row cultivating. None of the implements manufactured industrially in Burkina Faso were found in the area of the study, probably because they cost about twice as much as those built by blacksmiths, and today no credit is available to buy them. Indeed, the credit organizations that used to provide 5-year loans for anneal traction packages no longer do so. They state that such credit is economically not viable in the Central Plateau.
In Senegal, as a result of a major Government and donor effort to promote and support animal traction from the mid-1960s to the end of the 1970s, there are many animal draft implements still in use today. But the credit schemes that enabled this important expansion of animal traction collapsed in 1980, so most of the implements are old and show signs of repeated repair by blacksmiths. Even so, and as an example of the degree to which animal traction has taken over, hand planting of crops has virtually disappeared in the area of Central Senegal where the study was conducted. Old and battered single-row planters, usually drawn by a horse, still serve their purpose well, and women demonstrated to the research team, with some glee, how they used to plant with hand hoes in the past. At the time of this study. there were plans afoot to re-launch agricultural credit schemes which with up to five years for repayment, would allow the purchase of industrially-produced animal draft
implements again. In the intervening years, from 1980 to 1997, virtually the only new implements sold were built by blacksmiths.
In Uganda, animal traction is confined to the Northern and Eastern parts of the country. The reasons for this relate to history, culture, and the presence of tsetse fly elsewhere, though tsetse is now well on the way to eradication. So in Central Uganda, where conditions for agriculture are very favourable, hoe farming is still the norm, though people are very interested in knowing more about anneal traction. The country has a recently reconditioned and fully equipped factory in Soroti which is producing animal draft implements.
In Zambia, the hand hoe also predominates. The spread of animal traction has been impeded by several factors: one is that the Government's high import duties on raw materials makes it virtually impossible for any implement manufacturer to survive. In fact those that were in existence have collapsed in the last few years, so implements now have to be imported from Zimbabwe. And making things even more difficult for Zambian manufacturers is that the Government of Zimbabwe subsidizes the cost of steel for its manufacturers, and also subsidises exports as well. A second factor is that Corridor disease, a tickborne ailment, has decimated the cattle population, including draft oxen, in recent years. And finally, Zambia has no significant donkey population, so to use them for draft power means importing them from Zimbabwe or Botswana
'In the past, we used ox-drawn implements, but not any more. The implements have been worn out and most of our animals have died from tickborne disease. The hand hoe is the key to our farming now.' Women during group discussion in Zambia.
Among the countries of the study, Zimbabwe has the highest level of farm production technology. Animal traction, using mainly oxen but also donkeys in some areas, is very widespread One reason for this is certainly the presence in Bulawayo of an impressive manufacturing facility for animal draft implements, which has been in existence in one form or another since 1929. In addition, the general level of the agricultural economy is superior to that of the other countries and this obviously facilitates investment in tools and implements.
There is an interesting difference in the cultivation practices between the two Sahelian countries of West Africa and the non-Sahelian countries. Where animal traction exists in Burkina Faso and Senegal, ploughing with mouldboard ploughs is hardly practiced, whereas in Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe it is the norm. In Burkina Faso and in Senegal, it is usual to run a cultivator over the surface of the field and follow it immediately with the planter or by hand planting. The origin of this difference probably lies in climate and soil types. During the dry season in the Sahel, the soils are too hard for easy use of mouldboard ploughs, and then, given the very limited rainfall and short cropping season, there is enormous urgency to plant as soon as the first rains do fall and begin to soften the surface. A cultivator can quickly loosen the top few centimetres of soil enough for the planter, and so necessity is the mother of low-till or no-till in the Sahel. Deeper primary tillage
is only used for groundnuts, and for maize to retain more soil moisture in areas where the rainfall is barely sufficient for it.
The role of women in agriculture
Much has been written in recent years about the role of rural woman in Africa, and this is not the place for a further discourse on the subject. Only the salient points that emerged from the study will be provided in this report and placed in the context of how they relate to production technology used by women. ^1
^1 A very complete picture of the situation of rural women in Africa, and globally, can be obtained from such publications as:
IFAD's Strategies for the Economic Advancement of Poor Rural Women, 1991.
The State of Rural Poverty, IFAD, 1992.
Household Food Security; Implications for Policy and Action for Rural Poverty Alleviation and Nutrition, IFAD 1996.
Rural Women and Food Security Current Situation and Perspectives. FAO, 1997.
'If a woman starts to earn too much cash from her garden (plot) she will get into trouble with her husband'. Comment by member of field research team, Zimbabwe.
'Women work their individual plots very early in the morning, or late in the afternoon when they don't have other tasks such as cooking and when they are freed by their husbands.' Conclusion of research team, Burkina Faso.
'Women do me work; men are in charge!' Extension worker and field researcher, Burkina Faso.
The agricultural system and women's role in it is similar in the five countries of the study. There is usually a family plot of land assigned to the male head of the family by the village leaders or local authorities. Typically this family plot ranges in size from 2-5 ha The man then allocates a small piece of this, usually about 1000-5,000 sq. m., to his wife or to each of his wives - polygamy is very common in the countries of the study.
The family plot is where the principal cash crops are grown, and in predominantly subsistence situations such as Burkina Faso, the staple family cereals are also grown on this plot. On her individual plot, each wife produces food for her husband, her children, and herself. If the family's staple cereals are being grown on the family plot, she will be responsible for producing the items such as vegetables, pulses, groundnuts, etc. to eat with them. She may be able to grow a few things for sale, but only to a very limited extent.
The family plot takes total priority for attention and work, and the women are only allowed to go to their individual plots very early in the morning or when their husbands free them in the afternoon or evening, after the day's work on the family plot is complete.
In the past, there were fairly clear distinctions between what was considered men's work and women's work in agriculture. For example, in most countries, land opening or tillage prior to planting was done by men, using ox-power when they had it. If a mechanical planter was available, the men would also undertake that operation, otherwise women and children became involved in hand planting. Thereafter, all of the hoeing to control weeds, and most of the harvesting operations, were traditionally done by women.
Today, these distinctions have become blurred. Many men have left the land to work in towns or to emigrate to neighbourning countries. The phenomenon is so marked in some areas that, according to reports in Burkina Faso for example, women can make up as much as 80 per cent or more of the adult rural population. In these circumstances, women have been forced to assume tasks that were traditionally done by men, in addition to their own of hand planting, weeding and harvesting.
In the area of livestock, men usually look after cattle, but women do the milking. addition, women generally look after small ruminants and poultry.
Men, even when they spend most of their time working in town, are still considered to be the main decision-makers about the farming activities. And they also take full control of the sale of farm produce and of family finances.
Tools
The hand hoe still remains the key farm implement in all of the countries of the study. Uganda may be an extreme case, but it was estimated there in 1997 that almost 90 pa cent of farmers use hand tools and human labour only, that animal draft power is used on only 8 percent of the cultivated land, and tractor power on only 2 percent.
The hoe comes in various forms in Africa, but in almost all cases it is of the traditional chop-downwards-and pull type. The only significantly different hoe that was being used widely was found in Senegal. It is a push-pull hoe that cuts the weeds just below the surface, (similar to the so-called Dutch hoe used in Europe) and it is fitted with a very long handle (180-220 cm) I