<title>Planning in Government Forest Agencies How to Balance Forest Use and Conservation: Agenda for Training Workshop</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Agenda 21 and the "Forest Principles" adopted by UNCED in 1992 emphasized the need to protect the environment and for people's participation to achieve sustainable development in the long run, in addition to maintaining the contribution of forests to economic development. With this shift in emphasis in forest development has come a need for new approaches and processes for forestry planning.
The Planning and Statistics Branch of the Policy and Planning Division of the Forestry Department of FAO, under the supervision of Yves C. Dubé, Forestry Officer (Planning), with the support of an interdisciplinary group from various Divisions in FAO, has issued in September 1996, a Working Paper titled "Planning for Forest Use and Conservation: Guidelines for Improvement". Dr. Jan G. Laarman from the Forestry Department of the North Carolina State University drafted the original version.
This Agenda for Training Workshop corresponds to a revised version of the September 1996 Working Paper, following the recommendations of an expert meeting organized in Accra, Ghana, in January 1997, by the FAO Regional Office for Africa in collaboration with the National Forestry Programme Coordinating Unit and the Forestry Policy and Planning Division of the FAO Forestry Department.
It is hoped that this publication will be an important reference framework for senior managers, planning leaders and trainers in government ministries and agencies as they review their planning systems for forest use and conservation and that the approaches recommended will be widely tested and adopted and thus contribute to the enhancement of capacities called for by UNCED's Agenda 21.
Lennart Ljungman
Director
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of planning for forestry development is to establish a workable framework for forest use and conservation which incorporates the economic, social and environmental dimensions on a sustainable basis. The framework is about creating a shared vision of how forests will be used and protected. This can be summed up in a single central question: Trees and forests for whom and for what? The question is not new but what is new is the perception that so many different groups have an interest in the reply.
Forestry planning has traditionally been mainly concerned with the production of timber for industry and other wood products, and with forest industry development. Planning for environmental goals also has a long history but was largely restricted to designated areas for exclusive conservation. National forestry development agencies were essentially responsible for the sustained yield management on protected public forest lands and for reserved forests. The term "sustained yield" was mostly limited to wood production and therefore excluded the majority of other forest products and services. Although most forestry agencies have made progress towards multiple-use management, planning remains often biased towards timber in a wide range of countries. Many of the actions taken in order to stimulate forestry development in the immediate failed to sustain the momentum of growth in the longer term. Short term achievements sometimes resulted in degradation or destruction of the stock
of natural capital needed in order to maintain growth in the future or reduced options for future end uses by degrading the forest capital.
Today, forestry planning must adapt to rapidly changing social, economic, and political circumstances. Around the world, the forestry profession is challenged to embrace new goals, principles, and management approaches. These changing perspectives (see Box 1) imply that forestry planning has to adjust as follows:
· To manage forests not only for industrial timber, but also for nontimber products and for aesthetic, spiritual, cultural, and environmental contributions;
· To account for both the private and public goods supplied by forests, and to search for helpful processes that determine how much of each to produce;
· To apply multiple criteria in order to compare forest options in terms of biological diversity, social acceptability, total economic value, and overall sustainability;
· To expand the spatial scope of planning from individual forest sites to entire ecosystems;
· To conduct planning in a manner that will recognize biological, social, and environmental uncertainties;
· To make greater efforts to reflect the interaction of forestry with other sectors like agriculture in particular with reference to food security;
· To recognize that policies outside the forestry sector such as macroeconomic policies, population growth, agricultural, energy or environmental policies play an important role in forest use and conservation;
· To emphasize the potential contribution to poverty alleviation and the priorities of vulnerable groups such as indigenous people, women and children, people at the lowest levels of subsistence, and those in future generations;
· To recognize that disagreements about forest uses occur within a world of sharply divided values and preferences, and that forest-based communities are local and global.
Among the leading themes in forestry planning are: (1) wide participation by interest groups, (2) negotiation of competing rights to forest resources, and (3) decisions that lead to forest sustainability. These themes are relevant everywhere, even though their context varies from one country to another.
Box 1. Changing Perspectives on Forestry
Yesterday
Today
Forest products are timber, game, fuelwood, and water.
Forest produces not only commodities, but also biological diversity, protection benefits, indigenous homelands, preservation values, and other cultural and spiritual benefits.
The natural world can be managed and controlled.
Humans have profound impacts on the natural world, and many of these impacts are beyond our capacity to understand and control.
Forest-dependent communities are local farms and villages.
Communities which benefit from forests are local, regional, national, and global.
Forest management should sustain harvests (of industrial wood, fuel, etc.).
Forest management should sustain the forest as a complex ecosystem.
Private property owners have every right to do as they wish with their forests.
Governments take an interest in property rights in order to protect the public good.
The forester is expert and decisionmaker.
The "public" is decisionmaker. The forester is technical advisor.
The shift in emphasis of forestry development towards improvement of the welfare of people and protection of biological diversity and of long term local and global environmental benefits requires associated shifts in the planning process. Many old ideas about planning are being discarded. Traditional planning has been too ambitious, Utopian, and inflexible. Traditional planning has attempted to control, but has done little to empower. In principle, the new emphasis is on planning as a means for empowerment.
This Agenda for Training Workshop provides a framework of principles, strategic approaches and new ways of thinking (see Worksheet 1) regarding how to achieve sustainable forest development in the long run. First, the concept of planning in relation to forests is revisited. Chapter 2 presents a typology of useful planning methods and tools in relation to forests. Chapters 3 and 4 advocates the integration of participation and conflict management into the planning process with a view to strengthening the (internal and external) planning environment and building partnership. Finally, Chapter 5 proposes orientations for effective forestry planning. At the end of the publication, three appendices are presented. The first is a glossary to define planning terms. Many terms have meanings not found in ordinary dictionaries. Secondly, references are provide for those who want to go deeper into planning concepts and methods. Thirdly, 38 training worksheets are provided. The worksheets
are user-friendly and can be used separately or group by sub-themes. They are also flexible insofar as the user can adapt, expand or reformulate them to fit his own planning situation and needs.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1: FORESTRY PLANNING REVISITED
1.1 Planning as a Process of Continuous Improvement
1.2 At the End of a Process that Never ends: What are the Results of Planning?
1.3 Planning Cycle Stages: How it should work
Forestry planning could be organized by administrative levels, geographical units, and functional purposes (see Box 2). In this publication, the term "sector planning" is minimized. This is because much previous planning in relation to forests has failed to cross sectoral boundaries. Instead, the term "strategic planning" is preferred where a strategy is a careful plan or method to achieve defined goals.
1.1 Planning as a Process of Continuous Improvement
In recent years, management consultants have worked hard to give planning an action orientation. Planning aims for "total quality management," also expressed as "continuous improvement." In relation to forest use and conservation, planning is: a continuous process of decisions and actions about alternative ways of using and conserving trees and forests, with the intent of achieving particular goals in the medium and long term. Planning is only as good as the number of constructive actions that come from it. It is not an end in itself. Rather, it has to be an instrument of policy and management. Even under the best of circumstances, planning may result in goals that are poorly selected, and strategies that fail. But if the experience produces a kind of learning, then planning becomes more "intelligent" as it learns from past mistakes. For most organizations, this is the most challenging part!
The planning cycle consists of seven stages (Box 3). In this planning cycle, success consists of small positive accomplishments that reinforce each other through the years. Or as shown at the bottom of Box 3, progress expands outward in the form of a spiral.
The process appears simple, but this can be deceptive. An organisation needs capable management in order to (1) know when and how to organize and supervise the planning, (2) adapt planning to be appropriate for a country's unique circumstances, and (3) learn from planning's successes and failures. The whole of the process relies on management, creativity, and cooperation. Any of these can be limiting. But for each constraint, the response is the same: to work for continuous improvement.
1.2 At the End of a Process that Never ends: What are the Results of Planning?
Strategic planning in relation to forests has the following characteristics:
· It is a means to visualize actions to increase the social, cultural, economic, and environmental benefits from trees and forests;
· It has a strong management orientation, since a strategy should state specific goals, specific activities, and specific people;
· It is much more than a short-term operational plan, since a strategy begins by reviewing missions and goals;
· It is much more than a set of projects, although projects can be one type of instrument for achieving certain goals;
· It often leads to questions about institutional capacity (and how to increase it); and
· It is an iterative process of testing, evaluating, and learning from some actions that succeed and others that fail.
Box 2. Planning in Relation to Forests Is of Several Types....
National Development Planning
Development plans set economic and social targets in relation to population growth, economic production, savings and investment, income distribution, and other macroeconomic measures. National development planning determines the budgets for sectors, agencies, and programs (e.g., in forestry).
Regional and Area Planning
When it works well, planning in regions and local areas is coordinated with national development planning. In forestry, regional and area planning are important because of the way forests are separated by gradients of climate, watersheds, transportation infrastructure, and other biophysical aspects.
Sector Planning
The forestry sector refers to linkages among the owners, managers, and users of trees and forests. Sectoral planning considers the different ways these owners, managers, and users will gain and lose because of alternative options for forest use and conservation.
Land-Use Planning
Land-use planning occurs at different levels and scales, from continental to local. It indicates the advantages and disadvantages of a specific use on a particular unit of land according to physical, economic, and social criteria.
Project Planning
Projects attempt to combine resources to achieve results in an efficient manner. Usually, projects are defined by well-specified objectives, budgets, time frames, and beneficiaries. In top-down planning, projects support goals at sectoral, regional, and national levels. In bottom-up planning, projects are specified prior to being considered for plans at sectoral, regional, and national levels.
Forest Management Planning
Management planning chooses among production and conservation options for specific forests. The "manager" is a person or an entire organization, depending on the context.
Forest Enterprise Planning
Enterprise planning refers to business operations (not always for profit) that use one or more forest goods and services. Enterprises are owned and managed by governments, communities, private companies, and individuals. Enterprise planning focuses on resource supply, production technology, and product marketing.
Box 3. The Cycle of Continuous Improvement
1. Define missions and roles. What is the mission of the forestry agency and of other groups (governmental and non-governmental) in protecting and managing forests? Planning begins by clarifying these purposes for one's group in relation to others.
2. Select improvement goals. Goals state what the agency will do to carry out its mission. Because the agency is searching for improvements, goals should aim for a higher level of accomplishment ("national good") than previously.
3 Set objectives. Objectives are the details about expected accomplishments. What type of results does the agency want, and in what quantity?
4 Select action strategies. Strategies are the operational means to achieve the improvement goals. Strategies are specific actions.
5 Negotiate major issues. To carry out its strategies, the agency needs cooperation from people within and external to it. Most of this cooperation has to be resolved in early stages of the planning. But for remaining issues, what are the points to be negotiated, and with whom?
6. Implement the strategies. Specific people perform specific actions as part of specific strategies. Implementation succeeds or fails in relation to communications, empowerment, supporting resources, and reward systems.
7. Evaluate results, make adjustments, and repeat the process. Are the strategies of the agency working? Are its objectives being met? The agency cannot know this without checking and evaluation. When there are failures, who is responsible for adjusting missions, goals, objectives, and strategies?
Strategic planning never truly ends, but there are milestones along the way to mark the progress. The results of planning can be the following:
1. Bottom-up and top-down communications that help integrate the different units within an agency. In this way, planning contributes to team building and a sense of shared purpose. But when these communications are poorly managed, they create resentment and frustrations.
2. Partnerships between the forestry agency, other agencies, and interest groups. For this to be effective, the forestry agency must genuinely want and respect the ideas it receives from persons not employed there. Just as importantly, the forestry agency cannot leave out any key groups - since that creates more problems than it solves. The risks of badly managing outside participation may partly explain the past reluctance of many forestry agencies to invite it.
3. A vision of the future and a path to get there. To plan is to create a shared vision of the future. Worksheet 2 presents a checklist of elements found in a good strategic plan for forest use and conservation, although the format may be different between organisations.
1.3 Planning Cycle Stages: How it should work
The rest of this chapter examines each planning stage to provide more explanation on how it should work.
Planning Cycle - Stage 1
Mission: An Agency Cannot Plan Without One
Each forestry agency has functional, geographical, and legal responsibilities that are different from every other organization. The mission - the broad general purposes for which an organization exists - of forestry agencies in relation to other organizations - both public and private-are changing dramatically. The starting point is to focus on the agency's mission in relation to the missions of all other groups whose actions affect forest use and conservation. Almost everywhere, this list of groups is longer every year.
Most readers of this publication are familiar with the almost continuous restructuring of agencies responsible for forests, watershed management, protected areas, wildlife, coastal zones, soils, and other natural resources. In numerous countries, forestry is moving from agricultural ministries to new organizations for environment and sustainable development. It is also quite common to find new units for agroforestry and community forestry. Some forestry agencies are removing themselves from wood processing and marketing. Others are privatizing their tree nurseries. For functional areas such as community forestry and protected areas, a number of NGOs now play a very prominent role. These many re-organizations are one of the reasons that planning environments can be chaotic.
The planning environment is even more complex due to an inflow of new ideas, influence, and power affecting forest use and conservation. Some people refer to this as a "paradigm shift." This refers to the increasing number of people who oppose tree cutting, and who value forests primarily for preservation benefits.
Although these ideologies originate in the industrialized countries, they are by now increasingly attractive to opinion leaders in the developing countries. This is a relatively new presence that now challenges forestry agencies on matters of authority and competence in forest concessions, reforestation programs, and other traditional roles. In the face of these challenges, the mission of government agencies for forests is increasingly difficult to define. Perhaps it is broader than before? Perhaps it is narrower? For certain, it is changing.
For this reason, it is very important for strategic planning to begin by asking: (1) What does the agency do? (2) How is this changing, and how should it be changing? (3) How does this affect where and how the agency should use its influence and resources? In essence, the agency is trying to avoid the following frustrations:
· Important functions for watersheds, coastal zones, etc., are neglected because there is no accountability for them. Each agency (or department) assumes that "somebody else" is responsible.
· In a functional or geographical area, the agency is doing the same type of work as another organization, but with conflicts or duplicated efforts.
· In policy and program development, the organization is slow to act upon the directives coming from top levels.
· In a geographic area, the missions of other organizations (e.g., for agriculture, minerals, roads, land reform, etc.) interfere with the agency's role to protect and manage forests.
· Different agencies, NGOs, and interest groups misunderstand each other. Even worse, many do not talk with each other.
These problems are widespread. Hundreds of management consultants agree that there is no easy way to solve them. But for planning, the agency must attempt to define a clear and concise statement of its mission in relation to other missions (Box 4). If this is done well at the national level, it can provide the basis for missions at subordinate levels (e.g., for regions, provinces, and districts).
Box 4. What an Agency Should Expect in a Good Mission Statement
A good mission statement should........
· cover all of its organization's functional, geographical, and service commitments;
· complement (not conflict with) the missions of other government and private organizations;
· be realistic, concise, and easy to understand.
Discussions about missions can be long and seemingly endless. This is a situation to be avoided. Management experts make the following recommendations:
1. Convene workshops or meetings in a neutral place, and use the services of a preferably neutral person (someone outside the organization) to facilitate group discussion about roles and mission. Invite leaders from organizations (public and private) that have the greatest interest and most questions about the mission of the agency.
2. Start by having everyone individually answer Worksheet 3. Then initiate group discussions about these questions. This has to be handled carefully. Each special interest, and each unit of the agency, will interpret the mission in a different way.
3. Based on these discussions, write a draft of a new or revised mission statement. This can be the responsibility of a small team. Do not be overly constrained by laws, regulations, and other legislation. In most agencies, many important roles are not written in laws and documents. Moreover, the agency is aiming to produce a statement of what its mission should be. This is the improvement you seek.
4. Circulate the draft to the invited leaders, as well as across and down the agency. Ask for comments, and revise the draft accordingly. When properly managed, this can be a powerful means of communication and team building.
Box 5 presents a sample mission statement for the fictional XYZ Forestry Department. The mission statement cannot be a "dead document," but on the contrary should motivate the work of the whole agency. In countries where it is appropriate, different regional and functional offices should write their own mission statements that start from the national model - modifying it to reflect the special circumstances of that region or office. At all levels, a clear statement of the mission is highly important for defining improvement goals, as follows.
Box 5. Example of a Mission Statement for a Forestry Agency
The XYZ Forestry Department contributes to the protection, utilization, and management of the nation's trees and forests in ways that are socially, environmentally, and economically sustainable by:
1. Continuously assessing areas, conditions, and trends in tree and forest cover, and making the information widely available.
2. Protecting public forestlands from encroachments, fires, insects, diseases, and other threats to the healthy condition of trees, forests, and associated natural resources.
3. Maintaining a system of natural areas protected from harvesting and other intensive uses in order to promote ecosystem preservation, environmental services, and scientific research.
4. Providing harvesting and other utilization rights to individuals, communities, and commercial enterprises in selected zones of public forests, and insuring that harvesting is sustainable.
5. Assessing and efficiently collecting a fair revenue for government from the individuals, communities, and enterprises which utilize products and services of the public forests.
6. Providing low-cost and efficient extension services in relation to trees, forests, and associated resources for farmers, communities, and private businesses.
7. Providing policy analysis on forest-related issues to the highest level of national authority and decisionmaking.
8. Interacting cooperatively with international assistance agencies, donor groups, and NGOs in the programming of external aid for forest protection and management.
Interacting cooperatively with authorities in public and private organizations on matters of shared concern relative to trees and forests in national defense, agricultural and pastoral development, water and power supply, public health, infrastructural development, and cultural and educational affairs.
Planning Cycle - Stage 2
Improvement Goals; Filling Performance Gaps
Goals are statements of what your organization intends to do in order to carry out its mission. But unlike missions, which are indefinite and continuing, goals can be accomplished. At any point in time, an organization's goals should determine its main activities.
The agency's search for continuous improvement is driven by the following question: In what main functions must the agency perform well in order to succeed? This question can be asked for each element of a mission statement. This will identify the key factors affecting the agency's performance.
Box 6 illustrates improvement goals for a mission element of the XYZ Forestry Department. An agency should define its own improvement goals with the help of Worksheet 4. Worksheet 5 is a supplementary framework to bring out institutional issues that cut across many different parts of a mission. Strategic planning cannot go far without attention to institution building. The combined use of these two frameworks should produce many improvement goals to be compared, sorted, and given priorities.
In view of past problems, many forestry agencies will do well to pursue socially-oriented improvement goals. It is perfectly acceptable to state qualitative goals such as "to improve the Department's relationships with indigenous communities." Other acceptable goals are "to employ more women in professional and technical positions," and so on. Many such goals are not forestry goals per se, but they may be social goals for the country as a whole. Therefore, the agency should include them.
Many people find it difficult to specify the factors that determine their performance. Their answers may be too general, such as "the agency's budget is too small." And technical staff often leave out social goals. By convening workshops and providing assistance, an agency may be able to raise the quality of how people state their improvement goals.
Box 6. Example of Improvement Goals to Support a Mission Element
Mission Element
Improvements Goals
(Next Five Years)
Factors for Success
"Providing harvesting and other utilization rights to individuals, communities, and commercial enterprises in selected zones of public forests, and insuring that harvesting is sustainable." (see fourth mission element in Box 5)
To increase field monitoring where harvesting takes place
Understanding where, when, and how harvesting is occurring.
To work with Dept. of Land Reform to improve where and how concessions are granted.
Resolving conflicting tenure claims.
To grant more forest concessions to regional and local interests, especially in South Region.
Revised criteria for granting concessions.
To refine and expand the method of selling timber by competitive pricing.
To obtain more support for the Department's programs from indigenous leaders in South Region.
Improved relations with indigenous communities.
To apply and evaluate positive incentives for good logging.
Effective sanctions and incentives for appropriate harvesting methods.
Sometimes, a forestry agency can have so many improvement goals that they become meaningless. Any single goal is lost in the middle of others, and it is impossible to monitor all of them. Almost always, there are more improvement goals than can be implemented at one time. For obvious reasons, the effort to consolidate and prioritize goals has to be a careful exercise in diplomacy.
Worksheet 6 classifies improvement goals by three levels of priority. Also, an agency can employ methods in Chapter 3 to show how proposed goals relate to each other, to national priorities, and to feasibility factors. The mix of goals should:
· respond to the highest level of national priorities;
· complement and reinforce each other; and
· be within the capacity of the agency to supervise, monitor, and evaluate.
Planning Cycle - Stage 3
Objectives: Setting Targets
Objectives (see Box 3) state specific results to be achieved. For an improvement goal, an objective should be clear about: what, who, when, and how much.
Objectives rely on indicators to quantify how much. For technical goals, this normally does not present a problem. But for intangible and institutional goals, the desired improvements may be difficult to measure.
The higher is the administrative level, the more challenging it can be to quantify the objectives (e.g., objectives to improve communications and public relations). But the planning is no less rigorous even though an agency cannot quantify everything in it. Rather, the agency states its objectives in terms that are indirect and qualitative.
In setting its objectives, the agency needs to know where it is now! That one simple truth can cause enormous frustrations. The frustrations are constructive if they lead to an honest search for information. They are not constructive if they make planners invent "creative" numbers that have no basis in reality. But if the search for baseline data is diligent and earnest, everyone will learn an enormous amount about current operations.
Worksheet 7 provides suggestions on how to write objectives, and Box 7 shows examples. For strategic planning that looks ahead many years, do not invest too much time trying to make the objectives precise. The agency is aiming for a reasonable approximation.
Planning Cycle - Stage 4
Strategies: Action Ideas
Strategies indicate how objectives will be achieved. For any objective, what obstacles stand in its way? And what positive factors increase the chances that it can be achieved? These are excellent questions for group discussion, such as through the techniques of brainstorming and force-field analysis (see Chapter 3). Each strategy group should invite wide participation from outside the agency in order to enlarge the range of ideas. The various ideas are screened, grouped, and studied for administrative and budget feasibility. The actions for each objective:
· follow a logical sequence;
· are placed in a time schedule;
· specify resources (e.g. budget) to accomplish them; and
· are assigned to individuals who are accountable for carrying them out.
Box 7. Examples of Objectives in Support of Improvement Goals
Improvement Goals (examples from Box 6)
Performance Indicators
Objectives
To increase field monitoring where harvesting takes place
No. of forest concessions regularly inspected for harvesting impacts
To increase monitoring from present 30% of concessions to target of 80% by end of year 2002. Responsible: Chief of Forest Utilization Section, XYZ For. Dept.
To grant more forest concessions to regional and local interests, especially in South Region
Share of forest concessions (by area) in hands of companies and individuals who live in South Region
To increase this share from current 18% to target of > 40% by end of year 2002. Responsible: Executive Director, XYZ For. Dept.
To obtain more support for the Department's programs from indigenous leaders in South Region
No. of "positive" exchanges between Department and indigenous groups in South Region
To increase the "positive" exchanges from current < 50% to target of > 90% by end of 1999. Responsibility: Regional Coordinator for South Region
Planning often fails at this stage of proposing action ideas. For example, the agency usually makes a mistake when it proposes actions "for" somebody who does not actually participate in the planning. Secondly, action ideas may suffer due to unrealistic cost estimates. Often this is because of too little attention in the office to budget and financial management.
Box 8 illustrates actions to accomplish objectives (and see Worksheet 8). The action statements should be prepared by the persons directly responsible for the objectives. Note, too, that not all actions have to be written on paper, especially if they do not need approval at higher levels.
Planning Cycle - Stage 5
Negotiation: Seeking Agreement and Compromise
If the planning is done well, many disagreements will have been resolved by this stage. Ideas are moving laterally as well as up and down when people discuss mission, goals, objectives, and actions. Obviously, the quality of this discussion varies with:
· the amount of careful preparation to support the plannin