<title>FAO Fisheries Circular No. Tests, demonstrations and training for the utilization of by-catch reduction </title>
<section>1</section>
1.BACKGROUND
The participants in the Working Group on Shrimp and Demersal Fishes held in Kuwait from 11 to 13 May 1996 observed that the amount of by-catch resulting from intensive shrimp trawling in the Gulfs is becoming a very serious problem for the stocks of demersal fish and for the sustainability of the fisheries in the region.
The following recommendation was made:
"With overfishing being a problem in every Gulfs country with a shrimp trawl industry which is known to have a serious impact on non-target species, i.e. by-catch, it is recommended that by-catch reduction devices (BRDs) be tested in the region and introduced in the fishery."
It is worth noting that a few countries of the Gulfs have already carried out some experiments aiming at reducing by-catch (Bahrain, Iran).
After the Working Group, a number of Gulfs countries consulted the Fisheries Department of FAO requesting information and documents related to the by-catch reduction devices already developed in various parts of the world, in particular in Australia and the USA. Later, one of the Gulfs countries made a formal request to FAO for tests of by-catch reduction devices to be arranged in the region and several countries of the region offered to contribute to this initiative with tests/demonstration/relevant training of such devices in the commercial shrimp fisheries of the Gulfs.
<section>2</section>
2. PROGRAMME
2.1 Immediate objectives
* To test several existing by-catch reduction devices with proved efficiency on trawls in shrimp fisheries in other parts of the world in order to ascertain which would be the most suitable to the conditions of the fisheries in the Gulfs.
* To demonstrate to local fishery officers under commercial fishing conditions the efficiency of several devices.
* To demonstrate to local fishery officers of the region the installation, rigging and utilization of the by-catch reduction devices in commercial fishing operations and the feasibility of further research and development in this respect.
2.2 Proposal
Iran proposed to host the activities and to organize these, in cooperation with FAO, during the shrimp fishing season, in October.
Trips at sea were organised for a five-day period on board commercial vessels off Bandar Abbas with observers, fisheries officers from the countries of the Gulfs having shrimp trawling fisheries, on board to participate in the tests and training.
A fishing technologist from Australia, experienced in by-catch reduction devices, Mr. Steve Eayrs, was recruited to conduct the experiments at sea and was responsible, in cooperation with a fishing technologist of FAO, for the demonstration and training.
The hosting country, Iran, had agreed to bring on board, for the duration of the tests, a journalist and a crew for a documentary (videofilm).
The proposed activities consisted of:
* Tests of several by-catch reduction devices under the local commercial fishing conditions, including, as appropriate, the utilization of underwater equipment;
* Demonstration to fishery officers in commercial fishing locally of the efficiency of several devices installed on trawls now in commercial use in the Gulfs;
* Training in the installation, rigging and utilization in commercial fishing operations of the by-catch reduction devices;
* Elaboration of the appropriate extension material for reporting the test/demonstration(a video film, article(s) for a local journal or magazine) to inform the fishermen on the potential advantages of using these devices. A video film will be given to each of the participants.
2.3 By-catch reduction devices (BRD) proposed for testing
The by-catch reduction devices to be used were selected in collaboration with the concerned Gulfs countries, the Australian technologist and the Fishing Technology Service of FAO.
The followings were proposed: square-mesh window, fisheye, cones and rigid grid (NAFTED type).
Square-mesh window
The simplest BRD. The window allows fish to escape upwards through the large square mesh, while the shrimps that do not swim as well as fish pass into the codend. It is normally located in the trawl extension immediately ahead of the codend.
w9032e01.jpg (31768 byte)
Fisheye
It is a simple steel frame attached to the codend to provide a small elliptical opening for fish to escape through. It faces forward in the top of the codend. Animals pass into the codend and must turn to swim forward to escape through this device.
w9032e02.jpg (33269 byte)
Cone
The Cone is not a BRD but has been designed to increase the efficiency of BRDs to exclude fish from the trawl. Developed by shrimp fishermen in the Gulf of Mexico, it is simply two panels of netting attached to a small wire hoop and inserted behind a BRD such as a fisheye, square-mesh window (or RES, Radial Escape Section). The cone impedes the passage of fish into the codend and 'stimulates' them to swim forward and through the escape openings.
w9032e03.jpg (26316 byte)
Rigid Grid, NAFTED type
The NAFTED was originally designed by the Australian Maritime College to exclude large animals such as sharks, stingrays and turtles from the trawl (however, the experience shows that, in general, small fish are also excluded). The NAFTED BRD features a grid, with a bar spacing appropriate to local conditions, secured to the trawl at 45 degrees. A panel of netting guides all animals to the bottom of the codend and prevents shrimp loss through the escape opening in the top of the codend. Large animals are physically guided by the grid through the
escape opening while shrimp and other small animals pass through the bars and into the codend.
w9032e04.jpg (28205 byte)
Figure 4: Rigid grid, the NAFTED (Eayrs et al., 1997)
Rope BRD
The rope BRD consists in a window including parallel ropes extending lengthwise along the trawl (in place of square mesh). It is normally located in the same position as the square mesh window.
w9032e05.jpg (29881 byte)
<section>3</section>
3. THE IRANIAN CONTEXT
3.1 The Iranian shrimp fishery
The Iranian shrimp fishery extends along much of the Iranian coast and is divided into three regions or provinces, namely Bushehr, Hormozgan and Khozestan. Trawling is the main harvesting method and in each province the fishing season is of approximately six weeks duration.
3.1.1 Fishing fleets and gear
The Iranian shrirnp fishery supports three types of fishing vessels. In the industrial sector, 39 steel trawlers, between 20 to 25m in length, with engine power for these vessels ranging from 257 to 588kW (350 to 800hp). The artisanal sector consists in two parts: - approximately 850 timber traditional vessels, "dhows", around 16m in length and with 73 to 160Kw (100 to 220hp) engines and - an estimate of 1,500 small fibreglass trawlers, about 7m in length and have 25 to 45hp. (Over the last ten years, a reduction in the number of vessels has been observed both in the "dhows"and industrial fleets, while the number of FRP small boats is increasing).
The industrial shrimp trawlers tow two trawls simultaneously with outriggers, flat trawls, semi-ballon or ballon trawls. The traditional wooden boats, "dhows", tow a single shrimp net or carry out pair trawling; the mechanized FRP crafts alway use a single trawl net. In this respect, it is worth noting that bottom trawling for shrimp except during the shrimping season as well as trawling for fish is banned in Iran.
In general, the codends are made of two layers of netting, 30-40mm meshsize, with, in addition, a protective chafer. However, smaller meshsize would frequently be used in coastal waters.
3.1.2 Effort and catch
As already mentioned, the fishing season is of approximately one and half months and is closed in each province when trawl surveys indicate that 20% (or less) of the shrimp stock remains.
In this connection it is worth mentioning that because of obvious increasing fishing effort and some concern regarding a risk of over-exploitation, the duration of the shrimp fishing season has been progressively reduced over the last few years. In addition, the number of fishing licences issued has been seriously curtailed (but at the same time illegal fishing is reported to be on the increase).
The artisanal sector fishing in coastal waters now accounts for more of the total production than the industrial fleet.
The shrimp fishing industry has landed more than 4,600 tonnes in 1996, to a value of US$ 32,200,000.
The wholesale price of shrimp is approximately 11000 - 12000 R/kg (A$4/kg) and the catch is sold locally and abroad.
3.1.3 Target species and by-catch
The dominant target species in the Hormozgan province is Banana shrimp (Penaeus merguiensis) while Tiger shrimp (P. semisulcatus) dominate in Bushehr and Metapenaeus affinis dominate in Khozestan. All provinces record catches of Parapenaeopsis stylifera. Fishing activity occurs mainly in daylight hours.
The Iranian shrimp fishery is typical of many tropical shrimp fisheries worldwide, being characterised by a wide variety of bycatch species and variable but often high bycatch to shrimp ratios. The bycatch in this fishery has been grouped by Shilat into three major categories: small adult fish; juvenile fish; and, large fish. Large fish comprise approximately 8-10% of total catch weight and other bycatch species 60-65% of catch weight. Shrimp comprise the remainder of the catch.
Small fish are categorised as those under 15 cm length and is dominated by Theraponidae, Threadfin bream (Nemipteridae), Orangefin ponyfish (Leiognathus bindus), Shad (Anodontostoma chacunda), Crab, Sardine (Clupeidae) and Mullet (Mugilidae). These species make up to 90% of total small fish bycatch. Juvenile fish are usually between 15-30 cm in length and comprise of Tongue sole (Cynoglossidae), Flounder (Bothidae) and Indian flathead (Platycephalus indicus), Cat fish (Ariidae), Shark (Carcharhinidae), Lizard fish (Saurida undosquamis) and Stingrays. These species make up to 80% of the total juvenile catch. Large fish are usually those greater than 30 cm in length and include Lizard fish (S. undosquamis), Stingrays, Indian flathead (P. indicus), Shark (Carcharhinidae), Croaker (Johnius aneus), Hairtail (Trichiurus lepturus), Grouper (Serranidae), Southern meager and Grunt (Haemulidae). These species make up to 90% of the large fish bycatch.
The order of priority in terms of bycatch exclusion is juvenile fish, large fish and then small fish.
3.2 Previous BRD tests in Iran
Shilat Fisheries Technologists have been investigating the effectiveness of square-mesh windows (SMW) and other BRDs for over three years. More recently, a SMW with a 100 mm mesh size measuring 45 bar lengths wide and 75 bar lengths long has been extensively tested. This BRD allows small fish to escape by providing mesh openings large enough for them to swim through and escape. Shrimp, on the other hand, do not have this swimming ability and passively enter the codend. A total of 210 trawl shots (settings) by two steel trawlers and eight dhows resulted in substantial reductions in bycatch but also similar rates of shrimp loss (Table 1). Based on these tests, bycatch reduction rates were highest on steel vessels while the highest shrimp losses occurred on the dhows. The reasons for this are unknown.
Target species
Bycatch species
Species
Gear type
Catch (kg)
Shrimp Shrimp
smw Standard
Juveniles Juveniles
smw Standard
Small fish <15 cm
smw Standard
large fish >30cm
SMW Standard
Total Total
SMW standard
Table 1: Catch data recorded pre-1997 by Shilat Fisheries Technologists
In July, 1997, the author tested the above mentioned SMW in the Bushehr province near Ameri. A radial escape section (RES) and a fish stimulator called a cone was also tested (Figure 6). The SMW was identical to the window described above and it was located in the extension of the trawl 15 meshes ahead of the codend. The RES is also designed to exclude fish from the trawl and uses a funnel of netting to guide all animals into the centre of the codend. As fish exit the funnel, many turn, orientate towards the direction of tow, swim forward and escape through square meshes that extend radially around the codend. Shrimp are unable to orientate themselves and swim forward to reach the escape openings. The cone was developed by US shrimp fishermen to improve fish exclusion rates from the RES. The cone consists of two triangular shaped sections of trawl netting attached to a 10 mm diameter wire hoop measuring 1000 mm in circumference. It is attached to the trawl behind a BRD such as a
SMW or RES, and by partially blocking the codend fish are stimulated to swim forward and out through the BRD. In these tests the point of the cone was located 13 meshes behind the trailing edge of the SMW and RES. To keep the codend open a hoop of 10 mm diameter wire measuring 63O mm in diameter was attached to the 13th row of codend meshes (measured from the leading edge of the codend). The results of these trials indicated that the SMW + Cone combination was superior to other BRDs in excluding bycatch. It excluded 44% of large bycatch and 41% of small bycatch with no loss of shrimp.
w9032e06.jpg (30449 byte)
Prior to the commencement of these latest tests, Fisheries Technologists from Shilat tested the SMW + Cone and compared the effect of 600 mm, 900 mm and 1500 mm codend hoop diameters on catch rates (Table 2). Compared to a standard codend, average shrimp catches varied by 3% or less and commercial fish catches varied by 4% or less. A 41% reduction in bycatch was measured with the 600 mm hoop, and the 900 and 1500 mm hoops resulted in bycatch reductions of 37% and 28% respectively.
SMW +cone
Standard
Shot
Time
Time
Hoop
Shrimp
Comm.
Total
Shrimp
Comm.
Total
No.
start
finish
dia. (mm)
fish
Bycatch
fish
Bycatch
Total no. baskets 
Average 
11 MO
Total no. baskets 
Average 
NR
NR
Total no. baskets 
Average 
NR - Not Recorded 
* Fish trap caught - results
excluded
Table 2: Results of various hoop diameters (SMW + Cone v Standard)
<section>4</section>
4. EXECUTION OF THE PROGRAMME
4.1 Organization
All the interventions were as planned and in time:
- the fishing technologist/trainer, expert in by-catch reduction device, Mr. Steve Eayrs, from the Australian Maritime College (AMC), Tasmania, Australia;
- the trainees from the Gulfs countries (one from Kuwait, one from Bahrain, one from Oman and two from Qatar);
- almost twenty participants from Iran, fishing technologists from Sheilat (Ministry of Fisheries) and from the Industrial Fishing Co. of Iran (INFICO), fisheries officers from the General Directorate of Fisheries, as well as from regional Fisheries Directorates; biologists from the Oman Sea Research Institute.
See List of participants in Annex
For carrying out tests and demonstrations at sea, two vessels, outriggers shrimp trawlers, commercial type, 22 and 24 m (one private, one belonging to Shilat) had been made available.
The two trawlers were equipped with standard commercial equipment, including net webbing for making modifications to the trawls. The consultant had brought from Australia a BRD/grid, especially modified to suit (per hypothesis) the conditions in the Gulfs; in addition, in order to facilitate the test and to make the demonstration more evident, he had been asked to bring an underwater camera (which was used for two days only because of difficulties in bringing this piece of equipment into the country).
In addition to manoeuvering or modifying fishing gear, the members of the crews on the two vessels (14 and 16, respectively) participated, with all other participants, in sorting and measuring fish.
4.2 Fishing equipment: trawls and by-catch reduction devices
Four BRDs and a fish stimulator called a cone were tested in a six day period onboard the steel shrimp trawlers, FV Mehrdad and FV Tabas (22.5 m, 550 hp). The tests were conducted in Horinozgan province in 530 m of water near Hormuz Island.
4.2.1 Trawl nets
The trawl nets were a four seam design originating from the Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery. Two trawls were towed simultaneously in a double rig configuration. Both trawls were identical in design and the headline and footline of each measured 29.3 and 33 m (16 and 18
fathoms) respectively (Figure 7). The mesh size in the main part of the trawl (body) measured 40 mm while codend mesh size measured 30 mm.
The top and bottom panels of each trawl were identical in design and all netting was constructed from polyamide (nylon). To each wingend, a 770 mm upper sweep and a 1200 mm lower sweep was attached. A 100 kg ground chain was 'scalloped' along the footrope of each trawl. The diameter of each link was 18 mm and 11 links extended between each 200 mm hanging. A 33 m (18 fm) tickler chain was extended between the otterboards and link diameter was 5 mm. The codend of each trawl measured 180 meshes in circumference and 280 meshes deep. Rectangular flat otter boards were used measuring 2.41 m x 1.13 m and weighing approximately 250 kg each.
w9032e07.jpg (25378 byte)
4.2.2 By-catch reduction devices
A square-mesh window (SMW), fisheyes, NAFTED, rope BRD and a cone (fish stimulator) were tested.
The square-mesh window (SMW) used during the tests was developed by Iranian Fisheries Technologists to suit local conditions. The window was located in the extension of the trawl 15 meshes ahead of the codend (Figure 8). The SMW was constructed from 210/72 polyamide and measured 45 bar lengths wide and 75 bar lengths deep. Mesh size was l00 mm.
w9032e08.jpg (29781 byte)
The fisheye consisted of a steel framework attached to the codend to provide an elliptical escape opening through which fish swim and escape (Figure 2). The escape opening measured 400 mm across and 200 mm high. Two fisheyes were tested simultaneously onboard the FV Tabas and only one onboard the FV Mehrdad. In both cases they were located in the leading section of the codend.
The NAFTED was designed at the AMC specifically to exclude large animals such as sharks, stingrays and turtles from the trawl. This BRD consists of an aluminium grid inclined at 45 degrees and a guiding panel of netting located ahead of the grid (Figure 4). The panel of netting guides all animals to the bottom of the codend. Large animals unable to pass through the bars are excluded through an escape opening located in the top of the codend. It is worth mentioning that the NAFTED is similar in design to the Nordmore grid with the exception that the bars of the grid are bent backwards to prevent blockage of sponges and other debris. In these tests a bar spacing of 40 mm was used to increase the exclusion of smaller animals from the trawl. It was located between the codend and trawl extension.
The rope BRD was located in the same position as the square mesh window and consisted of parallel ropes extending lengthwise along the trawl. Rope diameter was 8 mm and rope spacing was 150 mm.
The design of the cone has been described above. In these tests the hoop of the cone was located 5 meshes behind the seam joining the codend to the trawl. A 900 mm diameter wire hoop extending around the circumference of the codend was also attached to this seam and served to keep the codend open with a constant diameter.
4.2.3 Underwater video
The underwater video system consisted of a Sony Hi8 camcorder located inside an aluminium housing. An aluminium frame attached to the housing provided a means of attachment to the trawl. The housing is waterproof to approximately 40 m. To commence recording a simple toggle switch is activated prior to deploying the trawl and recording for up 60 minutes is possible. Video footage is then viewed either through the camcorder itself or via connection to a television monitor.
4.3 Fishing operations, methodology
At the commencement of the tests one shot was completed with both port and starboard trawls equipped with standard diamond mesh codends in order to ensure that both trawls were functioning correctly and measure any catch bias between sides. The number of baskets of shrimp were counted and both sides were found to be the same.
At the completion of each tow both codends were emptied on to the deck of the trawler, taking care to prevent mixing of port and starboard catches. Initially, the catch from each side was sorted into the following categories: shrimp, small bycatch, large bycatch and commercial fish. However, as much of the bycatch was approximately 15 cm long and therefore easily categorised as either large or small bycatch, it became apparent that the bycatch categories were unsuitable. All bycatch was then placed into a single category. Each category was placed into baskets and the number of baskets counted (Table 3). Full baskets weighed 20 kg.
Initially, shot duration was standardised to one hour. However, large shrimp catches on October 14 necessitated a reduction to half an hour. This duration was retained for the remainder of the tests.
In addition, in order to gain a better understanding of the species composition and size ranges of fish and shrimp, catch sub-samples were taken during the last few days of the tests.
BRD
Port or
No.
Shrimp
Commercial
Total bycatch
Stb.
shots
fish
Standard
p
y
Fisheye
S
Standard codend
P
y
Fisheve + Cone'
S
Rope BRD
P
y
Standard codend'
S
Table 3: Catch summary by number of baskets
<section>5</section>
5. RESULTS
5.1 Catch results
During tests/demonstration shrimp catches have, in general, been high, often two, three, or more hundreds of kilogrammes for half-hour tows.
By-catch consisted, in general, in small fishes almost same size than shrimp, small pelagic fishes as well as juveniles of small commercial fishes; on certain fishing grounds catches of stingray, small sharks and jellyfish were considerable.
Compared to the standard diamond mesh codend, the square mesh window (SMW) caught 30% more shrimp, maintained commercial fish catches and reduced bycatch by 29%. Compared to the SMW +Cone combination, the SMW caught 53% more shrimp, 100% more commercial fish and 30% more bycatch. This latter test should be treated with caution as it was performed only once and fouling of the catch around the hoop (in the SMW + Cone combination) resulted in considerable catch loss.
The SMW + Cone combination caught 15% less shriinp, 17% less commercial fish and 28% less bycatch when compared to the standard codend. Shrimp catch rates were, however, highly variable, ranging from less than one basket to almost 42 baskets. On the FV Tabas, the SMW caught 4.5% more shrimp, 33% less commercial fish and 75% less bycatch.
The Fisheye was tested against the standard codend and also in a Fisheye + Cone combination against the SMW. Compared to the standard codend the Fisheye reduced shrimp catches by 22% and bycatch by 32%. There was no loss of commercial fish. Compared to the SMW, the Fisheye + Cone combination caught 41% less shrirnp, 25% less commercial fish and 58% less bycatch.
The NAFTED was also compared against the SMW + Cone combination. There was a 2% loss of shrimp, a 50% reduction of commercial fish, and the number of baskets of bycatch was reduced by 35%. Stingrays with a disc width of less than l m dominated the bycatch and the NAFTED reduced these animals by 95%.
The rope BRD was tested for one shot only. Compared to the standard codend there was no loss of shrimp or conunercial fish and a 25% reduction in bycatch.
As already mentioned, catch sub-samples of shrimp and fish from five 30 minute shots were taken during the last few days of the tests. From the sub-samples the weight and carapace length of P. mergitiensis and M. affinis from both sides was measured. During this time the port side trawl was fitted with a standard codend while the starboard trawl was fitted with a SMW + Cone combination. The results suggest that no obvious size classes were apparent although a wider length range of M. affinis was caught.
5.2 Video results
The underwater video system was only available for two days due to difficulties bringing the system into Iran. Adverse weather on the eve of the video tests reduced water visibility so that recording was not possible on the seabed, despite attempts in depths ranging from 8 m to 28 m. However, some useful footage was obtained during deployment and hauling of the trawls at 3 to 5 m below the sea surface.
For instance, after a cone had been installed in the trawl, the video footage showed that the cone was forced upwards against the top of the codend as the trawl moved through the water, thereby only blocking the upper portion of the codend. While the cone is designed to partially block the codend (and stimulate fish to swim forward and through the escape openings in the BRD), it is not known if the effectiveness of the cone was reduced when operated in this position.
Video footage also showed fish and shrimp surging forward when the codend was on the surface (prior to hauling the codend onboard). This can be a source of high shrimp loss as these animals may reach the escape openings of the BRD and escape.
Poor visibility prevented taking footage of fish behaviour.
<section>6</section>
6. DISCUSSION
It is worth remembering that the collection of data suitable for detailed analysis was not an aim of these tests which had been planned first of all for demonstration and training.
Extreme caution must be exercised with the above reported results
The low number of trawl shots for each BRD, occasional damage to the codend and BRD, and variations in tow duration, location and direction means that the results are only suitable for preliminary analysis and interpretation. Furthermore, variation in fishing practices between the two fishing vessels makes it difficult to compare results.
When checking at the beginning of the tests that both the trawls were functioning correctly and measuring any catch bias between sides (with both port and starboard trawls equipped with standard diamond mesh codends), the number of baskets of shrimp were counted and both sides were found to be the same. Although this test was completed only once due to time constraints, it at least indicated that the new trawls were functioning correctly and that both sides were capable of catching the same amount of shrimp. It is worth mentioning that ideally this test should be repeated several times to reduce the likelihood that the catch result was due to chance alone. In this respect, it is worth drawing attention to the observations reported below, when testing Square Mesh Window which indicated that the trawls towed together were not performing as effectively on both sides.
When the tests first began the catch was categorised as either shrimp, commercial fish, large bycatch or small bycatch. Small bycatch included animals less than 15 cm in length. Much of the bycatch was approximately this length, however, time did not permit all bycatch to be measured and categorised as either large or small. All bycatch was therefore combined to form a single category. An additional problem with the catch categories occurred when small (juvenile) commercially important species were caught as these animals could be categorised as either commercial fish or small bycatch. To overcome this problem the category of commercial fish was maintained for those species normally too small to be retained for commercial purposes. This is not entirely satisfactory however as it misrepresents the catch of commercially viable fish and gives no indication of juvenile catch rates of these species. The same applies to categorising juveniles as bycatch.
The results indicate that all BRDs such as Square Mesh Window (SMW), preferably with Cone, or grid, NAFTED type, effectively reduced bycatch (with the exception of the fisheye).
Results on board the FV Mehrdad indicate that the introduction of the cone in combination with the SMW had little effect on bycatch exclusion but substantially reduced shrimp catches. The reasons for this shrimp loss are unclear and are in contrast to Bushehr results for this BRD. During these latest tests the SMW + Cone combination was only tested on the starboard side. Interestingly, in nearly all cases shrimp and bycatch catch rates were less on this side, despite highly variable catch rates. This indicates that the starboard trawl was not performing as effectively as the port trawl.
The NAFTED effectively reduced bycatch, large species in particular (such as rays, sharks or jellyfish) while maintaining catches of shrimp
. It also excluded large numbers of stingrays from the catch which otherwise would have posed a safety hazard to crew sorting the catch. Large numbers of stingrays in the catch delays shrimp processing times and adversely affects catch quality, particularly during the heat of the day. The NAFTED substantially reduced catch sorting times and the exclusion of these animals by the NAFTED is likely to result in increased shrimp quality (although not tested).
When using fisheye, the shrimp loss was found extremely high
. Possible reasons for this include location too close to the accumulated catch in the codend and loss through the escape openings during shooting and hauling of the trawls.
Regarding fish and shrimp surging forward when the codend was on the surface (prior to hauling the codend on board) which was observed with the video, Australian experience has found that shrimp loss increases with retrieval time and that losses increase in adverse weather due to surging action of the sea. A preventive measure is for the vessel to accelerate for a short period (immediately after the otter boards reach the towing blocks) and flush the catch back into the codend. Shrimp loss was visually observed during hauling of the codend with high numbers of shrimp escaping from the square-mesh window. Surging of the catch may also account for shrimp loss from the fisheye and the high losses onboard dhows reported by Shilat during previous tests.
During testing of the SMW v SMW + Cone combination, much of the catch fouled in a pocket of netting around the wire hoop (used to increase the effectiveness of the cone). This resulted in substantial shrimp loss and was caused by a combination of factors including the design of the trawl, the diameter of the wire hoop and the size of the catch. The seam joining the trawl extension to the codend was constructed of 240 x 40 mm extension meshes to 180 x 30 mm codend meshes. The hoop measured 600 mm in diameter. The hoop restricted the large number of larger extension meshes, allowing these meshes to 'balloon' outwards into a large pocket of netting and foul the catch. When hauling the codend onboard, shrimp and fish caught in the pocket were able to fall forward towards the SMW and escape through the meshes. This hoop was replaced with a 900 mm diameter hoop and was successfully used for the remainder of the tests.
The port side trawl and square-mesh window (SMW) also suffered extensive damage during the initial stages of the tests. This was due in part to poor attachment to the trawl and the design of the SMW. When first attached to the trawl, the ratio of trawl meshes to bars (of the SMW) along the top and bottom of the SMW was uneven. Following repair to the trawl a new SMW was constructed and attached to the trawl using a 3 to 1 mesh to bar ratio along the bottom of the window and a 2 to 1 ratio along the top. The rationale for this being that mesh opening in the trawl decreases towards the codend and therefore must be allowed for when attaching large windows. An 8 mm diameter rope was attached to the perimeter of the window for added strength.
Initially, the SMW measured 75 bar lengths long and 45 bar lengths wide. The design of the trawl and location of the window meant that the SMW was not only attached to the top panel, but also extended into the side panels. As the mesh opening of the side panels is likely to be different to the top panel, the SMW was modified so that it was attached solely to the top panel. The modifications included a 1P4B taper to reduce the width of the window (near the codend) to 28 bars.
<section>7</section>
7. CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FISHING PRACTICES
The aim of these tests was: to demonstrate the rigging, operation and performance of several BRDS; to demonstrate catch data collection methods, and to observe the reaction of fish and shrimp to BRDS. All aims were achieved with a high level of success.
As planned the tests/demonstration carried out have demonstrated the feasibility to reduce by-catch by using an appropriate device.
In general, great interest was shown by the observers from the Arab countries, as well as by the participants and the fishery authori