<title>A new framework for: Conservation-effective land management and desertification control in Latin America and the Caribbean</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMMES ON CONSERVATION, REHABILITATION AND DESERTIFICATION CONTROL CAN BRING ABOUT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC BENEFITS, SUCH AS GREATER FOOD SECURITY, LESS MIGRATION TO URBAN AND MORE MARGINAL AREAS, HIGHER INCOMES AND A GENERAL IMPROVEMENT OF LIVING STANDARDS.
Serious problems of land degradation and rapidly declining production occur in large parts of Latin America and the Caribbean. They are caused by inappropriate land use or land management practices, which are themselves the consequences of the ever growing pressures on land and water resources and rural poverty.
Efforts at land conservation during the last 30-40 years have met with little success and there is now an unprecedented awareness of the urgent need to develop and implement sustainable land use and management practices that will effectively control land degradation and desertification. Recent experience has shown that sustainable practices will be much more readily adopted once land users perceive the direct economic and social benefits of these practices. Thus conservation practices must not only control soil degradation and desertification, but must also give economic and social benefits, such as higher incomes, a more secure food supply and overall improvements in living standards.
This document incorporates new concepts and mechanisms related to technology development and transfer, some of which emerged from the UN Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED). Biological and agronomic conservation practices are emphasized, as well as the farming systems concept and use of micro-catchments, since they have come to assume much greater importance in soil conservation than formerly. The adoption of participatory approaches, in which public and private sectors, local communities and land users are all involved in decision making, is stimulated at all stages and levels of the development process. The importance of the role and participation of women is also emphasized.
FAO, together with countries of the region, is proposing the preparation and implementation of National Action Programmes (NAP) on conservation-effective land management and desertification control. For dryland areas, the NAP will also include drought mitigation actions and should comply with the proposals of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification.
Guidelines on the phased development of NAP for conservation-effective land management and desertification control arc presented together with modifications that may be required in political, institutional and legislative frameworks to facilitate the successful execution of NAP. Capacity-building, education and awareness issues, the creation of NAP coordination commissions and regional and international cooperation are also considered. Financing strategies are discussed with particular reference to the financial mechanisms of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification. The formulation of NAP must take into account other ongoing national action programmes oriented to the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources. The implementation of an initial pilot phase of a NAP, formulated through a participatory workshop, is recommended before developing a larger scale NAP.
The adoption of this framework for formulating and implementing NAP will give all participants in the development process a clearer vision of how best to achieve an optimal planning for the sustainable utilization and improvement of their land and water resources. It will also facilitate governments' requests for external funding.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The natural resources of Latin America and the Caribbean are being subjected to increasing pressure and progressively more intense exploitation as a result of high population growth rates. This is manifested by constant increases in the demands for food, fuel and construction materials, by increased poverty in rural areas, by migration into urban areas and ever more marginal zones of fragile soils, and by increasingly strained institutional support.
In the last 30 years the population of the region has doubled to 480 million and it will again double in the next 50 years if the present growth rate continues. A stabilized population of 1100 million is expected by the year 2100; however, to achieve an appreciable increase in living standards, food production will have to more than double.
These events have caused serious degradation of the natural resources and loss of productivity in more than 306 million hectares in the region due to soil erosion, acidification, loss of organic matter, compaction, nutrient impoverishment and salinization. In the drylands some 79 million hectares are threatened by desertification, caused mainly by human actions through overgrazing, overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use, deforestation and inappropriate irrigation methods. Thus the lives of millions of people are affected and the future development of large parts of the region is at stake.
It is estimated that the region's cultivable land could expand from the present 171 million hectares to 736 million hectares. However, the greater part of the potentially cultivable land is of marginal quality and its utilization would entail high social, economic and environmental risks.
Landscape typical of desertification problems
Other lands that are not being used for arable cultivation are covered by tropical forests, but their conservation is of vital importance in order to maintain the global ecological stability and reduce the problems of global warming and loss of biodiversity.
Degraded landscape due to overgrazing
Scarcely 4 percent of cultivable lands are under irrigation, yet they produce approximately a third of the region's food supplies. This illustrates the tremendous potential of irrigation, but there are only limited possibilities for expanding the irrigated areas. Furthermore, the competition for water among agriculture, domestic consumption and industry is becoming ever stronger.
The rate of urbanization in the region has reached unprecedented proportions. Urban areas not only suffer from pollution but also compete with agriculture for land and water supplies. Thus, land-use planning at a national scale is urgently required, so that land can be assigned to different uses according to users' needs and the suitability of the land.
With the growing concern about environmental degradation, desertification and loss of biodiversity, the term 'sustainable land use' has become a common phrase enthusiastically welcomed by governments, scientists and planners. However, sustainable land use can only be achieved once the problems of land degradation and desertification are overcome and the land is used and managed in a way that is socially and economically acceptable to all sectors of society and does not cause environmental deterioration.
<section>3</section>
Part I: The present situation
Land and water resources
Traditional approaches to land conservation and the consequences
Land and water resources
Present potential
In order to develop sustainable systems of agriculture that satisfy the present and future needs of the region, there must be reliable information on the potential of the region's land and water resources.
The potential of some 96 percent of cultivable lands is limited by rainfall or soil factors and 29 percent of drylands are threatened by desertification. The areas with favourable soil and climatic conditions are mainly found in the southern cone of South America in temperate or subtropical climates.
The region as a whole is subject to much less agricultural exploitation than other parts of the world, such as the Near East or the Asian continent. This is due to a lower population pressure which results in a greater proportion of the land, including potentially cultivable areas, remaining under forest.
The region also possesses considerable freshwater reserves. Available data show that, for most countries, the average freshwater supply is satisfactory and exceeds 5000 m³ per person per year. However, the value varies from as little as 195 m³ per person per year in Barbados to 73416 m³ per person per year in Paraguay. In large areas of coastal Peru and northern Chile the freshwater supplies are less than 1 m³ per person per year.
The region possesses one of the largest freshwater reserves in the world, where water availability in the Amazon basin exceeds 300000 m³ per person per year. In this region the abundance of water gives rise to seasonal flooding which restricts the utilization of the most fertile soils located in the alluvial plains.
Of all water available for agriculture, livestock and industry, agriculture is the main consumer of water, using 60-70 percent to irrigate 13 million hectares. In areas where water is scarce, conflicts arise among agriculture, domestic consumption and industry; the serious problems of competition for water in Mexico City and Lima are well known. Although the expansion of irrigated areas has been limited in the last decade, many projects have been initiated to improve and rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes.
Water quality has been affected by discharge of sewage and industrial waste into rivers and the limited available data present a rapidly deteriorating trend. A symptom of this was the outbreak of cholera at the beginning of the 1990s which, in addition to the loss of human life, resulted in estimated costs of the order of US$ 200 million. Less dramatic, but of equal importance from an economic viewpoint, is the alarming increase in suspended sediment concentrations in many rivers, which causes additional costs for the maintenance of irrigation canals and the dredging of navigable rivers.
Limitations
In 1992, the Latin American and Caribbean Commission on the Environment emphasized that inappropriate land use is the most serious environmental issue. This results in soil erosion, desertification, loss of soil fertility, the deterioration of pastures and forests, salinization of irrigated lands and the under-utilization of good agricultural land.
The region can be subdivided into several clearly differentiated agro-environments with specific potentials and limitations, briefly described as follows:
Steeplands
Insidious processes of soil erosion in densely populated steeplands are causing a crisis that is progressively diminishing local people's capacity to produce even their subsistence food requirements. Average daily food intake in these zones is below the regional average of 2673 kcal/person. Soil erosion is also forcing large numbers of small-scale farmers to migrate to cities, or to forested areas in the lowland tropics, which constitute the agricultural frontier in many Andean countries. As in many other mountainous environments in the world, soil erosion with implied loss of production is becoming the most pressing environmental problem in these areas.
Drylands
Dryland areas constitute approximately 15 percent of Latin America and are found in a great variety of landscapes, ranging from the Pacific coastal zone, to the Chaco plains, to the semi-arid Pampa grasslands; one-third of these areas is threatened by desertification. Drylands are classified on the basis of aridity indices into hyperarid, arid, semiarid and dry sub-humid zones. In none of these zones does the annual precipitation exceed 65 percent of the annual potential evapotranspiration.
Desertification
Desertification has affected nearly 30 percent of the dryland areas which occupy some 516 million hectares in Latin America. Irrigated lands, which are very important in terms of their significant contributions to food production in many countries, also occur mainly in these areas. The causes of desertification are climatic combined with human activities, such as deforestation, overgrazing, the expansion of crop production into fragile areas and the overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use.
Within the dryland zones are irrigated areas that contribute significantly to food production; in Mexico irrigation provides more than 50 percent of the total food production. Irrigated areas also contribute a significant proportion of the agricultural exports of Chile, Brazil and other countries.
Dryland areas are very susceptible to desertification caused by climatic variations and human activities, such as overgrazing, overirrigation and inadequate drainage, expansion of cultivation into fragile soils, deforestation and overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use. The productivity of irrigated areas is also in danger because of poor quality water and diminishing water supplies. An estimated 10-15 percent of the irrigated areas in arid zones are degraded by waterlogging and salinity and once degraded their rehabilitation becomes very expensive.
Humid tropics
In the humid tropics the conversion of forested land to cropland and pastures is most rapid. It has been caused by migration from other, densely populated regions and by present economic development trends. The creation of croplands has led to loss of soil organic matter, accelerated erosion and increased sediment loads in rivers and lakes. It has also given rise to losses of important plant and animal species due to direct destruction and to changes in their habitats. In the Amazonian region in particular, new settlers have been granted permission and encouraged to extract timber and to establish crops or pastures. However, the nature of the soils, vegetation and climate and restricted land use suitability have seldom been taken into account. In some regions, especially those with high rainfall, transformation of the natural ecosystem has caused pronounced land degradation and loss of productive capacity. To date it is estimated that more than 800000 km² of forest in the
Amazonian region have been felled due to the combined effects of population pressure, poverty and the commercial exploitation of cattle, timber and minerals.
Grazing lands
The grazing lands include subtropical and temperate grasslands in the south of the continent, seasonal pastures of the high altitude Andean regions and tropical savannahs and pastures of the Amazon basin. Due to socioeconomic reasons the number of cattle frequently increases as the area of pastures decreases. Overgrazing is the main cause of degradation of natural pastures, resulting in a rapid decline in productivity. In large watersheds this can result in damage such as gully erosion and contaminated water supplies in the lower-lying areas of the catchment that will entail high rehabilitation costs.
Many of the soils under cultivated pastures are of low fertility and pasture productivity generally diminishes with time due to poor management. The risks of deterioration are accentuated by the steep topography and short length of growing periods in the Andean highlands.
Under these conditions water and wind erosion can severely deteriorate the soils, cause sediment accumulation in river channels and reservoirs and lead to flooding, waterlogging and salinization.
Wetlands
Wetlands occupy 11 percent of the region and are most common in Central America, the southern cone, in the Orinoco valley, in the north of Bolivia, southeast Brazil and Mexico. Smaller areas of wetlands are also frequently found in a wide variety of topographic and edaphic situations. The principal limitations are the lack of drainage and the high risk of flooding. Although the soils are very varied in terms of texture and acidity, the majority are well supplied with nutrients and can be very productive if adequately drained and protected from flooding. The potential effects of drainage on the hydrology of the surrounding land and on the environment, including plant and animal (bird) diversity need to be considered before such conversion.
Acid savannahs
The acid savannahs, consisting predominantly of low shrubs and tough grasses, occur mainly in the vast Cerrado region of Brazil where they occupy 112 million hectares of rolling landscape. They correspond mainly to a sub-humid environment with a 4-6 month dry season and an annual rainfall of 1200-2000 mm. The soils are physically good, deep, well drained and easy to plough, but suffer from a very low chemical fertility due to high acidity, low nutrient content and-very high aluminium saturation. However, with good management that includes the application of considerable quantities of fertilizers and lime, the land can become very productive. Nevertheless, the application of fertilizers and lime is very costly and is not sufficient on its own to sustain yields. The soils are very susceptible to erosion and if the management practices do not ensure an adequate soil cover and provide effective conservation, erosion can rapidly degrade the soils so that they are soon abandoned.
Small island environments
The Caribbean, which consists predominantly of island environments, deserves special attention. The small proportion of agriculturally suitable land provides few opportunities for production and leads to an enforced, intensive use of the limited lands available. These limitations become even more serious due to the ever-growing population pressure. This situation exists on almost all of the islands, both large and small, with the possible exception of the Dominican Republic and Cuba, where the agro-ecological conditions are more similar to those of continental environments.
The formulation of National Action Programmes for sustainable natural resource use and management will need to take account of the great variety of island environments, the physiography, climate and cultural aspects, as well as tourism with its ever-increasing impact.
Traditional approaches to land conservation and the consequences
AFTER MANY YEARS OF IMPLEMENTING CROSS-SLOPE PHYSICAL BARRIERS FOR SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION, MANY FARMERS ARE STILL NOT CONVINCED OF THEIR BENEFITS AND RIGHTLY REGARD THEM AS ADDITIONAL COSTS.
In the traditional approach to land conservation emphasis was placed on three factors: physical conservation structures, the need for soil conservation specialists and the requirement that farmers comply with the recommended conservation measures.
Even nowadays, many farmers do not associate these practices with increased productivity or higher profits and most farmers consider physical conservation structures merely as additional costs. Most soil conservation structures were implemented as part of aid programmes with subsidies and many of the structures were abandoned as soon as the subsidies ceased.
Government bodies created to combat the problems of soil erosion and runoff emphasized physical aspects related to soil type, hydrology and engineering. These physical aspects contrast with the more socioeconomic concerns of extension agencies and farmers, which have tended to accentuate the lack of coordination between the work of extensionists and soil conservation specialists.
Traditional approaches only achieved limited success, even when recommended soil conservation structures were implemented. As a result, soil erosion has in general not been controlled and productivity continues to decline in extensive areas affected by erosion.
The guidelines in this document introduce new concepts and methods for the implementation of soil conservation measures and the development of sustainable agriculture.
Traditional soil tillage practice using animal traction
<section>4</section>
Part II: A new framework
Concepts
Procedures
Technical approaches
Concepts
SUCCESSFUL ACTION AGAINST SOIL EROSION ON A LARGE SCALE WILL ONLY BE POSSIBLE BY IMPLEMENTING LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES WHICH CONVINCINGLY INCREASE PRODUCTION OR DECREASE COSTS OR LABOUR TO THE BENEFIT OF THE LAND USER, WHILST SIMULTANEOUSLY CONTROLLING SOIL EROSION. THIS IS SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS ACHIEVING SOIL CONSERVATION BY STEALTH.
Land conservation approaches
A broad-scale assault on land degradation and desertification will only be successful if the actual land users are able to perceive direct benefits from the recommended conservation and management practices. Therefore, a new concept is the promotion of management practices capable of providing not only erosion control but also greater productivity, lower costs and higher profits. This is sometimes referred to as 'conservation by stealth'.
Another change of concept is the trend away from applying solely physical conservation structures and placing more reliance on the use of biological and agronomic conservation practices that provide a protective vegetative cover to the soils for as much of the year as possible. Typical examples of the biological and agronomic practices are denser plant populations, leaving crop residues on the soil surface, minimum tillage, sequential cropping, intercropping and agroforestry. The use of physical conservation structures then becomes complementary to biological and agronomic practices.
Example of the combination of traditional earth banks combined with an agronomic conservation practice of zero tillage (Chapecó, Brazil).
A further change of approach is to take advantage of traditional farming practices, many of which are conservation-oriented, but which have fallen into disuse because of growing population pressures on the land and changing economic and social life styles. Some of these traditional systems can be modified and adapted to make them more appropriate to current economic realities. Building on existing traditional practices to achieve soil conservation is much more likely to lead to successful adoption than attempting to introduce completely new techniques.
Focus on participation
Numerous experiences confirm that a change in farming practice can be relatively easily achieved when a community of farmers, with some trusted technical advisers, design, prepare and implement their own plans and action programmes. Changes have been slow, difficult and at times impossible when plans have been made without farmer participation.
Thus an obvious change of approach is required from 'top-down' to 'bottom-up', whereby all land users are involved in the whole process of development from the identification of their problems to the selection and implementation of solutions.
Governments must promote and support land conservation and desertification control programmes, but only farmers can implement and maintain land conservation practices. It is the farmers who make decisions on how best to use and manage their lands, according to the needs of their families and considering soil, climatic, economic and market factors.
Participation and training
Most of the FAO technical assistance projects engaged in land and water conservation in Latin America and the Caribbean are promoting active participation of the beneficiaries, whether they be families, communities or farmers' associations.
In projects as diverse as 'the management and conservation of lands' (Costa Rica), 'sustainable agriculture on hillsides' (El Salvador), 'the management of waters, public irrigation plans and irrigation districts' (Brazil and Mexico) and 'the management of plant nutrition' (Bolivia and Nicaragua), training courses on the participatory approach are being funded that will enable farmers' organizations to manage crop or irrigation technologies in a truly participatory and independent manner. Farmer participation in meetings where results of surveys or field data are presented and visits to see successful land management, conservation and rehabilitation practices form part of the training courses.
The provision of collective credit has a very positive effect as an incentive and catalyst in promoting the participatory approach.
Participatory panning; an FAO expert in a fertilizer programme, Ecuador, listens to members of a farmers' club in m, Andean village
Participatory discussions on fertilizer problems between extensionists and farmers (Chuquisaca, Bolivia).
Thus NAP need to be participatory, not imposed; this can be greatly facilitated when farmers, farmer associations and other land users in the community are included as members of all decision-making groups that deal with land use and management. Decisions on the parties responsible for carrying out specific activities must be made according to the capabilities, resources, interests and willingness of the different members and sectors of the community.
Example of women farmers maintaining; Inca terraces in Peru. The participation of women is essential in all aspects of the participatory process.
Focus on gender
It is essential that not only the men but also women and the whole family participate in decision making about the management and conservation of natural resources. The participation of women has been recognized as essential for the successful implementation of land and water conservation programmes.
In recent years the role of women in agriculture has become increasingly recognized, not only in the execution but also in the planning and management of specific tasks. It is extremely important that women are urged to participate more effectively and fully in developing and implementing land conservation and desertification control programmes. To achieve this, mere incentives are not sufficient; definite opportunities must be systematically created for women to be involved in all livestock, crop and land management activities. An inventory and analysis of those activities assigned to women and to which the man's contribution is very limited would greatly facilitate the correction of these imbalances. A flagrant example is women's total involvement in domestic duties and field work and their almost complete exclusion from the predominantly male role of decision making, e.g., about which crops to grow or activities to initiate, what management practices to apply and when or
where to sell the produce.
Recognition of the equitable role of women in the new strategies must be viewed as an integral part of the participatory approach and is essential for the success of the proposed actions in the longer term.
Sustainability
The aim of conservation-effective land management and desertification control is to achieve a sustainable system of agricultural production which is socially and economically acceptable to farmers and has a favourable cost/benefit ratio. Sustainability implies that land is used according to its suitability without causing land deterioration or environmental degradation, so that its productivity can be guaranteed for present and future generations.
Systems approach
To facilitate the formulation of appropriate conservation and rehabilitation programmes it is necessary to identify agro-ecologically and socio-economically similar areas, within which the conservation or rehabilitation programmes will be applied. These areas are often referred to as recommendation domains or resource management domains, having similar crop, livestock or forestry production systems, to which the same land use or management recommendation will be equally relevant and applicable.
The basic agricultural unit is the farming system which has at its centre the farmer and her or his family. This is a holistic concept that embraces the agro-ecological and environmental conditions of the farm, the farmer's enterprises, the systems of management for each of the production systems, the marketing and economic conditions in the community or region where the farmer lives; the socioeconomic circumstances and needs of the farm family.
Within a farming system there are invariably interactions between the production systems or management practices. These interactions may give rise to positive or negative effects on the productivity or sustainability of one or more of the production systems. An example is given in the box below, from El Salvador, where frequently there is a conflict between the use of crop residues as protection against soil erosion and as fodder for livestock. This conflict can best be solved by a farming systems approach in which alternative sources of fodder are produced to satisfy livestock requirements, thereby leaving more crop residues on the surface for better soil conservation.
The systems approach to soil conservation
For farmers cultivating basic grains on steep hillsides in El Salvador, crop residues are very important, being used as livestock fodder and also for soil conservation when left on the soil surface as a protective cover. In areas with more livestock or lower crop residue production due to a drier climate or less fertile soils, there are often insufficient residues to satisfy the requirements for both soil conservation and livestock fodder. When a conflict arises, the priority use of residues is as fodder at the expense of soil conservation. To improve soil conservation a farming systems approach is required, and in this situation the production of additional fodder in the form of silage or hay from improved pastures, silage crops or forage trees, should be promoted. This would allow more crop residues to be left on the soil surface for soil conservation.
Soil cover from previous grass and shrub residues within which maize has been planted (Cabañas, El Salvador).
The sustainability of land conservation and rehabilitation will be the end result of an efficient system of agricultural production, which in turn will depend on the adaptability and resilience of the conservation technologies employed.
Soil cover from a prior cover crop of rye into which beans have been sown (Chapecó, Brazil)
Example of conservation-effective land management in hilly terrain on slopes up to 45% by leaving maize and sorghum crop residues on the soil surface (Guaymango, El Salvador)
Flexibility of recommended practices
Land conservation and rehabilitation practices thus become an integral part of farming systems. Therefore, the technologies should be adapted to the specific agro-ecological, socio-economic and cultural conditions where they are to be applied, to ensure that they are sufficiently flexible to accommodate future changes in economic, marketing, technological and political pressures.
Contrast between conservation-effective land management due to an adequate cover of crop residues and controlled grazing in the foreground and eroded lands on tile opposite hillside caused by a lack of vegetative cover due to overgrazing of crop residues (Guaymango, El Salvador)
Procedures
General approach
Conservation-effective land management and desertification control programmes must become a part of national agricultural development plans, so that the proposed activities are truly integrated towards solving the main problems facing farmers. The variations in farming systems and the different socioeconomic and cultural circumstances of farmers need to be taken into account when planning activities in the different countries and regions of Latin America and the Caribbean. All aspects of the planning process must include the participation of land users, as well as other public and private sectors of the community.
Levels of planning
Land conservation, rehabilitation and desertification control programmes must be planned at the level of farms, communities and political-administrative regions. The socio-economic development plan must be preceded by a physical planning at the level of a clearly defined watershed or other physiographic unit in order to avoid situations where local solutions produce adverse impacts on the natural resources or inhabitants in other parts of the watershed.
For physical planning to be fully effective, all available information on natural resources, climate and socioeconomic conditions must be compiled using geographic information systems. The acquisition of additional, or more detailed, data may be necessary for some areas. Those who will be using the data may need to be trained and motivated, and the same people must also be involved in the planning of the work.
Monitoring of activities is very important so that adjustments in procedures can be carried out when necessary. Monitoring should be carried out using environmental, economic and social indicators based on both quantitative and qualitative indices identified by both technicians and land users.
Geographic Information Systems
Geographic information systems are of great assistance in the classification of natural resource inventories and in the diagnosis of land potential and limitations. They permit the geographical integration of many different thematic variables and afford opportunities of diagn