<title>ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ROAD COSTRUCTION IN MOUNTAINOUS TERRAIN. Environmentally sound forest road construction in mountainous terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Case studies on environmentally sound harvesting operations form part of a series of initiatives undertaken by the Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch of FAO to promote environmentally sound forest harvesting and engineering practices to serve the unquestionable continuing need to refine harvesting systems and techniques so that they become fully compatible with the objectives of sustainable forest management contributing to the economic, ecological and social aims of sustainable development.
This study, initiated by FAO, meets the need to document and establish data on environmentally friendly forest engineering practices. The marked superiority of sophisticated construction equipment and advanced techniques in forest road construction should encourage the adoption of such practices to provide access to the forests by roads in mountainous and difficult terrain.
The results of this study give the opportunity to compare the efficiency and the environmental impacts of "environmentally sound road construction" in semi-natural forests of the Alps as an alternative to the "traditional road construction methods" generally used in Austria in the past. Although a case study is just a snapshot of reality, it is hoped that this will contribute to raise interest in introducing environmentally friendly forest engineering practices not only in mountainous terrain but also in areas where sensitive forest ecosystems are to be accessed.
The Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch wishes to express its gratitude to the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg, Austria, for their kind support.
This case study was made possible through a special contribution by the Austrian Government for the FAO programme on environmentally sound forest harvesting.
Rudolf Heinrich
Chief
Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department, FAO
<section>2</section>
SUMMARY
The study was carried out in semi-natural forests of the Alps in the province of Salzburg, Austria. Although the concept of opening up forests by a permanent road network as a precondition for forest management and utilization of forests in a sustainable manner is widely accepted both to specialists and to the public at large, it is a difficult concept to put into effect particularly in sensitive forest ecosystems.
The road projects were selected to demonstrate that "Environmentally Friendly Forest Engineering" considerably reduces the effect of damaging elements of forest road construction. The study documents each phase of environmentally sound road construction by excavator and advanced blasting technique as applied in the road projects under review and compares its environmental impacts with those of the traditional road construction by bulldozers.
Data on road construction was collected under different terrain and formation conditions. Work and time studies on construction operations by excavator were carried out at all construction sites and blasting operations where observed in one road project where substantial rock blasting was specified.
The productive work time required per running metre of road constructed by excavator ranged from 8.75 min and 9.75 min at study sites 1 and 2 to 16.93 min at study site 3. These figures on productivity can be considered indicative for favourable, medium and extreme difficult construction conditions in mountainous terrain of the Alps.
The productivity per hour of workplace time varies even more due to the need for rock breaking by hydraulic hammer at study site 2 and the interference of blasting operations at study site 3. A productivity of 5.69 m/h workplace time was found under favourable conditions of study site 1 and of 5.24 m/h workplace time under medium conditions of study site 2. In the extreme difficult terrain of study site 3 the productivity dropped to 2.42 m/h workplace time.
All figures stated above on efficiency and performance rates of excavators under different conditions refer to the establishment of the cross section including the hillside ditch but do not cover any further activities usually carried out by excavators such as installation culverts or construction of retaining structures.
The productive work time required per blasting operation with an average rock volume of 76 m³ to be shattered was 115.22 min per blasting operation. The performance rate of rock blasting was 28.18 m³/h work time at the study site.
The cost per running metre of road constructed by excavator is based on the performance rates established by the work and time studies at each construction site and amounts to US$10.12/m for study site 1, US$17.64/m for study site 2 and US$95.83/m for study site 3. The stated figures on cost per running metre refer only to the particular road sections under review. At study site 3 where conditions for road construction varied between adjacent road sections of the project, the average cost per running metre of road dropped to about US$70.00/m considering the entire road project.
The overall cost per running metre of road completed is estimated to amount to US$27.62/m, US$28.93/m and US$75.62/m for the road sections under review. The overall cost per running metre differs less in degree between the study sites since the required activities for finishing the road vary considerably between the three observed construction sites.
The marked superiority of road construction by excavator, including the use of advanced blasting technique, over the traditional road construction techniques by bulldozers is underscored by the results of the qualitative assessment of environmental impacts in the environmentally sound road construction practice under review. This practice encourages a reduced area dedicated to permanent forest infrastructure, reduced disturbance of the landscape, satisfactory water drainage and effective erosion control as well as negligible damage to forest stands alongside road.
The implementation of environmentally sound road construction technique, characterized by use of excavator and advanced blasting technique as applied in the road projects is believed to provide a satisfactory solution to the unquestionable impact of timber harvesting operations on the environment. This technique developed initially for the Alpine mountain range of Austria is deemed to be the most suitable option for areas where sensitive forest ecosystems are to be opened up.
<section>3</section>
SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
kg = kilogram
km = kilometre
kN = kilonewton
kPa = kilopascal
kW = kilowatt
l = litre
m = metre
m² = square metre
m³ = cubic metre
min = minute
rm = running metre
sec = second
t = metric ton
Abbreviations
AFI = Austrian Forest Inventory
Exchange rate applied (as of July 1997)
US$1 = ATS12 (Austrian Schilling)
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study was to thoroughly document and establish data on "environmentally sound road construction applying advanced operating methods and tools as currently used in mountainous terrain in Austria" as an alternative to the "traditional road construction methods" in sensitive forest ecosystems.
Since the opening up of forests by forest roads and a permanent forest road network is a prerequisite to introduce sustainable forest practices, another aim of the case study was to demonstrate that forest engineering can serve as a tool for Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) if proper road design, construction and maintenance techniques are used. The introduction of these advanced techniques will meet the overall objective of preventing environmental problems associated with forest harvesting operations in mountainous terrain and elsewhere.
The case study on "Environmentally Sound Road Construction in Mountainous Terrain. Applying Advanced Operating Methods and Tools" was initiated by Rudolf Heinrich, Chief, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, and Joachim Lorbach, Forest Officer, Forest Engineering, both FAO - Rome.
In order to meet the objective of the case study, three construction sites in semi-natural forests in the Alps of Austria with different terrain and formation conditions for road construction were chosen to serve as study objects. All study sites were under continuous supervision of the local forest authorities and the forest engineering department of the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg.
The efficiency of the environmentally sound road construction methods was investigated by work and time studies analysing the work performance of the road construction operations carried out by means of hydraulic excavators and by applying advanced rock drilling and blasting techniques.
The field studies and preparation of this report have been carried out by Norbert Winkler for FAO. The support and information provided by Josef Egger of the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg are highly appreciated. Photographs used in this publication were taken by Norbert Winkler.
<section>5</section>
2. DESCRIPTION OF STUDY AREA
2.1. General information
The case study was done in Salzburg, one of the nine provinces of Austria. The orographic features of Salzburg are characterised by the Alpine mountain range with its great variety of geological strata and parent rocks and by the pre-alpine region in the northern part of the province with moderate to hilly terrain conditions. Three road projects in the Alpine mountain range, different in respect to bedrock material and side slopes, were chosen to serve as study objects to cover favourable, intermediate as well as difficult terrain conditions for road construction by excavator.
Table 1. General information on forest area in Austria and in the province of Salzburg
Austria
Salzburg
Forest categories
[ha]
[ha]
Commercial forest
Protection forest with yield
Forest without timber yield
Protection forest without yield
Total forest area
Note: Forest without timber yield are areas dedicated to forest road, skid trail, landing, nursery, game management, route of mains, skiing ground, springwater catchment, avalanche path, virgin forest, nature reserve or wildlife preserve. These areas remain forest by law although they often do not have any tree cover.
Geological, morphological and hydrological terrain features are not only responsible for different construction conditions but also widely determine the type of forest cover in interaction with climate conditions. Within the framework of the Austrian Forest Inventory (AFI) two main forest types are distinguished, namely, "production forest" and "protection forest without yield". The production forest comprises the categories commercial forest, protection forest with yield and forest areas which remain forest by force of the forest act although they are currently without timber yield. The areas of protection forest without yield, which also covers dwarf pine vegetation, are areas mainly located in the timberline zone. Soil protection and erosion control is the exclusive objective in management of those areas. General information on these forest categories is provided in Table 1.
In the province of Salzburg the precipitation varies considerably, not only with respect to mean rainfall year and rainfall intensities, but also with its distribution over the year which is of significant importance to understand watersheds' response in distinct geological regions and therefore to properly design and dimension road drainage facilities (Winkler, 1992).
Another important fact to be considered in road planning activities is the land ownership and land use pattern in the province of Salzburg. It is characterized by small private property (see Table 2), mainly held by farmers who often rely on alpine agriculture and forest harvesting activities to earn their living. In many cases forest roads do not just serve timber harvesting purposes but also provide access to alpine pasture areas above the timber-line. In some cases, forest roads form part of the planned network of public roads and become an essential component of the local level development infrastructure.
Table 2. Forest ownership in Austria and in the province of Salzburg
Austria
Salzburg
Forest type
Production forest
Protection forest without yield
Production forest
Protection forest without yield
Ownership
[ha]
[ha]
[ha]
[ha]
Smallholders
Forest properties
Federal forest
Total forest area
Note: Private property comprises the category of smallholders (owners of less than 200 ha forest area) and the category of forest properties (owners of more than 200 ha forest area). Federal forest refers to state owned forest area.
Private property, which comprises ownership by smallholders and forest properties, provides about 59 % of the province's production forest area which is low compared to Austria's average of 87 % for this type of ownership. The remaining part of the production forest area, about 41 %, and a major part of the protection forest without yield, about 36 %, are federal forest in the province of Salzburg. These state-owned forest areas in Salzburg are often characterized by having been exploited in the Middle Ages in order to provide fuelwood and charcoal for the salt-mining industry.
The growing demand for fuelwood and charcoal in the early salt-mining and iron industries in the Middle Ages resulted in the first forestry regulations (Sedlak, 1996) in order to avoid further forest exploitation and to guarantee continued wood supply to the industry. As a result of these early efforts in forest management Austria has gained a long tradition in forest harvesting on a sustainable basis. The Forest Act 1976, adopted in 1996, and several environmental regulations are a response to the growing importance of environmental issues and provide the legislative tool to keep the impact of forest harvesting operations, in particular permanent forest infrastructure, to the absolute minimum (Photo 1).
Sustainable Alpine Land Management, which meets the needs of the agriculture and forestry sector while serving the growing demand of multiple use of resources, requires careful planning and co-operation between different small landowners and other interest groups, to favour appropriate road alignment and design required from the economical, environmental and social point of view. An integrated approach in road planning activities will most likely contribute to a well-planned rural road network.
Photo 1. Well-planned alignment and proper design of forest roads provide acceptance of forest harvesting operations. - Perfect road alignment prevents scars inflicted on the landscape
Photo 2. Critics of forest roads often point to excessive road building, evident on many hillsides, due to lack of co-operation between landowners - failures in the past
Almost 80 percent of the Austrian road network of about 200 000 km, may be classified as low-volume rural roads (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995). The low-volume rural road network comprising all roads providing access to rural areas, that are neither federal nor provincial, may be divided into the following categories (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) based on ownership and function:
· Community-owned roads outside villages and towns;
· Farm-to-market roads connecting farm areas, single farm houses, or small villages with the higher road network; and
· Forest roads.
In general, road construction and maintenance are the road owners' responsibility. Associations formed by potential road users, mainly found in small ownership, are an appropriate means for financing of construction and maintenance of farm-to-market and forest roads while serving the need for co-operation between adjacent landowners to shorten the total length of road (Photo 1) at the same time.
The Road Inventory, as a sub-programme of the Austrian Forest Inventory, has provided the information on forest access, by different types of low-volume rural roads (Winkler, 1998; FBVA, 1997), stated in Table 3.
The figures in Table 3 show that low-volume roads located at the forest edge, about 12 % on average for Austria and 8 % for Salzburg contribute significantly to forest access although mainly serving agricultural requirements. These edge roads reduce the need for roads located inside forests or at least help to reduce the forest road densities required.
Table 3. Accessibility of production forest by low-volume rural roads
Austria
Salzburg
Road location and ownership
[km]
[km]
located inside forests
private-owned
community-owned
located at forest edge
private-owned
community-owned
Total of rural roads
Note: private road: access usually controlled by the owner
community roads: either with or without limited access
If all roads within the forest, either private or community owned, are assumed to be forest roads and then compared to the corresponding figures on commercial forest, road densities of about 27 metres per hectare for Austria and 24 metres per hectare for Salzburg (Table 4) result. These figures give an indication of road densities required for the management of forests on a sustainable basis in mountainous regions of Austria.
Table 4. Road densities in commercial forest
Commercial forest
Roads inside forest
Road density
Political unit
[ha]
[km]
[m/ha]
Austria
Salzburg
In the province of Salzburg with its mountainous terrain and the need to open up protection forest areas, which are mostly located in steep terrain, for stand improvement purposes, well-planned road alignment and keeping slope disturbances to the absolute minimum are of highest priority. There is also a legal requirement, since every project of forest road has to be planned and supervised by a professional forest engineer and needs the approval of the Forest Authority, which will be guided by the aspects of road construction stated below:
· shortening the total length of roads and skid trails;
· avoidance of areas of wet soils and high erosion risk;
· reducing the size of cut- and fill slopes by use of excavators in steep terrain;
· use of dozers is to be restricted to easy to moderate terrain conditions;
· applying advanced drilling and blasting techniques;
· observance of minimum road standards (road gradients etc.);
· adequate compaction of road surfaces;
· adequate drainage system from road surfaces;
· erosion control by measures of slope stabilisation.
Even following these considerations, serpentine alignments are often unavoidable in mountainous terrain due to slope features, but the number of switchbacks in the route for a road must be restricted to the absolute minimum. Poor road alignment, due to a lack of co-operation among small landowners which leads to zigzag roads with too short distances between switchbacks, are hopefully all in the past (see Photos 2 and 3). They not only inflict scars on the landscape and are difficult to travel but they are also potential sources for erosion and of landslides (Sedlak, 1996).
Growing concerns on environmental issues and the fact that forest roads are unquestionably the most damaging feature of timber harvesting operations (Dykstra and Heinrich, 1996) have forced and encouraged the development of new road construction methods and blasting technologies which now are exclusively used in forest road construction in the province of Salzburg.
Photo 3. Zigzag roads with too short distances between switchbacks due to lack of co-operation between landowners unnecessarily increase the area dedicated to roads
2.2. Description of particular study areas
The main features of the three selected road projects where work and time studies on environmentally sound road construction practice by excavator had been carried out, are stated in Table 5. The area opened up by each road project and the annual timber supply to the market are the key-figures on which justification of financial assistance by federal and provincial government is based.
Table 5. General description of road projects under review
Filzmoos
Untertauern
Golling
Project feature
study site 1
study site 2
study site 3
unit
Forest area
[ha]
Farmland
[ha]
Total area opened up
[ha]
Total road length
[m]
Road density
[m/ha]
Timber volume / year
[m³]
Duration
years
All three road projects were handed in by road associations for approval by the authorities. The road association of each road project under review has been established by smallholders exclusively and ranged from 3 members in the political community of Untertauern, 4 members in Filzmoos to 10 members in Golling. Detailed information on the projects is given in Table 6.
Table 6. Main features of the particular road projects
Project features
Project - Filzmoos
Project - Untertauern
Project - Golling
Commercial forest
35 ha
85 ha
10 ha
Protection forest
with yield
20 ha
85 ha
Area opened up
55 ha
85 ha
95 ha
Range in altitude
1050 - 1350 m
1420 - 1600 m
700 - 1000 m
Road length
main road
3100 m
2300 m
2100 m
side road(s)
700 m + 500 m
1500 m
Bedrock material
phyllite
limestone formation changing with phyllite layers
stratified layers of compact limestone
Morphological and hydrological features
moderate steep to steep terrain with wet areas
moderate steep to steep terrain with wet areas and rock outcrops
steep to very steep terrain with rock outcrops
Streams to be crossed
1 intermittent stream 1 perennial stream
1 intermittent stream
Fords / bridges
2 fords with culvert
1 ford
Construction equipment
1) excavator 2) --- 3) dump truck 4) motor grader 5) vibration roller
1) excavator 2) --- 3) dump truck 4) motor grader 5) vibration roller
1) excavator 2) drilling equipment 3) dump truck 4) --- 5) vibration roller
Max. road gradient
Switchbacks/turning (outside radius)
3 switchbacks (22 m)
2 switchbacks (20 m)
2 switchbacks (17 m) 1 turning (17 m)
Other specifications
local improvement of subgrade by gravel
local improvement of subgrade by gravel
Drainage from the road surface will be provided by a crowned road, a hillside ditch and culverts (40 cm Ø) spaced at 50 m distances. In road sections where streams, either intermittent or perennial, are to be crossed, the dimension and spacing of culverts should be adjusted to the actual need for adequate water drainage. For the road project - Golling, additional drain dips at 70 m intervals have been specified.
As an important erosion control practice, seeding of grass is considered obligatory for all three road projects. Fill slope protection will be provided by a debris cover wherever possible. Retaining structures will be built up with boulders by the excavator wherever needed for slope stabilisation alongside the road (for details see Chapters 3.2 and 3.7).
Photo 4. Fords with integrated culverts are sometime specified as they meet the requirements of normal run-off as well as of high floods (Winkler, 1992)
Table 7 provides information on alterations, adaptations and additional prescribed measures made by the approving authorities and stated in the road building licence on which the beginning of road construction work depends. All measures must be inspected by the supervising forest engineer. Disregard of prescriptions may lead to loss of governmental financial support.
Table 7. Specifications in the road building licences
Project feature
Project - Filzmoos
Project - Untertauern
Project - Golling
Mass transport
on side slope > 70 %
on side slope > 70 %
on side slope > 80 %
Fords
with retaining structure
with retaining structure
Culverts
inlet - outlet protection
inlet - outlet protection
outlet protection
Alteration of road alignment
slight alteration to circumvent wet areas
slight alteration to avoid rock formation
Other measures
ephemeral area is to be crossed by ford
protection of trees used by woodpecker
Figure 1. Regular cross-section for earth and rock
The cross-section both for earth and rock recommended in the road projects is shown in Figure 1. In the road project - Filzmoos a subgrade width of 4.0 m and a running surface of 3.0 m has been specified for the two side roads. Figure 2 shows the actual cross sections found at the study sites which are derived from several measurements spaced at 30 m distances along the road centreline of the road sections where construction operations have been observed.
Figure 2. Actual cross-sections at study sites
At study site 1 and 3, the average subgrade width was considered to be in compliance with the subgrade width of the approved road projects, whereas at study site 2 the subgrade width had obviously been increased. The latter was caused by the need to store logs alongside road, not only felled during clearing of construction area but also for logs of future timber harvest. Due to terrain conditions no landing could be established for several hundred metres (Photo 5).
Photo 5. The need of log storage alongside road has led to an increase in subgrade width at study site 2 as no landing could be established for several hundred metres
<section>6</section>
3. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ROAD CONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUE IN STEEP TERRAIN
Environmentally sound forest road construction techniques as holistic, interdisciplinary approaches that take into account the need for landscape and wildlife considerations should replace purely technology-oriented solutions (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) and are to be guided by the following principal considerations:
· any disturbance to the landscape is to be kept to the absolute minimum;
· environmentally sound correction of poorly located and designed roads at a later stage is virtually impossible;
· reckless and incompetent construction work may destroy the beneficial effects of even the most carefully selected road location;
· undesired effects and scars inflicted on the landscape can seldom be remedied at a later stage and only at much higher costs.
Equal attention is to be paid to the three phases in road construction projects (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995), namely, planning and design, construction operation, and integration which comprises bioengineering as well as landscaping measures. All operations undertaken are guided by the consideration that unless the forest is left in a condition that will permit the attainment of a desired future condition, sustainability cannot be assured (Dykstra and Heinrich, 1996).
The detailed information given in the following chapters focus on construction activities. Some details also refer to integration measures as they are accomplished by means of excavator.
3.1. Clearing of the construction area
Prior to clearing of the construction area, the design information is to be moved from the plan to the ground by staking. There are a variety of staking methods which can be employed, however, for the mechanized construction of forest roads in the mountainous terrain of Austria, where the gradient rather than the horizontal alignment is the controlling factor, simpler methods of location have been developed (Sedlak, 1985).
At the study sites the gradeline method was employed, referred to as "zero-line method" in Austria, which has proved to be the ideal tool for fitting the road to the natural terrain as closely as possible. It can be described as a step-by-step method for fixing the location line with a given longitudinal gradient directly in the terrain (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) by means of a hand-held clinometer. The gradeline itself represents the intersection between subgrade of the road and the slope, and serves as the guideline for mechanized road construction (Sedlak, 1985).
In using this simple method there are no real limits to project accuracy (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) as exact costing of earthworks is not necessary due to the high performance of the construction equipment employed. Such simple methods must not be confused with inadequate planning as skill and experience are required to find the most feasible road alignment, both from the environmental and economic point of view (Sedlak, 1985).
Figure 3. Road template
Once the gradeline is staked, clearing of the construction area by felling the trees within the clearing limits (see Figure 3) should be carried out. In difficult terrain the clearing limits are marked by tying coloured plastic tapes to trees or branches.
The felling itself, as the landowners responsibility, has to take account of the anticipated method of extraction by the excavator operator with regard to felling direction and harvesting method to be used. A modified full-length method is normally applied as it facilitates log removal from the construction area by excavator most efficiently. This method requires that trees are delimbed and topped at the felling site, except where the trees are too large to be handled by the excavator, when some cross cutting will be necessary.
Photo 6. Modified full-length method should preferably be used in felling at construction site
3.2. Road construction by excavator
The introduction of hydraulic excavators in forest road construction has been the major step towards environmentally sound road construction practices. In hilly terrain in Austria the use of excavators not only replaced bulldozers in forest road construction but also improved the quality of roads while reducing environmental impacts of these complex engineering structures, whereas in steep terrain their use is the only option to make road construction even feasible.
Road construction technique by hydraulic excavator comprises the following five distinct phases stated below:
i) log removal from construction area
ii) topsoil removal from construction area
iii) excavating base for fill foundation
iv) fill slope construction
v) subgrade and cut shaping
This order is not necessarily followed in the actual construction sequence on the construction site. Some operators will arrange single activities in sequence, whereas others will chop and change between tasks. The latter are at risk burying organic materials in the fill and failing to separate excavated local materials taking account of their anticipated use in building up the fill in layers.
However, even if a well-trained and experienced professional operator follows his personal optimum sequence of construction activities, log removal from the construction area will always be the first phase in road construction and close supervision has to ensure best construction practices to be followed and compliance with the project plan approved by the authorities. The road gradient should frequently be checked to ensure that the gradeline is followed since stakes marking the gradeline will be obliterated during topsoil removal.
Figure 4. Road construction technique by excavator
Close supervision is important when road construction works are carried out by contractors who are paid per running metre of road completed rather than on an hourly rate. Past experience has shown that contractors paid by the running metre tend to decrease their own costs by poor construction practices (see also Chapter 5.1.1) where proper establishment of the fill foundation is often neglected. Road failures and even landslides triggered by construction flaws have been the consequence, in particular due to the inadequate fill foundation provided by the excavator in the third phase.
On slopes where substantial rock blasting is specified the topsoil removal from the construction area will be followed by rock drilling and blasting to facilitate a solid foundation.
Photo 7. Log removal by means of chain attached to the bucket's hook
i) Log removal from construction area
Once the trees have been felled within the clearing limits, road construction activities will start by log removal from the construction area. As already mentioned in Chapter 3.1, trees should preferably remain in full length in order to minimize the delays to the work of the excavator and ensure maximum performance.
After several trees have been attached by means of chain to the excavator's bucket or sometimes just by balancing stems put on the bucket, the excavator pulls or carries logs out of the construction area by moving backwards to roadside storage. Logs should be stored at roadside in several places rather than transported over long distances to landings due to the low driving speed of excavators. Such frequent storage will reduce extraction cost and facilitate any further processing.
Photo 8. Log removal at the construction site by means of the excavator's bucket
ii) Topsoil removal from construction area
The log removal phase will be followed by clearing the construction area from wood residues and organic topsoil. Bigger branches are piled up by pulling them with the bucket's sh