<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Towards 2010: Report of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study</title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations used in the report
AAC
Annual Allowable Cut
AIEs
Advanced Industrialised Economies
ANZCERTA
Australia and New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement
APAFRI
Asia Pacific Association of Forest Research
APAN
Asia Pacific Agroforestry Network
APEC
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum
APFC
Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission
APFSOS
Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study
AsDB
Asian Development Bank
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CDM
Clean Development Mechanism
CDP
Integrated Conservation and Development Project
CDS
Commission on Sustainable Development
CFM
Collaborative Forest Management
CIFOR
Center for International Forestry Research
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
DPR
Democratic People's Republic (of Korea)
EAA
Ecotourism Association of Australia
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FECOFUN
Federation of Community Forestry Users (Nepal)
FIDC
Forest Industries Development Corporation
FMAFMA
Forestry Management Agreement
FMAs
Industrial Forest Management Agreements
FORSPA
Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and Pacific
FORTIP
Forest Tree Improvement Project
FRA
Forest Resources Assessment
FRIM
Forest Research Institute of Malaysia
FUGs
Forest-User Groups
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GFSS
Global Fibre Supply Study
GSP
Generalised System of Preferences
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank)
ICIMOD
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
IFF
Intergovernmental Forum on Forests
INBAR
International Network for Bamboo and Rattan
IPF
Intergovernmental Panel on Forests
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN
International Union for Nature Conservation
MSS
Myanmar Selection System
NA
North Asia
NEAP
Ecotourism Accreditation Programme
NFAP
National Forestry Action Plan
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisation
NIEs
Newly Industrialising Economies
NWFP
Non-wood forest product
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PI
Pacific Islands
PR
People's Republic (of China)
RECOFTC
Regional Community Forestry Training Center
RWEDP
Regional Wood Energy Development
SA
South Asia
SAARC
South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation
SAP
Structural Adjustment Programme
SEA
Southeast Asia
SFM
Sustainable Forest Management
SIFMP
Socialized Industrial Forest Management Programme
SPC
South Pacific Commission
SPF
South Pacific Forum
SR
Socialist Republic (of Viet Nam)
TPTI
Indonesian selective cutting and replanting system
TRIFED
Tribal Co-operation Marketing Development Federation of India LTD.
UN
United Nations
UNCED
United Nations Commission on Environment and Development
UNFCCC
Framework Convention on Climate Change
WCARRD
World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
WCMC
World Conservation and Monitoring Centre
WHO
World Health Organization
WTO
World Trade Organisation
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
FAO expresses sincere appreciation and gratitude to all who contributed to the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study (APFSOS). In doing so, FAO recognises that contributions have been far wider than the list provided here. Hundreds of unidentified contributors provided information, advice and opinions during the preparation of working papers and the final study report. Grateful thanks are rendered to all these people and agencies.
The strong support given by member countries toward the completion of the APFSOS is reflected by the nearly universal preparation of country outlook studies by member countries of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. Many countries also provided comprehensive reports and recent documentation on national policies, strategies and actions. Governments in the region nominated national focal points who met early in the process to discuss their roles and to agree upon a common national report structure. The national focal points were instrumental in collecting country-level data and information, clarifying issues and verifying statistics.
Valuable support for the APFSOS was also provided by partner agencies within and outside the region. These include the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA); Canadian Forest Service; Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR); Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and Pacific (FORSPA); International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO); Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific (RWEDP); USDA Forest Service (International Programs and Northwest Forest Experiment Station); Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests of Japan (through Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA)) which seconded an expert to the FAO Regional Office in Bangkok; and Ministry of Forestry of the People's Republic of China and Ministry of Forestry, New Zealand, both of which released officers for FAO assignments.
The Study was initiated at the Sixteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which was chaired by Dr. Kyaw Tint (Ministry of Forestry, Myanmar); and reviewed at the Seventeenth Session chaired by Dr. Toga Silitonga (Ministry of Forestry, Indonesia).
Implementation of the study was co-ordinated by Mafa Chipeta and Patrick Durst, and assisted by Desk Officers Chris Brown, Hidehiko Ishihara and Zheng Rui, under the supervision of Hosny El-Lakany, Soetatwo Hadiwigeno, David Harcharik, A.Z.M. Obaidullah Khan, Prem Nath, Lennart Ljungman, Marc Rene de Montalembert and Michael Martin. Implementation was overseen by an FAO Steering Group comprised of Nikos Alexandratos, Jacques Antoine, Jim Ball, Jim Bourke, Mafa Chipeta, Jean Clement, Yves Dube, Klaus Janz, Lennart Ljungman, Michael Martin, Marc Rene de Montalembert, Saravannamuttu Muttiah, Richard Owen, Paul Reichert, Olman Serrano and Miguel Trossero.
National reports were submitted by government forestry agencies from nearly all countries in the region. Additional thematic working papers were contributed by: Mohammed Ahmed; Romulo Arancon (Asian and Pacific Coconut Community); Joerg Balsiger; Ajit Bannerjee; Jean Louis Blanchez; David Brooks, Mafa Chipeta and Adrian Whiteman; Chris Brown; Neil Byron (CIFOR); Dali Zhang, Joseph Buongiorno and Shushuai Zhu (University of Wisconsin); Anthony DiNicola, Don Justin Jones and Gerald Gray (American Forests and COPEC); Lamjavyn Djortseden (Ministry of Nature and Environment, Mongolia); Thomas Enters (FORSPA); Hong-Narith (Department of Forestry and Wildlife, Cambodia); Robert Fisher, Somjai Srimongkontip and Cor Veer (RECOFTC); P.M. Ganapathy; Don Hammond; Kampheuane Kingsada; Guido Kuchelmeister (Tree City); Thierry Lefevre, Jessie Todoc and Govinda R. Timilsina (Asian Institute of Technology); Kreg Lindberg, Brian Furze, Marilyn Staff and Rosemary Black; Michael Lyons and Lu
Wenming; Ma Qiang; Andrew Mittelman, Chun Lai, Neil Byron, Genevieve Michon and Esther Katz; Mok Sian Tuan; Saravannamuttu Muttiah; Aung Kyaw Myint and Thomas Hofer (International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development); James Paine (World Conservation and Monitoring Centre); Tara Bhattarai, Conrado Heruela, Willem Hulscher, Auke Koopmans, Jaap Koppejan, Joost Siteur and Arjan Kraijo (Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific); David Seabright; Shi Kunshan, Li Zhiyong, Lin Fenming and Zheng Rui (Ministry of Forestry, People's Republic of China); K.M. Siddiqui (Pakistan Forest Institute); Nguyen Tuong Van (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Viet Nam); Napoleon Vergara; Thomas Waggener and Christine Lane; Douglas Williams (International Tropical Timber Organization); Byoung Il Yoo (Forestry Research Institute, Republic of Korea); Zhu Zhaohua, Jiang Chunqian, Zhong Maogong and Wang Huafu (Chinese Academy of Forestry); and Mohamed
Zuhair.
The following individuals served as National Focal Points or participants in the National Focal Points' meetings: David Alien (New Zealand); Lamjavyn Djortseden (Mongolia); Saw Eh Dah (Myanmar); Allan Hansard and Peter Thomas (Australia); Shaharuddin Ismail (Malaysia); Jeon Jin-Pyo (Republic of Korea); Sa-nguan Kakhong and Sirada Phongsoeksawat (Thailand); Indra Singh Karki (Nepal); Jose Malvas (Philippines); Adriu Nabora (Fiji); Hong Narith and Uk Soknonn (Cambodia); M.P.A.U. Sarath Fernando (Sri Lanka); Shi Kunshan (People's Republic of China); Shingo Shibata and Takashi Sekiguchi (Japan); K.M. Siddiqui (Pakistan); Toga Silitonga and D. Mulyadhi (Indonesia); Rajiv Srivastava (India); Nguyen Tuong Van (Viet Nam); Bounthong Xaisida (Laos); and Mohamed Zuhair (Maldives).
The core drafting team for the main report was comprised of: Tara Bhattarai, Darcie Booth, Jim Bourke, Susan Braatz, David Brooks, Chris Brown, Neil Byron, Cherukat Chandrasekharan, Mafa Chipeta, Patrick Durst, Thosapala Hewage, Miguel Trossero and Adrian Whiteman.
Other contributions to the main report were made by: Jim Ball, Jean-Louis Blanchez, Gary Bull, Anthony DiNicola, Patrick Dugan, Hidehiko Ishihara, Dougal Morrison, CTS Nair and Salleh Mohd Nor.
An Expert Advisory Group (EAG) composed of eminent experts on Asia-Pacific forestry, met twice to review drafts of the report - once in Kathmandu (hosted by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD)), and once in Kuala Lumpur (hosted by TROPBIO Sdn Bhd). The EAG was comprised of: Masahiro Amano, Tara Bhattarai, Patrick Dugan, Barin Ganguli, Larry Hamilton, Thosapala Hewage, Salleh Mohd Nor, Narayan Kaji Shresta and Napoleon Vergara.
Thanks are due to the entire Forestry Department, FAO, Rome and Forestry Staff of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, all of whom contributed to the study.
Finally, special thanks go to those who worked long and late to provide essential secretarial support: Linda Ransom (FAO, Rome), Amy Tanachiva and Helene Gunatilaka (FAO, Bangkok) and to Iraê Sassi for preparation of the final manuscript for printing.
<section>3</section>
Preface
At the Sixteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Commission decided to launch a regional forestry sector outlook study. This major initiative was to consider status, trends and prospects for the sector to the year 2010. In making the decision to implement the study, the Commission felt that it was necessary to analyse developments and factors both within and outside forestry. It called for presentation of possible paths for future changes and of the implications for policy and action. In endorsing the regional study, the Commission recognised that many developments are beyond the scope of any one country; it also recognised the value of a collaborative exercise involving all members of the APFC as a means of strengthening its own role in forestry development.
As Chairmen of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Sessions of the APFC, we are pleased to present the report of the study to member countries and to the broader international community. We believe it can serve the interests of policy-makers in both the public and private arenas. The study has been a major undertaking and, if it has taught us anything, it is that the region and the sector are highly dynamic. We, therefore, consider this report as the beginning of an ongoing process that will hopefully be repeated and updated in the future. We believe it should also serve as the basis for even greater attention to the main issues and opportunities that it exposes, both within and outside the forestry sector itself. We encourage all interested policy-makers dealing with forestry in the region to make use, not only of this summary report, but also of the vast amount of valuable information contained in the supporting working papers.
The success of this study must be attributed to the excellent contributions and spirit of partnership demonstrated by member governments, regional and international organisations, donor agencies and individual contributors. On behalf of all members of the Commission, we also express our appreciation to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which co-ordinated the study and provided secretariat support through its regional office in Bangkok and headquarters in Rome. The study also benefited substantially from inputs provided by nongovernmental organisations and the private sector, although we would have preferred more involvement from these partners and we appeal to them to become more actively engaged in future APFC initiatives.
Conducting a study of this nature in a region as diverse as Asia and the Pacific is not easy; the challenges of drawing together the vast range of information, experiences, policies, prospects and perspectives are daunting. Nonetheless, when the Seventeenth Session of the Commission convened in February 1998, in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, to review the results of the study, the wealth of information that had been compiled was clearly evident. Participants were particularly struck by the large number of common themes and problems running throughout the countries of the region. Clearly, many countries in the region have faced, or are facing, similar challenges in forestry. Perhaps for the first time some of these linkages have been clearly specified, providing countries in the region with an excellent opportunity to more fully understand how others are dealing with similar problems - and setting the stage for greater co-operation in the coming decades.
It has been our privilege and pleasure to serve as Chairmen of the APFC during the course of this study and to oversee its completion. It is difficult for us to imagine a better catalyst for advancing one of the key objectives of the APFC - that is, to promote regional dialogue and co-operation on forestry issues.
U Kyaw Tint
Chairman of the Sixteenth Session Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (Director-General, Forest Department, Myanmar)
Toga Silitonga
Chairman of the Seventeenth Session Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (Director General, Forestry Research and Development Agency, Ministry of Forestry and Estate Crops, Indonesia)
<section>4</section>
Foreword
FAO welcomed the decision by the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, in 1996, to undertake a comprehensive regional forestry sector outlook study. For some time, FAO had been concerned that, while the forestry situations in selected countries were well documented and global analyses regularly assessed the forestry situation at macro levels, many of the complex relationships at regional levels were being overlooked and under-appreciated. Consequently, understanding of many of the more subtle - though no less important - dynamics of the sector was being affected.
It is evident that countries can no longer develop forestry policies in isolation. Policies often have major repercussions not only in the country in which they are promulgated, but also in other countries, sometimes far away. Thus, an understanding of regional and sub-regional dynamics is crucial to understanding particular country situations, but also in building a more accurate global picture. At a time when increasing attention is being paid to global forest issues and decisions are being made that will affect the forest legacy of several generations, better information is vital. Therefore, we are pleased that the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study (APFSOS) has made substantial and critical contributions toward improving the understanding of the forestry sector in Asia and the Pacific and the rest of the world.
Perhaps the most significant outcome of this regional outlook study, however, has been the spirit of collaboration and sharing it has engendered. Not only have the countries of the region shown enormous commitment to the study, but so too have the region's forestry institutions and organisations in related sectors. Numerous organisations and individuals have given freely of their time and resources in contributing to the success of this study. Through their partnership and commitment, they have demonstrated the power and value of regional and international co-operation in achieving common objectives.
The APFSOS is the first in what we hope will be an ongoing series of outlook studies carried out under the auspices of the various regional forestry commissions. In providing the link between national and global analyses, these studies will provide the basis for better decision-making at all levels. The obvious success of this study provides both a benchmark and a model for furthering this process. We trust, therefore, that in addition to fulfilling its primary role of informing and generating discussion in Asia and the Pacific, the APFSOS will serve as an inspiration and a challenge to people in other regions.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Assistant Director-General Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Prem Nath
Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
<section>5</section>
Executive summary
A region of rapid change... a time of transition
During the past several years, the Asia-Pacific region has experienced rapid and often tumultuous political and socio-economic change. The Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study, conducted under the auspices of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), has been carried out against this backdrop of diversity, dynamism and contrast.
Economic growth in a number of the region's countries has been among the fastest in the world; since 1945, the region's economy has grown seven times faster than the world average. Since mid-1997, however, the region has undergone a significant economic downturn, with negative growth in many economies - the impacts of which have yet to be clearly determined. Nonetheless, from this dislocation, the region is expected to resume rapid economic growth, with associated strong demand for a wide range of forest products and services.
Economic growth in the region has been accompanied by enormous social and political transformation. Dramatic changes are occurring in the way people work, where they live, what they spend their money on, and countless other aspects of life. The perspectives of the people living in Asia and the Pacific toward forests and forestry are evolving in concert with socio-economic changes, and emerging environmental perceptions and institutional attitudes.
The future of forestry is shaped by current choices
The policies, choices and decisions that will determine the future of forests and forestry in the region lie in the hands of the member countries of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. The key challenges are to achieve balance among the multiple roles of forests to deliver the greatest overall benefits, and to adopt measures that keep the sector responsive to changing needs without compromising the sustainability of forest resources.
Countries rich in resources have more options for meeting diverse demands placed on forests. The capacity to choose also derives from general economic and institutional strengths. It is, however, unrealistic to expect immediate and dramatic shifts in the way forests are managed and used in the region.
Many actions can be taken unilaterally by individual countries, but others require multilateral co-operation -matters of trade, responsible stewardship standards, management of international waterways and watersheds, and research and education are some of the areas where co-operation can yield considerable benefits.
Economic and social background
The most important drivers of demand for forest products are population and economic growth. The Asia-Pacific region accounts for 55 percent of world population (more than 3 billion people) and annual population growth is currently averaging 1.4 percent. This is expected to continue through 2010. The region accounts for 25 percent of world GDP and annual growth has averaged 2.6 percent since 1980. The recent economic downturn will significantly affect this growth rate for the next several years.
Notwithstanding the economic downturn in the region, a sizeable share of the population is achieving rapidly rising prosperity and purchasing power. A large middle class is emerging in many countries of the region.
Economic growth has been heavily skewed, however - the greatest growth has been in Japan (which accounts for more than 50 percent of Asia-Pacific's GDP). Substantial growth has also occurred in the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and the Republic of Korea. The rest of the growth has been in a handful of relatively small countries or territories. The Asia-Pacific region remains generally poor, although demands for modern products and services are growing.
The overall importance of forestry in national economies is generally limited. The countries with the largest forest and forest products sectors (Japan, People's Republic of China, Indonesia and Malaysia) all have large economies. In these countries, forestry's large gross value contribution comprises a smaller proportion of exports and GDP than many of the smaller countries. Nonetheless, in both Indonesia and Malaysia forestry still accounts for around 10 percent of the economy. In several countries, forestry contributes very significantly to the economy:
· 10 percent or more to GDP in six countries (highest in Bhutan);
· 10 percent or more to merchandise trade in eight countries (highest in Cambodia); and
· 10 percent or more to both GDP and merchandise trade in four countries (highest in Solomon Islands).
Overall, demands for the full range of goods and services of forests are increasing throughout the Asia-Pacific region.
Demands for services of forests
Services of forests are important, whether they have a formal market (such as for grazing, ecotourism, and recreation) or are largely intangible (such as cultural and spiritual values or biological diversity conservation). Achieving sustainable financing to manage forests for non-marketed services is a major challenge.
Among the range of services, the most significant include:
· ecotourism: the market for ecotourism (not all forest-based) is estimated at around US$6 billion annually and is growing at 10 to 25 percent annually. Ecotourism and forest-based recreation clearly have the potential to become increasingly important for forestry in the region;
· watershed protection: demands for water are increasing dramatically in the region. The contribution of forests to water quality and flow are extremely important in this respect. As several major river basins cross international boundaries, the potential for actions in upstream countries to have major impacts on downstream countries must be carefully considered;
· protective and habitat functions of mangroves: mangroves help protect coastal areas and provide critical habitat for wildlife and fish. Despite these values, mangrove areas are shrinking and being degraded at a rapid pace. These changes are putting at risk the livelihoods of millions of people and the integrity of coastal environments;
· carbon sequestration: there are promising emerging opportunities for developing countries to capture investment funds in forestry for carbon sequestration (through major afforestation of under-utilised lands and areas of low productivity); and
· biodiversity conservation: the region harbours a large proportion of global biological resources, many of which are increasingly threatened by spontaneous and inappropriate development.
Demand for non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
NWFPs comprise an important, though generally poorly monitored, aspect of forest production. They are of particular significance to forest-dependent people. The Asia-Pacific region is estimated to account for up to 40 percent of the world's NWFP exports. At local levels, key NWFPs include food, fodder, medicines and building materials such as thatch, bamboo and rattan.
There are a number of diverse challenges related to mainstreaming NWFPs. Only a few NWFPs have proven economically dynamic and a number of problems arise from the small scale and economic weakness associated with most NWFP production and processing. A major constraint to date may well have been a failure to identify and focus upon the few NWFPs that have the greatest importance now or that demonstrate the greatest promise for the future.
Demand for wood energy
Woodfuels are a basic need for 2 billion people in the Asia-Pacific region; they account for 70 to 80 percent of the total roundwood harvest. While woodfuels' share of total energy use is declining, the absolute volume of woodfuels used continues to increase. Despite this, in many countries wood energy is still largely considered a traditional "poor people's fuel." A major challenge is to bring wood energy use more into the mainstream, including policy agendas.
Salient issues relating to woodfuel utilisation include:
· the primary supply problem for fuelwood is uneven distribution and accessibility. Consequently surpluses exist simultaneously with pockets of shortage. At the regional and national levels, potential woodfuel supplies almost invariably exceed current demand - shortages are largely localised;
· on average, two-thirds of woodfuel supplies come from non-forest land rather than from forests; and
· in economically fast-growing countries, woodfuel demand is slowing down and may soon decline. In most countries, however, woodfuel will remain of central importance well beyond 2010.
Demand for and trade in industrial forest products
The Asia-Pacific region produces nearly 280 million cubic metres of industrial roundwood annually. Increasingly, industrial roundwood is being processed domestically. Manufacturing into secondary and finished products for export is also increasing. Considerable attention is being devoted to developing processing capacity for new products. A notable trend is toward rapid expansion of processing capacity for medium-density fibreboard and pulp and paper. Some countries are undergoing major restructuring of the industrial processing sector to adapt to the realities of reduced raw material supplies, smaller logs, and increased dependency on plantation-grown wood and non-traditional raw material sources (rubber, oil palm).
There has been rapid growth in the consumption of forest products - even faster than income and population growth. The Asia-Pacific region's output and consumption of many commodities are of similar orders of magnitude as for Europe and are approaching those of North America.
The Asia-Pacific region is the world's largest net importing region of industrial forest products. Japan will continue to be the region's largest importer of forest products. Therefore, changes in Japan's consumer preferences, economic growth or the extent of harvesting of Japan's forest resources, could significantly re-orient trading patterns. Two major areas of uncertainty concerning trade will be future supply developments in the Russian Far East and in the two largest developing countries - the People's Republic of China and India.
The most important features of the industrial wood sphere in the Asia-Pacific region are that:
· recent years have brought a greater emphasis on fibre processing as opposed to manufacturing of solid-wood products. Particularly, there has been a relative stagnation in the production and consumption of sawn timber in comparison with panel products. The increasing scarcity of large-diameter logs suitable for sawing is accelerating the transition to engineered wood products and non-wood alternatives;
· the growth in roundwood consumption has slowed relative to the growth in the output of products derived from it (i.e. sawnwood, panels, pulp and paper). This trend is due to gains in efficiency and greater reliance on recycled material, alternative raw materials and residues;
· only a few countries dominate the production and consumption of most industrial wood products;
· a high proportion of recycled and non-wood fibre is used in the production of paper and paperboard in the region relative to the rest of the world;
· several non-traditional timber producers, particularly among the Mekong countries and Melanesia, are emerging as potential sources of supplementary wood supplies;
· there is increasing substitution of coniferous timber for hardwood resources. Several countries have rapidly maturing plantations that will provide increased volumes of timber in the next decade.
Forest and tree resources
The Asia-Pacific region covers one-quarter of the world's land area and has 15 percent of the world's forest and wooded land. This represents about 28 percent of the region's land area but is equivalent to only a quarter of a hectare of forest or wooded land per person - the lowest ratio for any region. In practice, in countries such as Bangladesh, the average person has hardly any forest, while in countries such as Papua New Guinea there is a relative abundance of forest. Of a total of some 550 million hectares of forest in 1995, the five leading countries account for two-thirds of the area. An even greater concentration of forest plantations exists.
Forest cover in the developed countries of the region has essentially remained constant in recent years. In contrast, forest cover has declined substantially in developing countries in the region, particularly in tropical regions. In the tropical countries of Asia, deforestation amounted to 3.9 million hectares per year between 1981 and 1990. The major direct cause of deforestation and forest degradation in Asia and the Pacific is clearing for agriculture (including shifting cultivation). Land-use changes have varied considerably among the sub-regions.
In addition to forest loss, there have been substantial changes in quality. Over the last decade, extensive areas have been converted to "other wooded land." Excessive cutting of timber causes forest degradation, although often more important contributors to forest clearing are logging roads, which facilitate migration and new settlements. Fires, open grazing, fuelwood harvesting, mining, irrigation and hydroelectric projects, and urban expansion are other important local causes of deforestation and forest degradation. Rates of deforestation in the region are expected to generally decrease as fewer easily accessible forest areas remain to be cleared and agricultural intensification takes root in a number of countries.
The Asia-Pacific region leads the world in tropical forest plantation development. More than 22 million hectares have been planted, representing three-quarters of the world's total. In the temperate areas of the region even larger areas of forest plantations have been established. Additionally, the Asia-Pacific region possesses most of the world's 14 million hectares of rubber and coconut plantations. Oil palm is another tree crop that has potential to supplement forest fibre in the region.
Until recently the important wood supply roles played by trees outside forests was little understood. It is now evident that non-forest trees, treecrops and non-wood cellulose provide very significant volumes of both fuelwood and industrial fibre.
Efforts to bring timber harvests within sustainable levels include: improving forest management practices, increasing forest conservation, accelerating plantation development, providing forest-derived benefits to a broader range of people, and offering incentives to individuals and corporations to encourage development of forest resources on community and private lands.
Forest management objectives have evolved considerably in Asia and the Pacific in recent years. There is notable reorientation in many countries toward social and environmental objectives. Many countries are reducing their reliance on natural forests as a source of industrial roundwood and are shifting to other sources. Most countries of the region have accelerated reforestation efforts in recent years.
Many countries are giving increased attention to forest conservation, exemplified by the creation or expansion of protected areas. The region has just under 3,000 protected areas in total, covering nearly 9 percent of the land area. Protection does not cover all representative ecosystems, however, and many "parks" exist only on paper. A protection-related practise of regional significance has been the tendency to restrict timber harvests or to withdraw large areas of natural forests from wood production.
People and forests
The region has four main types of people/fore