<title>The right to food in theory and practice</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
In November 1996 the world's leaders gathered in Rome for the World Food Summit. They considered it intolerable that more than 800 million people in the world do not have enough food to meet their basic nutritional needs and pledged their political will and their commitment to achieving food security for all and to an ongoing effort to eradicate hunger in all countries, with an immediate view to reducing the number of undernourished people to half its 1996 level no later than 2015.
The World Food Summit Plan of Action spells out the various objectives and actions to guide countries in achieving the aims of the Summit. One of these objectives is to improve the definition and implementation of the rights related to food. The High Commissioner for Human Rights was given special responsibility for this objective, and has already made considerable progress.
The fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the cornerstone document for all those aspiring to establish human rights and human dignity, is on 10 December 1998. It is my pleasure to present this special publication by FAO in commemoration of that anniversary.
One of the rights spelled out in the Universal Declaration is the right to an adequate standard of living, including food. The Preamble to the FAO Constitution sets "ensuring humanity's freedom from hunger" as one of the basic purposes of the Organization. The rights related to food are therefore of special concern to FAO and other agencies involved in food, agriculture and rural development.
In this publication, the rights related to food are examined from both the human rights and the operational points of view. Distinguished human rights expert A. Eide provides an insight into the meaning of the right to adequate food; FoodFirst International Action Network, a non-governmental organization (NGO) that specializes in the right to food, presents an overview of NGO action in the field; the World Food Programme discusses the right to food in emergencies, with special emphasis on the plight of internally displaced persons; P. Spitz of the International Fund for Agricultural Development explains the visions of his organization for the rural poor; and FAO itself has contributed various articles about women's right to food, hunger mapping, follow-up action to the World Food Summit, the Special Programme for Food Security, and the importance of national legislation in implementing the rights related to food.
W9990e04.gif (247 bytes)
Jacques Diouf
Director-General,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The World Food Summit decided in November 1996 to entrust the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with the mandate of better defining the rights related to food, as set out in Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. This included the responsibility to propose ways to implement and realize these rights as a means of achieving the commitments and objectives of the World Food Summit, taking into account the possibility of formulating voluntary guidelines for food security for all. The Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council endorsed this mandate.
Children in Madras eat what they can find on the streets
Hunger is an outrageous violation of human dignity that requires urgent measures for its elimination.
My first substantive step in the implementation of this important task was to convene a two-day consultation in Geneva on 1 and 2 December 1997. Representatives of the United Nations system, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and experts participated in the Consultation. The first day was devoted to a general discussion within the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the normative content of the right to food as set out in Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The second day was an expert meeting, which focused on the implementation of the right to food, that is the practical steps to be taken at national and international levels for the full enjoyment of that right.
The Commission on Human Rights discussed the report of this consultation and, on 1l April 1998, adopted resolution 1998/23 on the right to food. By this resolution, the Commission reaffirmed that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human dignity and, therefore, requires the adoption of urgent measures at national, regional and international levels for its elimination. The Commission also reaffirmed the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger so as to be able to develop fully and maintain their physical and mental capacities.
The Commission therefore considered it intolerable that more than 800 million people throughout the world, especially women and children and those living in developing countries, do not have enough food to meet their basic nutritional needs, which infringes their fundamental human rights.
The Commission also welcomed the initiative undertaken by my Office to convene the Consultation on the Right to Adequate Food, as a concrete and practical response to Objective 7.4 of the Rome Declaration and Plan of Action. The meeting concluded that the human right to adequate food is firmly established in international law, but its operational content and means of application are generally little understood.
A human rights approach to food and nutrition problems is fundamentally different from basic needs-oriented approaches to development. It introduces a normative basis, which is obligatory at the state level. It also implies that the "beneficiaries" of development are active subjects and "claim holders" and stipulates the duties or obligations of those against whom such claims can be held. Finally, such an approach introduces an accountability dimension not present in basic needs strategies.
A fundamental misunderstanding in the implementation of the right to food, has been the notion that the principal obligation is for the state to feed the citizens under its jurisdiction (fulfilling the right to food), rather than respecting and protecting the rights related to food, as well as emphasizing the obligations of individuals and civil society in this regard.
The Consultation therefore recommended that a follow-up meeting should take place to complete the discussions on the content and means for implementation of the right to adequate food. The Commission on Human Rights endorsed the proposal to have a follow-up meeting before the end of 1998 to pursue the discussions on the contents and means of implementation of the rights related to adequate food.
A baby on its mother's back, Ghana
Everyone has the right to safe and nutritious food.
In addition, the Commission requested that the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights draft, discuss and adopt a general comment on the rights related to food. Such a general comment would greatly enhance the common understanding of what the right to food means and give greater guidance for the States Parties to the Covenant in their reporting obligations on how they are implementing this right.
My Office is therefore convening a second round of consultations, hosted by FAO in Rome on 18 and 19 November 1998. It is my hope that this venue will facilitate an even stronger participation from the Rome-based food agencies; they are the ones in constant touch with the practical realities of the right to food, and the lack of it.
I would like to see FAO, the World Food Programme (WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) becoming more institutionally sensitive to the fact that aspects of the right to food are their main purpose, and more willing to take a rights approach in their work, as well as taking part in the effort of the United Nations to integrate human rights in general into all aspects of its work.
Many actors are relevant to the right to food. Apart from the Rome agencies already mentioned, the right to food is relevant to the mandate of the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Bank and many others. I would like these organizations to achieve a common understanding and common direction for eliminating hunger and malnutrition, and I attach great importance to the dialogue between them and my own Office.
Empty shelves in Moscow reflect serious food shortages
The right to food is supported by international law, but effective means of putting it into practice have still to be established.
There is a clear division of labour between human rights institutions and development actors. At the international level this means that the United Nations human rights machinery is charged with monitoring the realization - and violation - of the right to adequate food, while the development agencies provide technical, financial and food assistance.
For the food and development agencies, clarification of the right to food is essential for the putting into practice of food security objectives. In this connection, the Maastricht Guidelines interpret the Covenant's call for the progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights as requiring states to achieve specific targets to satisfy a normative standard (the "obligation of result").
Market traders in Togo display their wares
The state should be seen as the protector of rights relating to food, rather than merely being the direct supplier of food in emergencies.
The global development conferences of the 1990s have provided important guidance in this regard, by providing quantitative, time-frame development targets, including food and nutrition. Within this framework, states can now set their own country-specific targets as a means for realizing the right to adequate food.
Of equal importance to the actors of the United Nations and intergovernmental system are NGOs. The human rights agenda is very much influenced by NGOs and civil society in general. NGOs are often able to be ahead of intergovernmental bodies in policies because of their different nature. For instance, a network of NGOs is already lobbying for its own draft Code of Conduct on the Human Right to Adequate Food, which would be a great working tool, even if it is not immediately adopted by the international community.
Let me state my approach. I am committed to giving equal importance to all human rights - civil, cultural, economic, political and social. Economic, social and cultural rights have received too little attention in the past but, as was reconfirmed by the World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in 1993, "all human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent and interrelated".
In practice, we have not yet achieved the universal, interdependent and interrelated protection and promotion of civil and political, economic, social and cultural rights. Whereas clear standards have been set as to the contents of civil and political rights, the precise meaning of economic, social and cultural rights remains vague. If all human rights are to be treated on an equal footing, more attention needs to be paid to clarifying the universal minimum core contents of economic, social and cultural rights.
In this respect, the World Food Summit Plan of Action must be very warmly welcomed. Objective 7.4 of the Plan of Action creates the possibility for a substantive strengthening of the right to food as contained in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
For the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which constitutes a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, it is my pleasure to introduce FAO's publication on The right to food in theory and practice, which throws light on the different but complementary approaches of the many actors involved.
W9990e09.gif (366 bytes)
Mary Robinson
United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights
<section>3</section>
The human right to adequate food and freedom from hunger
Asbjørn Eide
Senior Fellow and former Director, Norwegian Institute of Human Rights; Special Rapporteur on the Right to Adequate Food as a Human Right, the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
In Ghana rice and beans are mixed together and cooked to make wakye
The right to food means access to enough food to meet the basic nutritional needs of everyone.
The Heads of State and Government gathered in Rome at the World Food Summit at the invitation of FAO, reaffirmed on November 13 1996 the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger. They considered it intolerable that more than 800 million people throughout the world, and particularly in developing countries, do not have enough food to meet their basic nutritional needs, and pledged their political will and their common and national commitment to achieving food security for all and to an ongoing effort to eradicate hunger in all countries. They formally renewed their commitment to the right to adequate food and recommended that the content of this right be defined more clearly and ways to implement it be identified.
The international human rights system
The contemporary international human rights system was born in 1948 when the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) as "... a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance."
The "Four Freedoms" address of United States President Roosevelt, in January 1941, was of special importance in the preparation of the Declaration, which included freedom from want as one of those rights.^1 In the negotiations for the UDHR in 1947-1948, the United States delegation played a major role, emphasizing that economic and social rights should be included as well as the civil rights that set out the fundamental freedoms, since - in the words of the United States delegation - "a man in need is not a free man". In his 1944 State of the Union address, Roosevelt had advocated the adoption of an "Economic Bill of Rights", saying that:
"We have come to the clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence. `Necessitous men are not free men.` People who are hungry and out of jobs are the stuff of which dictatorships are made."^2
The great contribution of the UDHR is that it extended the human rights platform to embrace the whole field - civil, political, economic, social and cultural - and interrelated the different rights, making them mutually reinforcing.
The International Bill of Human Rights includes the UDHR and the two Covenants prepared on the basis of that Declaration, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), both adopted in 1966.
Economic, social and cultural rights constitute three interrelated components of a more comprehensive package, with links to civil and political rights. At the core of social rights is the right to an adequate standard of living (UDHR Article 25; ICESCR Article 11; the International Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) Article 27). The enjoyment of these rights requires, at a minimum, that everyone shall enjoy the necessary subsistence rights - adequate food and nutrition, clothing, housing and the necessary conditions of care. Closely related to these rights are the right of families to assistance, the right to property, the right to work and the right to social security, all of which can be found in the international instruments.
The right to adequate food
According to UDHR Article 25(1), "everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing...". Under ICESCR Article 11, the States Parties "recognize the right of everyone to an adequate standard of living for himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and housing...". In paragraph 2 of the same article, the States Parties to the Covenant recognize the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger and list measures to be taken individually and through international cooperation in order to bring hunger to an end.
Under CRC Article 27, "States Parties recognize the right of every child to a standard of living adequate for the child's physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social development".
The right to an adequate standard of living sums up the underlying concern of all economic and social rights, which is to integrate everyone into a humane society. This right is closely linked to the guiding principle of the whole human rights system, that everyone is born free and equal in dignity and rights and should act towards each other in a spirit of fraternity (UDHR Article 1).
The general concept of adequate food can be broken down into several elements: the food supply should be adequate, which means that the types of foodstuffs commonly available (nationally, in local markets and, ultimately, at the household level) should be culturally acceptable (fit in with the prevailing food or dietary culture); the available supply should cover overall nutritional needs in terms of quantity (energy) and quality (it should provide all the essential nutrients, including micronutrients such as vitamins and iodine); and, last but not least, food should be safe (free of toxic elements and contaminants) and of good quality (in terms of, for example, taste and texture).
The UDHR envisaged that everyone throughout the world should enjoy the rights contained therein. These rights were to be absorbed into the legal, administrative and political culture of nations, through recognition followed by implementation in national law and administration, including any necessary political and social reforms. Global institutions had to be set up, some of them to monitor the implementation of human rights worldwide and others, such as FAO, to provide assistance and cooperation in facilitating the enjoyment of these rights for all. The UDHR was initially an expression of ideal goals to be achieved. The process of transforming these ideals into hard law at the international level started with the adoption of the two Covenants in 1966, followed by numerous more specific conventions. While these created obligations for states under international law, the main task was to ensure that rights were incorporated into national law and administrative practice, and
that conditions were created under which it would be possible for states to meet their obligations.
State obligations
Under ICESCR Article 2, States Parties have undertaken legally binding obligations to take steps, to the maximum of their available resources, to achieve progressively the full realization of the economic and social rights in that Covenant.
A basic misconception, which has had a negative affect on the implementation of economic and social rights, is that such rights must be provided by the state. In the past, this misconception caused many people to oppose economic and social rights, on the assumption that they were costly, undermined creativity, removed incentives and led to an overgrown state apparatus. It is now widely recognized that this view resulted from a misunderstanding of the nature of these rights and particularly of the corresponding state obligations.
A realistic understanding of state obligations must take into account, as is stated in the United Nations Declaration on the Right to Development Article 2, that the individual is the active subject, not the object, of economic and social development. Most human beings strive to take care of their own livelihoods through their own efforts and resources, individually or in association with others. If individuals are to be able to use their own resources, however, they must have resources that can be used. Typically, an individual's usable resources are land or other capital and/or labour, combined with the knowledge necessary to achieve optimal utilization of all the other resources he or she controls. The realization of many of an individual's economic, social and cultural rights will, in most cases, take place within the context of a household as the smallest economic unit. This means that attention must also be paid to the female/male division of labour and control over
production and consumption, and to various forms of wider kinship arrangements that influence the nature and practical operation of the concept of "family".
Since state obligations must be seen in the light of the assumption that human beings, families and wider groups seek to find their own solutions to their needs, states should, at the primary level, respect the resources owned by the individual and the individual's freedom to find a job of preference, to make optimal use of her or his own knowledge and to take the necessary actions and use the necessary resources - alone or in association with others - to satisfy his or her own needs.
The state cannot, however, be passive in its acknowledgement of these rights and freedoms. Third parties are likely to interfere negatively with the possible options that individuals or groups otherwise might have had to satisfy their own needs. At a secondary level, therefore, state obligations include active protection against other, more assertive or aggressive subjects, in particular against more powerful economic interests. There is a need for state protection from fraud, unethical behaviour in trade and contractual relations, and the marketing and dumping of hazardous or dangerous products. This protective function of the state is widely used and is the most important aspect of state obligations with regard to economic, social and cultural rights, similar in importance to the role of the state as protector of civil and political rights.
Significant components of the obligation to protect are already spelled out in the existing law of most states, and legislation of this kind must be based on the specific requirements within the individual country concerned. This is one of the reasons for the relative vagueness in the formulations of economic and social rights in international instruments - such rights should be clarified by specific legislation within each country, taking into account the situation prevailing there.
At the tertiary level, the state has the obligation to facilitate opportunities by which the rights listed can be enjoyed or, when the other obligations are insufficiently met, to provide such opportunities and thus fulfil the rights.
Facilitation takes many forms. With regard to the right to food, for example, under ICESCR Article 11(2), the state shall take steps to "improve measures of production, conservation and distribution of food by making full use of technical and scientific knowledge and by developing or reforming agrarian systems."
The obligation to fulfil rights by providing the needs listed in the instruments is important both during emergencies and under normal circumstances. During emergencies, when the conditions for survival are temporarily disrupted (as a result of, for example, severe draught or flood, armed conflict or the collapse of economic activities within particular regions of a country), the obligations of the state on whose territory the emergency occurs must be supplemented by assistance from outside. The existence of international obligations to cooperate when such needs arise is increasingly recognized.
A more permanent feature of the obligation to fulfil is that it becomes more important with increasing rates of urbanization and the decline of group or family responsibilities. Obligations towards the elderly and disabled, who in traditional agricultural society were taken care of by their families, must increasingly be borne by the state and, thus, by the national society as a whole.
The obligation to fulfil therefore consists of the direct provision of basic needs such as food or resources which can be used for food (through direct food aid or social security) when no other possibility exists, for example: i) when unemployment sets in (such as during economic recession); ii) for the disadvantaged and elderly; iii) during sudden situations of crisis or disaster; and iv) for those who are marginalized (as a result of, for example, structural transformations in the economy and production).
Concluding remarks
Economic and social rights are an important part of the human rights system as it has been formulated and consolidated since the adoption of the UDHR in 1948, but there has been limited political will to enforce them. The Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by the World Food Summit has changed this situation significantly. The follow-up, through cooperation between the High Commissioner for Human Rights, FAO and its Committee on World Food Security as well as other food organizations, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Sub-Committee on Nutrition of the United Nations Administrative Coordinating Committee (ACC-SCN) and other bodies, is likely to place the issue of the right to food more centrally on the international agenda. The outcome that is hoped for is that a long-standing commitment be transformed into reality and that by the early decades of the next millennium everyone will be able to enjoy the right to adequate food.
^1 On the Roosevelt conception of freedom from want as a source of contemporary conceptions of human rights, see Eide, A., Oshaug, A. and Eide, W.B. 1991. Food security and the right to food in international law and development. Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems (University of Iowa), 1:2, 415-467; and Alston, P. 1990. US ratification of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: the need for an entirely new strategy. American Journal of International Law, Vol. 84. On the historical evolution of the broad concept of human rights, see Marshall, T.S. 1959. Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press; and Dahrendorf, R. 1988. The modern social conflict: an essay on the politics of liberty. London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
^2 Quoted in Alston, 1990, p. 387.
<section>4</section>
NGOs and the right to adequate food
Michael Windfuhr
FoodFirst Information and Action Network (FIAN) International
Hunger and malnutrition: the human rights approach
Village children in Senegal eat a meal of millet and milk
All civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights need to be realized to guarantee a life in dignity for all human beings.
The fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) offers a unique opportunity to strengthen the indivisibility of all human rights. The UDHR established that the realization of all human rights - civil, cultural, economic, political and social - is needed to guarantee a life in dignity for all human beings. As stated in UDHR Article 25, a life in dignity requires that "everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing...". Despite the recognition of the right to adequate food in the UDHR, and subsequently in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), economic, social and cultural rights were not given adequate attention at the national and international levels for several decades. Fortunately, this situation is changing and several factors are now contributing to a better understanding of the interdependence,
indivisibility and universality of all human rights.
One of the most important reasons for this change is the increasing emphasis that non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are putting on economic, social and cultural rights, at both national and international levels. More and more, NGOs and social movements (community-based organizations) are demanding the full implementation of the right to food from their respective authorities; for example, landless peasants in Latin America call for access to land, indigenous peoples seek security for their traditional land titles and fishers in Asia struggle against the destruction of local fishing grounds by industrial fleets. The "rights approach" is becoming important to many groups in their daily struggles and this is having a knock-on effect on other strategies to end hunger and malnutrition. This does not mean that adopting the rights approach is always going to be enough to solve the problems that cause hunger and malnutrition; not every hungry or malnourished human being is a
victim of human rights violations. However, violations occur when states fail in their obligations to respect, protect or fulfil the right to food, and such state failure is one of the major causes of the persistence of hunger and malnutrition. The rights approach, therefore, helps civil society organizations to deal with this type of problem and policy.
The use of the rights approach by NGOs and social movements has increased considerably in recent years because economic, social and cultural rights generally are more precisely recognized than they were before. Although the existence of economic, social and cultural rights and the right to food has been acknowledged frequently for several decades, the rights themselves have been neglected and discriminated against by both states in their human rights work and the United Nations human rights system itself. Recently, however, the situation has changed considerably as a result of developments such as: a more precise legal interpretation of the rights concerned, which started with the establishment of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in 1987; better support from the international law community; and, since the end of the cold war, states' commitment to the implementation of these rights. Although much remains to be done at both the national and international
levels to elevate the status of economic, social and cultural rights, in practice, to that of civil and political rights, the indivisibility and interrelatedness of all human rights are now high on the agenda.
NGO action in the follow-up to the World Food Summit (WFS) has taken Objective 7.4 of the Summit Plan of Action^3 very seriously. Many NGOs are well aware that promotion of the right to food requires a clear definition of the basic concept of economic, social and cultural rights and a continuous process of "unlearning" the reductionist human rights concept, which is focused entirely on civil and political rights, as well as the reductionist concepts of food security that focus only or mostly on agricultural productivity and harvest yields.
NGO action
A Senegalese woman breastfeeds her baby
Organizations involved in issues such as breastfeeding, access to health facilities and child malnutrition are increasingly working on a rights basis.
More than 1 000 organizations from more than 80 countries participated in the parallel NGO Forum at the WFS. NGOs and social movements are following a wide and colourful variety of practical and legal approaches to solving hunger and malnutrition and their work is essential to all endeavours aimed at tackling these problems. To get an overview of the variety of approaches to implementation of the right to food in concrete situations, it is important to differentiate those national and international NGOs and movements that explicitly use a rights approach in their daily work from those that, while working with issues strongly related to the right to food, use more developmental, or "implicit", approaches.
So far, only a few NGOs are using an explicit rights approach to food and nutrition issues at the international level. Among these rights approach NGOs are: FoodFirst Information and Action Network (FIAN), the World Alliance for Nutrition and Hu