<title>Medicinal Plants: Rescuing a Global Heritage</title>
WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPER NO. 355
John Lambert
Jitendra Srivastava
Noel Vietmeyer
The World Bank Washington, D. C.
Copyright © 1997
The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing March 1997
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the
World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 913, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
ISBN 0-8213-3856-0
ISSN: 0253-7494
John Lambert is an agriculture consultant at the World Bank. Jitendra Srivastava is Principal Agriculturist in the World Bank's Agriculture and Natural Resources Department. Noel Vietmeyer is Senior Program Officer at the National Research Council.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lambert, John, 1938
Medicinal plants : resucing a global heritage / John Lambert, Jitendra Srivastava, Noel Vietmeyer.
P. cm. - (World Bank technical papers, no. 355)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-8213-3856-0
1. Materia medica, Vegetable-China. 2. Materia medica, Vegetable-India. 3. Medicinal plants- China. 4. Medicinal plants
India. I. Srivastava, Jitendra, 1940- 11. Vietmeyer, Noel,
1940- . 111. Title. IV Series.
RS180.C5L35 1997 96-52234
615'.32'0951-dc2 CIP
<section>Foreword</section>
Since ancient times people have used medicinal plants. Indeed, during the past decade dramatic sales increases attest to a renaissance of both medicinal plants and the traditional health practitioners who prescribe them. Over the last five years in China, for instance, sales have more than doubled, while during the last decade in India exports have soared almost three-fold.
This booming trade-most of it fueled by citizens of the developing world but some of it serving affluent customers in wealthy nations-is damaging the supplies. Most medicinal plants are gathered from the wild. A number are now so overharvested that they feature high on the lists of threatened or endangered species. More are headed in that sorrowful direction and will become extinct unless action is taken.
Nonetheless, what looks like a problem actually provides numerous opportunities for developing nations to advance rural well-being. After all, medicinal plants are one of the few (legal) developingcountry natural products that sell at premium prices. Thus, the global clamor for more herbal ingredients creates possibilities for the local cultivation of medicinal crops as well as for the regulated and sustainable harvest of wild stands. Such endeavors could help raise rural employment in the developing countries, boost commerce around the world, and perhaps contribute to the health of millions.
However, creating a regularized production of these species also raises many difficult issues. Some of these issues relate to medical efficacy and its proof. Some relate to the protection of fragile tropical habitats. Yet others relate to local empowerment, gender equity, regulatory measures, and the rights to traditional knowledge.
The present study-jointly funded by the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department and the Research Support Budget of the World Bank-builds upon the authors' brief overview: Medicinal Plants: An Expanding Role in Development. The present sequel is designed particularly to alert specialists in sectors such as agriculture, health, rural development, and international trade to the rising swirl of issues around medicinal plants. Although the focus is on China and India, the authors' fundamental conclusion is universal: medicinal plants are not just for health professionals any more.
Alexander F. McCalla
Director
Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
<section>Abstract</section>
Traditionally, medicinal plants have been considered solely part of the health sector, but increasingly they are part of agriculture and even of environmental programs. This is because demand for medicinal plants is increasing at such a rate that the stocks in the wild are being destroyed. Hundreds of species are overharvested and face extinction if they are not protected or cultivated. China and India are the first countries to seriously grapple with the issue. This report provides an overview of the global situation and it highlights the efforts China and India are making to ensure the long-term health of this resource upon which billions trust their lives.
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
The authors wish to thank Alexander McCalla, Director, Agriculture and Natural Resources Department and Douglas Forno, Chief, Agricultural and Forestry Systems Division in the Environmentally Sustainable Development Vice Presidency for their support and encouragement. Special thanks are due to those colleagues who provided important information and insight from China, especially: Professor Lu Rongsen, China National Seabuckthorn Office, Beijing; Dr. He Shan-An, Director, Institute of Botany, Nanjing, and Dr. Xiao Pei-Gen, Director of Institute of Medical Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, from India: Dr. S. K. Jain, National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow; Mr. D. K. Ved, Research Coordinator, Foundation for Revitalisation of Local Health Traditions, Bangalore; Professor V. P. K. Nambiar, Principal Scientist, International Development Research Centre (IDRC) Project, Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal; Dr. S. S. Bisen, Tropical Forest Research Institute,
Jabalpur, and Dr. Cherla Sastry and staff, International Development Research Centre, New Delhi, and in the Bank: Mr. Shawki Barghouti, Chief, SA2AW, and Mr. Joseph Goldberg, Chief, EA2RS. Threatened medicinal plant lists for China and India were provided by Ms. Harriett Gillet, World Conservation Monitoring Center, U. K. and are gratefully acknowledged. The latest activities of the Botanic Gardens Conservation International were kindly provided by Dr. P. Wyse-Jackson. Ms. Sophie Kuipers provided important up-to-date figures on medicinal plant trade in China.
Earlier drafts of the paper benefited enormously from consultations with Dr. Keith Shawe, Natural Resource Institute, U.K.; Dr. John Parrotta, International Institute of Tropical Forestry (World Bank consultant), Dr. Cherla Sastry (IDRC), Dr. Peter Principe, United States Environmental Protection Agency, and Dr. Keith Wilde, Natural Resource Economist, Government of Canada. Ms. Olga Boemeke, World Bank Sector Library, provided invaluable referencing assistance throughout the review. The paper has benefited from comments from many others within the Bank and beyond.
Partial financial support from the Research Support Budget of the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged. Sole responsibility for the content of the paper rests with the authors.
<section>Executive summary</section>
This report results from an assessment of the status and promise of medicinal plants in developing countries, with a special focus on China and India. The main conclusions are:
China and India have much to teach the world.
These two nations are the greatest users of medicinal plants; their traditions of plant remedies date back at least 7000 years. Between them, they now account for two-fifths of humanity (in other words, more than 2 billion people), the bulk of whom rely heavily on medicinal plants. Certain of the experiences in China and India can be used to facilitate medicinal-plant conservation, cultivation, community participation and sustainable development in the rest of the world.
Medicinal plants are among the most misunderstood of all resources.
Reportedly utilized by more than 4 billion people in developing countries, herbal medicines are a fundamental of life for the rural poor. They sell at premium prices, and even in povertyridden regions are in increasing demand. Yet, except in China and India, developingcountry governments invest little or nothing to enhance the conservation, cultivation, trade and better understanding and improved use of such plants.
Something has got to be done quickly.
While other cash crops have received millions of dollars of research support, the production of these exceptionally promising generators of income and well-being are left to languish and are therefore decreasing and many are in danger of disappearing. Yet local consumers, industries, and exporters are clamoring for more herbal ingredients and such demand is likely to continue to soar while supplies of raw materials from wild sources of medicinal plants are rapidly shrinking.
An organized coordination is needed.
In medicinal-plant conservation, there is little coordination (let alone, cooperation) between government agencies, the pharmaceutical industry and organizations dealing with environment, natural resources and agriculture. Such a collaboration could do much to protect and enhance threatened medicinal species. Although the World Health Organization and local ministries of health have featured medicinal plants in their programs, their emphasis has been on efficacy and treatment protocols. Arguably, the more immediate need is in the production and conservation of the raw materials. The capabilities of agriculture and of habitat conservation are currently the most vital missing links.
A lack of trade data is hindering the process of preserving medicinal plants.
No one can at present designate with certainty the status of individual species nor the state of the overall medicinal-plant trade. Some data are available on production and trade for the organized market, but they are grossly inadequate and seldom identify yields, production amounts, or market value. For the vast informal market in the rural areas, ethnic communities and urban slums there are no quantitative data whatever. Because of the numbers of users, however, the economic and cultural value of these unregulated markets must be enormous.
Women are the primary users and marketers of medicinal-plant materials.
Mothers and grandmothers use herbal products in the home as well as sell them in the rural markets. Such materials make home healthcare affordable and provide much needed income. Sustainability of supply can be greatly assisted if women were included in the process of developing conservation and cultivation.
The use of medicinal plants in animal health is probably extremely important.
Although the use of plants in the medical care of livestock is even less well documented than in human use, much is known to the farmers and "village veterinarians." This treasure trove of untapped indigenous knowledge likely holds considerable benefit in the vast areas of the developing world where the average farmer can seldom obtain or afford veterinary drugs.
In principle, many of the supply problems can be overcome by cultivating the medicinal plants
. The fact that medicinal plants are predominantly harvested in an unregulated manner undermines the whole industry. Yield from the wild is wholly unpredictable. Supplies are at the mercy of the weather, pests, and other uncontrollable variables. Farming these species would help even out the supply, regularize the trade, provide certifiable products of uniform quality, and make available to rural areas new sources of income. However, cultivation is presently constrained by a lack of methodologies and support for proving suitable methodologies.
The World Bank could play a pioneering role in assisting all who hold a stake in the increased and sustainable employment of medicinal plants.
To promote conservation and sustainable use of medicinal plants will require actions such as policy dialogue, sector work and the incorporation of medicinal plants into lending operations. There is a need to identify suitable cultivation and storage methods, to develop pharmaceutical industries based on local plants, and to encourage client countries to include medicinal plants in their biodiversity conservation strategy and National Environmental Assessment Plans.
<section>1. The global background</section>
As was noted in the previous volume, plants are still an indispensable source of medicinal preparations, both preventative and curative. Despite immense progress in synthetic chemistry and biotechnology, hundreds of species are recognized as having therapeutic value. Many of those are commonly used to treat and prevent specific ailments and diseases.
While health providers in industrialized nations have reduced their dependence on the Plant Kingdom, the majority of developing nations still rely on herbal remedies. Medicinal plants constitute one of the important overlooked areas of international development. They represent a form of biodiversity with the potential to do much good, and not just in the field of healthcare. Indeed, the production and processing of medicinal plants offers the possibility of fundamentally upgrading the lives and well-being of peoples in rural regions. It can also help the environment and the protection of habitats and biodiversity of the developing world.
<section>Economic issues</section>
The potential world market of phytomedicines or herbal medicines is very large, but its significance to the global economy can at this point only be inferred from a few sources of diverse and inadequate data. The World Health Organization estimated in 1980, for instance, that the world trade amounted to $500 million a year. However, information from diverse sources suggest that the overall trade in botanicals has since then greatly increased. This has been accelerated by a renewed interest in traditional medicines in many developing countries and especially in Europe and North America.
The developing countries, particularly those in Asia, are the main suppliers to the developed countries of plants used in pharmacy. However, in Africa and Latin America local and regional trade in medicinal plants is growing rapidly along with an increasing demand by international plant traders hoping to discover new "wonder" drugs.
Germany is one of the largest importers of medicinal plants. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has determined that Germany's imports include at least 40 threatened or endangered species. Many were originally listed in CITES to protect them from heavy exploitation for the ornamental trade. However, it became apparent that many of these were also used for medicinal purposes.
There is a reason for Germany's imports of medicinals. Of all the western nations, Germany has made the greatest progress in bridging the gap between traditional and Western medicines. Every medical student there is taught about phytomedicines and more than 80 percent of all German physicians regularly use herbal products. The government requires that plant drugs must be standardized and of proven safety and efficacy. Safety of long-used natural products is generally assumed, if no side effects have been reported. Clinical experience noted by physicians, scientific evidence published in technical journals, and data supplied by manufacturers are the basis for the doctrine of "reasonable certainty," which Germans accept as a substitute for strict clinical trials. The German experience is being closely watched by both industrialized and developing countries as it offers an example of how to integrate the two systems.
The global demand for medicinal plants is expressed from four identifiable sources: (i) pharmaceutical industries, (ii) traditional healthcare systems; (iii) individual traditional health practitioners, and (iv) women in family home care. The money values involved depend not only on the extent to which barter or non-monetary exchange is a factor, but also the degree to which the production and sale are concentrated in visible locations, regulated and taxed.
Gauging the extent and growth of the global trade in herbal ingredients is made difficult by unpredictable fluctuations in price. Such fluctuations - typically over six to nine year periods - are common as the availability of many wild medicinal plants goes from oversupply to scarcity very quickly and then slowly stabilizes again. Variations in price due to supply conditions make it difficult to determine the extent to which demand is increasing. Government(s) and the local private sector would probably be more willing to fund research on the extent of existing and potential supply of medicinal plants if they had a better idea of the potential (and existing) market. From that they could tell how much could be sold, at what price, and therefore what profit was to be made.
The regulated trade provides all the present data on the market value of medicinal plantsfrom raw material to finished product. The unregulated market includes all manner of medicinal plants where there is no market accounting (largely because the government draws no benefit from these sales). This informal use of medicinals includes home use, exchange between neighboring families, collecting and sale in rural markets, use by traditional health practitioners and other undocumented transactions.
The most complete data are, unsurprisingly, available from the official Chinese and Indian healthcare systems, but even that is incomplete. Even where there are local pharmaceutical industries, the figures on general herbal drug sales to the public are often unavailable. Assessing informal medicinal product sales by traditional health practitioners and vendors, primarily peddled by women in local markets, would be very difficult due to a lack of records. Similarly, products grown in home gardens and administered to family members have an unknown value. It is this cultural value, that is rarely, if ever, captured in economic analysis. Yet it is likely to represent a significant portion of the total economic benefit provided by these plants.
A number of Asian countries (including China, India, both Koreas, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines) have the technical background, knowledge, and existing pharmaceutical industries to process raw materials and market finished products. However, the majority of developing countries in Latin America and Africa lack the industrial base and financial resources to expand this market rapidly. As a result, 86 percent of finished health products are still manufactured in Europe and North America. 6 In virtually every developing country, local healthcare needs are satisfied primarily using raw materials from plants. The majority of people just cannot afford to purchase imported pharmaceutical products.
Not much has been done to assist developing countries to develop their medicinal-plant resources. However, two organizations - the International Organization of Chemical Sciences in Development (IOCD), Falls Church, Virginia, USA, and Biotics Ltd., University of Sussex, UK - have taken an active role in this. IOCD has helped establish the Network for Analytical and Bioassay Services in Africa (NABSA), which links cooperating laboratories with capabilities to provide services in chemical spectroscopy and biological evaluation. Services currently offered by NABSA Centers are in Ethiopia (Addis Ababa), Kenya (Nairobi), Madagascar (Antananarivo), and Botswana (Gaborone). Biotics Ltd. provides access to high technology screening through training of phytochemists. As a result, a number of independently-owned companies have been created in developing countries to prepare plant extracts.
<section>Policy issues</section>
Developing countries are entering a new era when community health services will likely occupy an evermore prominent position in national priorities. The type of production, processing, and manufacturing of a large array of medicinal plants produced in the rural sector - and in turn the ability of developing countries to invest in medicinal plant (phytopharmaceutical) industries - will determine the future quality of those community health services.
To derive optimal benefit from the conservation and cultivation of its medicinal-plant genetic resources, each country must develop an integrated strategy for their management and use, identify policies, and enact legislation that will encourage a broadly-based delivery of the benefits to be realized from these actions rather than allowing the majority of the economic benefits to accrue to a smaller but well-place minority.
So far, however, few developing countries are doing this. In order to stimulate more such action, three regional workshops sponsored by Global Initiatives for Traditional Systems of Health (GIFTS) were held in Latin America, Africa and Asia in 1994-95 followed by an international meeting in England in late 1995. All stressed the need for clearly-defined policies promoting the safe utilization of traditional medicine. Recommendations included:
- the documentation and promotion of traditional medicines with proven efficacy;
- increased funding of research and development programs;
- need to evolve policies which involve local communities in conservation programs;
- document and cultivate endangered plant species known to have medicinal uses;
- recognizing the role of women;
- information exchange; and education at all levels to increase awareness of medicinal plants and their economic potential in drug production.
<section>Regulatory issues</section>
All countries where medicinal plants and traditional medicines are used are aware of the need for regulating the use of medicinal substances. Indeed, most developing countries have a heritage in the use of plant-based medicine that is far older than the modem of medicine. China probably has the strictest criteria for regulating the sale of traditional plant-based medicines. Chinese authorities are well aware of the problems and constraints facing them in the production, processing, and marketing of herbal medicines. The Government of India, while constantly upgrading its controls, does not exercise any regulatory control over the use of "home-made" remedies that are used by a large segment of the vast Indian population.
The European Scientific Cooperative for Phytotherapy (ESCOP) is currently drafting fifty monographs of product characteristics to be used as a basis for licensing phytotherapeutics in all member states of the European Union (EU). Since January 1995, a decentralized marketing authorization procedure has existed in addition to the national licensing of individual member states. Following enactment in 1994 by the United States Government of the Dietary Supplement and Health Education Act (DSHEA) greater effort has been made to develop guidelines for quality control, good management practice, and to provide a sound scientific basis for ensuring proper identity and purity of finished products. Such activities by the industrialized countries put greater pressure on the developing countries to regulate trade in medicinal plant raw materials.
<section>Social issues</section>
Sociocultural factors play an important role in the preservation of medicinal plants and the people's continued reliance on traditional medicine. Often, villagers will use a modem medicine to relieve their immediate symptoms, while turning to traditional medicine for treating the root cause of the illness. Revival of traditional health systems following decolonization, as well as increased self-determination of indigenous groups, has led an increasing number of developing country governments to re-evaluate and promote their traditional medicine systems. Such systems are a response to the conditions and needs of local populations. To have any chance of success, however, new public health systems must necessarily incorporate the cultural habits handed down through generations.
Traditional Knowledge.
Most developing country societies view traditional medicine practices as an integral part of social culture. During colonial times, however, traditional healthcare systems gradually lost patronage and favor especially with the urban populationsdue notably to the imposition of Western culture and to the support given to Western (allopathic) medicine. Since the demise of colonialism, there has been a gradual reestablishment of the traditional systems of teaching and dispensary in indigenous medicine. It is in light of this resurgence, both locally and internationally, that pressure is being placed on an important component of that healthcare--the plants.
In some cases, however, traditional practitioners have resisted attempts to document their knowledge. They see such disclosures as being detrimental to their practice. In addition, they treat with skepticism the outsiders' interest in their plants and therapies, rightly believing they will receive no credit or royalties for any future drug discoveries derived from their knowledge.
Yet exchanging experiences and scientific data on various aspects of traditional medicine prevalent in different parts of the world is an important step in helping save the plants and the knowledge of their use. And there are also greater advantages to be reaped. In many parts of the world, for instance, there are no doctors and no Western drugs. Even where doctors are available, import restrictions and government budgeting often mean there are insufficient medicines to distribute. Sometimes, preparations are used even though they have passed their expiration date.
In such circumstances, it would probably be better to use herbal medicines-all of course chosen with care, supplied with a maximum of quality assurance, and prescribed by practitioners the patients trust.
Taken all round, the availability of locally-grown drugs, their relatively low cost, and the minimal side-effects associated with many of the drugs are important factors in providing primary healthcare. For persons who have never experienced sickness or illness without medicines, these are important considerations.
Women's Role.
In many of the developing countries women serve as conservators and cultivators of medicinal plants. Through their household practices they use traditional approaches in caring for the health needs of the family. In Africa and Latin America, women constitute the majority of traditional medical practitioners, as well as the primary gatherers of medicinal plants. Women are the traditional birth attendants, delivering and tending the mother's pre- and post-natal needs.
Although often unappreciated, most mothers are the de facto healers of the family tending to accidents and ailments with medicinal-plant remedies cultivated in their home gardens, maintaining the family diet, administering medicines, providing counseling and essential emotional support. It would not be an exaggeration to suggest that virtually every leader of a developing country benefited at some time in his/her formative years from the medicinal-plant knowledge of a mother or grandmother.
Enhancing Social Capital.
The importance of traditional medicinal-plant knowledge or social capital is evident by the need for "bioprospectors" (Western specialists seeking new and profitable drugs from nature) to recruit indigenous peoples to identify local flora and describe their uses and healing properties. The need to protect intellectual property rights (IPR) has now become a major issue both for developing countries whose genetic resources are being exploited, and for developed countries whose patent law cannot always be enforced in developing countries.
Legal restrictions over access to, and removal of, medicinal-plant germplasm. are easier to enforce than legal protection over the use of the information represented by that genetic material (intellectual property rights). In the past, many countries have failed to adequately enforce such property rights, partly because of a lack of awareness of the potential value contained within their genetic resources. The recognition of IPRs, however, may provide a very important incentive to many countries to institute environmental policies preserving biodiversity. 9 A careful balance needs to be achieved between restricting access to plants, which may enable economic returns to be achieved, and restricting access to information which may have opportunity costs.
Generating Income.
Medicinal plants are both a source of income and a source of affordable healthcare. As described above, many poor people derive their only income from harvesting medicinal plants. This income however, is probably declining in those countries where natural habitats are disappearing. A strategy that integrates conservation and cultivation of medicinal plants could create long-term employment and income opportimities. Agricultural R&D, and production will require qualified professional and technical workers, and labors, many of the latter can be recruited locally. Expanded local pharmaceutical industries would also require additional workers at all levels.
<section>Conservation Issues</section>
If existing medicinal-plant resources are to continue to meet demand now and in the future, they will need to be adequately protected through the development of appropriate policies and legislation. Awareness of the conservation issues and of the importance of sustainable utilization needs to be raised among all stakeholders. Perhaps most importantly, local people need to be supported and encouraged to take the necessary steps to protect this valuable resource. The collection of medicinal plants must be guided by an accurate knowledge of the biology of the species concerned, and steps must be taken to avoid over-exploitation, and the collection of rare or otherwise endangered species.
Preserving Wild Genes.
Fortunately, many plant species consist of thousands of populations. These together form a gene pool in which a more or less free gene exchange can take place. This is a feature that can be utilized by plant breeders to protect medicinalplant diversity.
Box 1: The Lost Ancient Plant We Could Use Today
As an example of the importance of preserving medicinal plants consider the case of silphion, a weed once used as a contraceptive. It was apparently so effective that the Ancient Greeks literally revered it. Now, with population growth seemingly out of control a plant like this could have immense significance. Unfortunately, the Greeks used so much of it, it became extinct. Botanists can no longer find the species.
Between 570 and 250 BC the majority of coins minted in ancient Cyrene, a city situated in what is now the eastern part of Libya, carried the embossed picture of the Silphion plant. This reflects the enormous economic importance this plant had for the city over four centuries.
The perennial roots and strongly ribbed annual stems of the Silphion plant were eaten in the fresh state and were regarded as a perfume, flavoring agent and spice. The juice was employed medicinally against a wide range of symptoms and diseases, especially gynecological ailments-it was a true "multi-purpose species" in the sense of modem economic botany.
It appears that Silphion was found only in the dry hinterland. Attempts to cultivate it seem to have failed, so wild plants remained the source of supply. No reasons have been given for its disappearance although overharvesting is considered to be at least one reason for the dramati