<title>Marine biotechnology and developing countries</title>
Raymond A. Zilinskas Carl Gustaf Lundin
Copyright © 1993
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433, U S.A
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printings August 1993
Discussion Papers present results of country analysis or research that is circulated to encourage discussion and comment within the development community. To present these results with the least possible delay, the typescript of this paper has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors.
The findings. interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attribute d in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive e Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility what so ever for any consequence of their use Any maps that accompany the text have been prepared solely for the convenience of readers: the designations and presentation of material in them do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Bank, its affiliates, or its Board or member countries concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area or of the authorities thereof or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries or its national affiliation.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, 27 Congress Street, Salem, Massachusetts 0197(3, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher. The World Bank, ISIS H Street, N.W., Washington. D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0259-910 X
Raymond A. Zilinskas is a consultant and Carl Gustaf Lundin an environmental specialist in the Land, Water and Natural Habitats Division of the World Bank's Environment Department.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
<section>Foreword</section>
Nobel Laureate Abdus Salam has named the twenty-first century, "The Biological Age." What he is alluding to, I believe, is that the current evolution in biotechnology will reach an even more exciting stage in the next twenty years or so, profoundly affecting the wellbeing of individuals and the economies of nations. Eventually, biotechnology will influence in some way virtually all of mankind's productive activities - whether they be agriculture, health delivery, environmental remediation, industry or energy production. It is important then to approach biotechnology cautiously by planning wisely, acting deliberately, and monitoring applications closely over the long term to ensure that these influences are constructive, benefiting both mankind and the environment.
"The Biological Age" can also be expected to benefit more than just the rich, industrial countries. Professor Salam and many others have shown clearly that biotechnology is particularly appropriate for the developing world. There are several reasons for this favorable assessment: (1) many developing countries are in the semi-tropical and tropical climates that produce rich and diverse biological resources, the substrate for biotechnology and for sustainable economic development; (2) most developing countries have sufficient grounding in the biological sciences and technologies that underlie biotechnology to be able to build capacity even in advanced techniques; and (3) entry costs for biotechnology research and industrial application, although significant, are lower than for other high technologies.
In order to transform the promise of biotechnology into reality, however, a government must make a considerable commitment to building the requisite science and technology capability. As is made clear in this report, capability-building in biotechnology is a complex, expensive and long-term effort that requires sustained funding until both the scientific base and the industry are established. Governments must also promote conditions supportive to the biotechnology industry, such as cooperative R&D ventures between research facilities and the private sector to transform research findings into commercial products or processes. This cooperation and support is crucial in biotechnology both (1) because of the inherent relationship between discovery and application (for example, when a particular genetic process is discovered, it introduces a process of interest to industry at the same time); and (2) because of the need for continued scientific involvement in the industrial
development of that process (a situation quite unlike that of other technologies, regardless of how complex they are).
For example, a country can set up an automobile industry by importing the expertise and technologies necessary to do so. Setting up and operating the automobile operation, as complex as it is, can be done without involving research scientists in the effort. Not so with biotechnology. Because the biotechnology industry involves the manipulation of living and therefore dynamic biological systems to achieve products or processes, trained scientists that know these systems are necessary to solve the problems inherent in operating them. The biotechnology industry, therefore, breaks down the usual delineations between basic research, applied research, development and manufacturing; and governments' support for all of these activities is a major factor in its success.
As this report points out, however, international agencies can provide crucial assistance to complement and ease the process. For example, assistance might take the form of supporting special training for scientists or industrial managers in technology transfer, biosafety and intellectual property issues.
To date, World Bank involvement in biotechnology is rather limited, and entering an emerging field at its beginning is a departure from previous Bank practice. There are several reasons for proposing this initiative. First, the marine area is relatively neglected in Bank investments - only a small fraction of that channeled to land-based efforts. Supporting marine biotechnology, therefore, would be a step toward balancing these levels of effort. Second, many developing countries are island countries or have long coastlines; yet, most of these have not developed their marine potential, except for fisheries and some aquaculture. Marine biotechnology could be one of the means toward sustainable, environmentally sound, development of ocean resources. The remediation of polluted coastal waters and beaches also could be done via marine biotechnology. Third, solving global environmental problems will require participation from all countries, including the developing world. Without
worldwide cooperation, such problems as the "greenhouse" effect, pollution of the high seas, destruction of coral reefs, loss of marine biodiversity in general, and certain water-borne infectious diseases will defy solution. In the process of building their capability in marine biotechnology, developing countries will concurrently build the expertise that can be deployed to investigate and solve local environmental problems, and to collaborate in solving global problems as well.
Fundamental to the development of biotechnology, and to any cooperative ventures, however, is that governments, scientists, private sectors, and international development organizations must first learn of the potential and problems of this new scientific endeavor, especially as they relate to the home countries. The express intent of this report, therefore, is to publicize the potentials of marine biotechnology for economic development and problem solving; identify some of the possible risks inherent in this field (and how they can be avoided or controlled); and clarify various investment options for international development organizations. The Environment Department presents this paper to further these purposes and to encourage discussion of how the Bank can best lend its support to this emerging area of science and technology, to the benefit of sustainable development.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This report would not have been possible without the assistance, cooperation and other support by a rather large number of persons who supplied information about their countries or the organizations they work for, reviewed drafts of the report, informed us of scientific and technical progress and clarified their implications, and in general encouraged us to persist in our endeavor. More specifically, we thank the following persons for their assistance as noted.
Information about their countries' activities in marine biotechnology or related areas was provided by Dr. Martin Abraham (Malaysia), Dr. Gideon Abu (Nigeria), Dr. Shanta Achuthankutty (India), Dr. Alonso Cardenas Aguilera (Chile), Dr. Kamaluddin Ahmad (Bangladesh), Dr. M.S. Andhale (India), Dr. E. Montenegro Arcila (Chile), Dr. Angel A. Baron L. (Dominican Republic), Dr. Enrique Bertullo (Uruguay), Mr. N.B. Bhosle (India), Cr. Vanderlel Perez Canhos (Brazil), Dr. Saipin Chaiyanan (Thailand), Mr. M. Chandrasekaran (India), Dr. Dong-Suck Chang (Republic of Korea), Dr. S.T. Chang (Hong Kong), Dr. Young-Meng Chiang (Taiwan), Dr. Ho Coy Choke (Malaysia), Mr. Pang Daode (China), Dr. Chen Dou (China), Dr. Ossama M. ElTayeb (Egypt), Dr. S.O. Emejuaiwe (Nigeria), Dr. Esther Fernandez A. (Venezuela), Dr. J.L.R. Pino Gaviño (Peru), Dr. Twee Hormchong (Thailand), Dr. Wei-Shang Ji (China), Dr. Koyoaki Katoh (Indonesia), Dr. Mohammed Moazzam Khan (Pakistan), Dr. Aida Lackany (Egypt),
Mrs. Trisnaui Dyah Listyawati (Indonesia), Dr. Milagrosa R. Martinez (Philippines), Dr. Enrique C. Mateo (Peru), Dr. M.L. Lizarraga-Partida (Mexico), Dr. Patricio Bernal Ponce (Chile), Dr. T.S.S. Rao (India), Mr. P.M. Satheesh Seshaiya (India), Dr. Thiarn Peng Teo (Singapore), Dr. Luiz R. Trabulsi (Brazil), Dr. C.K. Tseng (China) and Dr. Xun Xu (China).
Several professionals from intergovernmental organizations reviewed an earlier draft of this report and provided many useful comments. Some also described pertinent activities sponsored by their organizations. In these regards, we thank Dr. D. Bartley (FAO), Dr. V. Campbell (UNIDO), Ms. I. Douek-Hykin (World Bank), Mr. S. Garcia (FAO), Mr. V. Kotchetkov (UNESCO), Mr. G. Kullenberg (IOC), Dr. T. Matsusato (FAO), Mr. M. Schneider (UNEP), Dr. G. Tzotzos (ICGEB/UNIDO) and Mr. K. Venkatararnan (UNIDO).
The scientific/technical reviewers of draft reports included Dr. R.R. Colwell, Dr. T. Veach Long II, Dr. Mark Ragan and Dr. T.S.S. Rao.
Last, we appreciate very much the help we received from World Bank professionals while this project was under way and the kind indulgence they granted our requests for assistance. Our gratitude is especially directed to Dr. Eric Arrhenius, Dr. Maritta KochWeser, Mr. Jan Post, Dr. E.W. Thulstrup, and Dr. Colin Rees. The fine editing by Ms. Charlotte Maxey is also gratefully acknowledged.
<section>Introduction</section>
This report provides an analysis of the potential of industrial applications of marine biotechnology and is focused on developing countries of the world. It makes clear that biotechnology's potential for remediating economic and social problems of developing countries is extraordinary. However, it is important to realistically assess what can be done in selected areas of biotechnology. Biotechnology is not a panacea to cure all ills of mankind, especially problems arising from population increase, over-utilization of natural resources, and underutilization of human talent. However, some areas of biotechnology have extraordinary potential to address some of these problems - and marine biotechnology is one of the most attractive of those disciplines.
The oceans cover about 75 percent of the earth's surface. Developing countries are predominantly riparian and, for the most part, depend on the oceans for protein, in the form of fish, shellfish and seaweed. A resource that has not been fully tapped, which represents potential income in addition to fisheries, is marine pharmaceuticals. The diversity of the marine environment in tropical areas is well recognized. It is wide-ranging and of unusual extent. Many developing countries are blessed with resources in the form of extraordinary biological diversity.
In recent years, relationships of marine bacteria with corals, sponges, invertebrate animals in the marine environment, as well as seaweeds and marine plants, have been intensively studied. Results from this research demonstrate complex chemical interactions between these bacteria and their hosts including systems of elaborate signaling and territorial marking. In studying the chemicals produced by marine organisms, a variety of toxins and chemical compounds have been described. Many of these chemicals have proven to be of potential pharmaceutical value. However, I estimate that far less than 1 percent of potentially useful chemicals from marine living sources have been screened so far. The chemical compounds that remain to be discovered represent one of earth's greatest treasures.
In addition to marine pharmaceuticals, enhancement of fisheries via aquaculture offers great value. Overharvesting of the world oceans is recognized as a global threat. The ability to produce transgenic fish and shellfish in culture, which grow faster and to a larger size with more efficient utilization of nutrients, is of particular value to developing countries, not only as a source of food, but also as export products. This report analyses the industry and offers some clear recommendations for enhancement of marine fisheries.
Other areas of marine biotechnology that are of great potential include marine bioremediation; for example, use of marine microorganisms to mineralize and degrade toxic chemicals spilled into the marine environment. Research has been done that shows that enhancement of biodegradation can be achieved by adding nutrients, mainly phosphates and nitrates, to spills in coastal areas and along shore lines. While much research needs to be done before reliable, safe and efficacious bioremediation processes are ready for large-scale use, it is certain that these techniques can greatly benefit those countries where environmental contamination has reached threatening proportions. It is not yet clear how bioremediation can be deployed in operations to treat offshore or open ocean spills.
The potential of marine biotechnology in areas other than those I have mentioned lies in exploitation of resources in an environmentally protective way. The value of biotechnology is that the genetic capability of marine organisms can be harnessed through the cloning of the genetic material into systems that can be manipulated and magnified in the laboratory, without depleting the resource in the natural environment.
It has been stated that the oceans are underutilized in their capacity for feeding the populations of countries of the world, but classical approaches to technology (that is, fish farming and seaweed farming) are limited to maximum yield much as is land agriculture. However, with the application of genetic engineering, the productivity of the coastal areas can be greatly improved. The forces at play are the increasing populations of nearshore regions along with increased demand for commercially valuable marine products. Thus, the future requires that a coordinated approach to biotechnology be applied in the marine environment, coupling bioremediation and applications of biotechnology with the production of fish and shellfish through aquaculture.
The information provided in this document lays the groundwork for an effective and efficient design of a plan of action for developing marine biotechnology in all countries of the world, but developing countries that aspire to improve living conditions for their populations are likely to be the main beneficiaries.
<section>Note from the authors</section>
This report focuses on a rapidly emerging science-based technology - marine biotechnology. The term "marine biotechnology" differs in meaning among scientists. We think of marine biotechnology as a collection of research and developmental activities in the biological, chemical and environmental sciences that occur in or are related to the marine environment. Only a few specialized facilities, located mostly in the United States and Japan are dedicated to research exclusively in marine biotechnology. However, many more laboratories have researchers working in marine biotechnology related areas.
"Emerging," for the purpose of this report, means that the technology is at a stage in its developmental cycle when practical applications engendered by the technology are being identified and laboratory processes and techniques are being moved into practice. Looking at the term from another perspective, an emerging technology is one that the public and its representatives begin to recognize as having the potential to generate new scientific knowledge and produce useful new products and processes. Marine biotechnology research has produced a few applications to date, but its potential economic effects are substantial, to be realized in five or ten years.
Many island and riparian developing countries are fortunate in possessing territories of subtropical and tropical marine waters that shelter a large diversity of estuarine and marine life. At the same time, large areas of their marine and coastal environments suffer from the detrimental effects of manmade pollutants. The largest promises of marine biotechnology are thus in two areas. First, some of its techniques may be deployed for the sustainable exploitation of natural resources under environmentally sound conditions; and second, other marine biotechnology techniques can be used to break down pollutants, to alleviate environmental damage.
The intent of this report is to introduce marine biotechnology to nonspecialists, clarify its relevance to developing countries, and outline the role of the World Bank and of other international agencies in helping to advance it. However, marine biotechnology cannot be considered in isolation; after all, it is that intersect where biotechnology meets and overlaps with the marine environment and its living resources. A brief review of relevant aspects of the oceans and the life they support and an introduction to the wider field of biotechnology are useful as a starting point. Thus, Chapter 1 sets the stage for the marine part of marine biotechnology by briefly describing and discussing certain aspects of the marine environment that are pertinent to biotechnology. In Chapter 2 is found a primer on biotechnology, consisting of a review of its history, a presentation of recent developments in this field, and an explanation of its "classic" and "advanced" components. Special
attention is given to advanced biotechnology, including its workforce and equipment requirements and the possible risks biotechnology research, testing and products may pose to scientific workers and society. Chapter 3 is the heart of this review; it defines marine biotechnology and provides a description of major sub-areas (suggestions for how marine biotechnology should be defined are found in Appendix C). Our consideration of marine biotechnology continues in Chapter 4, where options for developing countries in this field delineated and analyzed. Specifically, each of the nine subareas of marine biotechnology is assessed in terms of promise for developing countries in the short and medium term and the degree of difficulty inherent in capability building (we
list institutes in developing countries whose work programs encompass marine biotechnology or related areas in Appendix A). Methods for building capability in biotechnology and in marine biotechnology are explained in Chapter ~ (some specific requirements for advanced biotechnology R&D are listed in Appendix B). Examples of projects in marine biotechnology and related areas supported by major intergovernmental agencies, including the World Bank, are presented in Chapter 6. In Chapter 7 we elaborate explicit proposals for how the World Bank can promote marine biotechnology capability building in developing countries, including ensuring that results from research are applied in national problem solving and for economic development. We conclude the substantive part of the report with a short essay on why it is important now for developing countries to commit to capability building in marine biotechnology and why intergovernmental organizations should assist in this endeavor.
This report is intended mainly for World Bank professionals who in the future may formulate and administer projects in marine biotechnology. Thus, the language is largely nontechnical, and when technical terms are used they are defined. In addition, a glossary of technical terms is provided. Those who wish to delve more deeply into the subject matter may consult the references.
<section>Executive Summary</section>
The tremendous diversity of life in tropical and subtropical seas represents the world's most abundant, but least utilized, living resources. Island countries such as Haiti, Indonesia and the Philippines, as well as countries favored with long cost lines, including Chile, China, India and Sudan, have barely drawn on their marine capital. Thus, some of the poorest countries oversee potentially the earth's richest assets.
Marine biotechnology applications
Marine biotechnology, which is defined as "the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials by marine biological agents to provide goods and services," has many applications of importance to developing countries - particularly aquaculture, marine natural products chemistry, bioremediation, biofilm or bioadhesion, cell culture, biosensors and terrestrial agriculture.
Aquaculture
Marine biotechnology may benefit aquaculture in two major ways. First, its research techniques can enhance a cultured organism's growth rate, procreation proficiency, disease resistance and ability to endure adverse environmental conditions. The organism's ability to grow and survive in intensive aquaculture will thus be improved, increasing yields. Second, through biotechnology vaccines may be developed against bacterial and viral diseases that commonly afflict marine organisms. Vaccines will protect fish, shrimp and other aquaculture organisms from diseases that now periodically decimate stocks, causing enormous economic damage in Asia and Latin America.
Marine natural products chemistry
As part of their metabolism, many marine organisms secrete compounds that help them survive and that incidentally have properties beneficial to mankind. Screening programs have discovered algae, corals, sponges and tunicates that produce compounds showing antibiotic, anti-tumor, anti-viral or anti-inflammatory properties. As procedures are improved, marine organisms producing antiparasitic, pesticidal, immune-enhancing, growth-promoting, and wound-healing chemicals will certainly be found. This field has substantial possibilities for growth since fewer than 1 percent of marine species have been screened.
Bioremediation
Microorganisms can be used to break down pollutants and wastes in soil or water to harmless or less toxic end products. The microbes used in bioremediation have usually been recovered from natural sites but have had their natural capability for breaking down pollutants enhanced through research and development (R&D). Most bioremediating microorganisms do not survive after the substance they feed on has been destroyed. Because under normal circumstances bioremediation causes less damage to the environment than do the present chemical and steam cleanup methods, it holds significant advantages over conventional techniques for cleaning polluted harbors and waterways, as well as decontaminating estuaries, mangroves and other sensitive coastal communities.
Biofilm and bioadhesion
A variety of marine organisms will settle on surfaces exposed in seawater, eventually forming a crust. Organisms enmeshed in the crust produce acids, which corrode piers, derricks and other structures. Encrustation also increases hull drag in ships, decreasing speed and raising operating costs. At present, paints containing heavy metals are used to coat surfaces, preventing organisms from settling. However, toxic paints pose health hazards to workers and pollute seawater. Marine biotechnology research seeks to clarify the molecular basis of the settling and adhesion process, and the findings may be used to develop clean methods for preventing encrustation by marine organisms.
Cell culture
Algae and other marine plant cells may be cultured in flasks, where they grow and subdivide much like bacteria. Cultured cells can be used to generate whole plants or they can be directed to synthesize natural products. Contrary to the chemical synthesis of compounds, cell culture production is energy conserving and essentially nonpolluting. Many terrestrial plant cell culture systems are already producing pharmaceuticals, food additives and pesticides; marine cell culture systems will certainly be developed in the next few years along similar lines, which will be capable of producing agarose and other valuable marine natural products.
Biosensors
Sensors are devices that detect a specific substance or organism, and in biosensors the detecting element is a special biological material such as a chemoreceptor or an immunological molecule. An example of a chemoreceptor is the crab's sensing antennule, which continually monitors water for dissolved substances ranging in chemical complexity from simple salts to pheromones. In the second kind of sensor, an immunological molecule, the recognition element is a monoclonal antibody or a DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) probe. These biological molecules are extremely selective; a monoclonal antibody will, for instance, bind itself to only one antigen, which may be a virus, a component of a bacterial cell wall, or a specific chemical. Kits based on monoclonal antibodies or DNA probes are being used to quickly detect and accurately identify the pathogenic bacteria causing cholera, shigellosis and typhoid fever, as well as viruses causing, for example, hepatitis. Biosensors may also be
used in public health for such purposes as identifying and monitoring substances and pathogens in the oceans, enabling scientists to establish cause and effect relationships between a particular agent and health events.
Terrestrial agriculture
Marine biotechnology researchers seek to transfer characteristics inherent to marine animals and plants to their terrestrial counterparts. For example, the winter flounder survives sub-zero temperatures that would kill most animals, including other fish. The flounder anti-freeze gene has been synthesized and inserted into yeast and higher plants. Tests are under way to find out if it will protect from sudden freezes crops grown at high altitudes or northern latitudes. Another example involves the world's most salt - tolerant plant, a microalgal species inhabiting the Dead Sea where the salt content is 29 percent. Researchers are implanting genes that code for salt tolerance in crop plants. Success will mean that farmers can grow rice, oil seed plants and other crops in soils irrigated by brackish or salt water.
Biotechnology and developing countries
While biotechnology undoubtedly holds enormous promise for developing countries, that promise cannot be transformed into reality until capability is built in all of the supporting processes needed. In particular, few developing countries have the broad and in depth R&D infrastructure to undertake wide-ranging biotechnology research because they lack the trained scientific personnel, well equipped laboratories and dependable supplies of rare, labile biochemicals. Even fewer have the industrial capability to develop research results and exploit them. In view of these problems, international agencies have a vital role to play by providing technical assistance and by catalyzing joint, cooperative R&D efforts between laboratories and firms in industrial and developing countries.
Precedents exist in natural resource development for fruitful cooperative ventures between R&D units in developing countries and counterparts or industries in industrial countries. Common to these projects is that both sides benefit: the industrial country partner gains access to a raw material and retains certain marketing rights, while the developing country partner gains expertise, financial backing and regional marketing rights. Some of these types of arrangements have been brokered by international agencies, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and World Health Organization (WHO). These organizations are particularly well placed to assist in developing profit-based options for joint ventures. Risks for failure or misunderstanding can be minimized by the international organization providing expertise in drawing up contracts, making startup funds available, and guiding the partners in the
equitable sharing of intellectual property rights.
Research and applications involving genetically engineered organisms may present risks to workers, populations or other life forms. Risk can be minimized by applying safe procedures as specified by appropriate regulations. Guidelines for biotechnology research and field testing have been formulated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and a UNEP/UNIDO/ WHO working group has elaborated guidelines for field testing applicable to developing countries. Either set of guidelines may be used as a model by governments when they formulate local laws. However, adapting foreign guidelines and regulations requires expertise in risk assessment and communication. Local scientists and regulators will have to be trained in these subjects, possibly in countries where regulatory frameworks have been developed and the appropriate skills are available.
If wisely and correctly employed, marine biotechnology offers the tools for increasing high quality food supplies; for the sustainable, environmentally sound exploitation of marine natural resources; for deploying bioremediation to destroy or detoxify pollutants harmful to people and the environment; and for improving public health through the accurate detection and continuous monitoring of pathogens and pollutants in coastal waters.
<section>Chapter 1</section>
<section>The marine environment</section>
This chapter has four sections. First, the vertical and horizontal dimensions of oceans and ocean space are described. Second, the number, variety and uniqueness of marine life is portrayed. Third, threats to the marine environment and biodiversity are briefly discussed. Last, the technical means for detecting and monitoring marine events is recounted.
<section>Oceans and ocean space</section>
For this report, it is useful to view the oceans as having a horizontal and a vertical dimension. The horizontal has two aspects; the high seas (blue water) and the coastal margin. The latter is a complex system where land, sea, fresh water and atmosphere interphase. Most of the world's human population lives in the earth's coastal areas, within what is often termed the coastal zone. The coastal margin is thus heavily impacted by both natural inputs and human activity. Understandably, coastal ocean waters are characterized by a high degree of variability in its biochemical and biological properties.
The vertical dimension is the water column. It is in effect a cross section of the ocean space existing between the atm