<title>Design and operation of smallholder irrigation in South Asia</title>
Donald Campbell
WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPER NUMBER 256
IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE SERIES
The World Bank
Washington, D.C.
Copyright © 1995 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing April 1995
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 910, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna, 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0253-7494
Donald Campbell is a consultant to the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department at the World Bank.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Campbell, D. E.
Design and operation of smallholder irrigation in South Asia / Donald Campbell.
p. cm. - (World Bank technical paper, ISSN 0253-7494;
256. Irrigation and drainage)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-8213-2995-2
1. Irrigation engineering - South Asia. 2. Irrigation - South Asia - Management. 3. Farms, Small - South Asia. I. Title. II. Series: World Bank technical paper; 256. III. Series: World Bank technical paper. Irrigation and drainage series.
TC903.9.C36 1994
627'.52 - dc20 94-29953
CIP
RECENT WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPERS
No. 251 Sharma, Rietbergen, Heimo, and Pa tel. A Strategy for the Forest Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 252 The World Bank/FAO/UNIDO/lndustry Fertilizer Working Group, World and Regional Supply and Demand Balances for Nitrogen, Phosphate, and Potash, 1992/93-1998/99
No. 253 Jensen and Malter, Protected Agriculture: A Global Review
No. 254 Frischtak, Governance Capacity and Economic Reform in Developing Countries
No. 255 Mohan, editor, Bibliography of Publications: Technical Department, Africa Region, July 1987 to April 1994
No. 256 Campbell, Design and Operation of Smallholder Irrigation in South Asia
No. 258 De Geyndt, Managing the Quality of Health Care in Developing Countries
No. 259 Chaudry, Reid, and Malik, editors, Civil Service Reform in Latin America and the Caribbean: Proceedings of a Conference
No. 260 Humphrey, Payment Systems: Principles, Practice, and Improvements
No. 261 Lynch, Provision for Children with Special Educational Needs in the Asia Region
No. 262 Lee and Bobadilla, Health Statistics for the Americas
No. 263 Le Moigne, Subramanian, Xie, and Giltner, editors, A Guide to the Formulation of Water Resources Strategy
No. 264 Miller and Jones, Organic and Compost-Based Growing Media for Tree Seedling Nurseries
No. 265 Viswanath, Building Partnerships for Poverty Reduction: The Participatory Project Planning Approach of the Women's Enterprise Management Training Outreach Program (WEMTOP)
No. 266 Hill and Bender, Developing the Regulatory Environment for Competitive Agricultural Markets
No. 267 Valdés and Schaeffer, Surveillance of Agricultural Prices and Trade: A Handbook for the Dominican Republic
No. 268 Valdés and Schaeffer, Surveillance of Agricultural Prices and Trade: A Handbook for Colombia
No. 269 Scheierling, Overcoming Agricultural Pollution of Water: The Challenge of Integrating Agricultural and Environmental Policies in the European Union
No. 270 Banerjee, Rehabilitation of Degraded Forests in Asia
No. 271 Ahmed, Technological Development and Pollution Abatement: A Study of How Enterprises Are Finding Alternatives to Chlorofluorocarbons
No. 272 Greaney and Kellaghan, Equity Issues in Public Examinations in Developing Countries
No. 273 Grimshaw and Helfer, editors, Vetiver Grass for Soil and Water Conservation, Land Rehabilitation, and Embankment Stabilization: A Collection of Papers and Newsletters Compiled by the Vetiver Network
No. 274 Govindaraj, Murray, and Chellaraj, Health Expenditures in Latin America
No. 275 Heggie, Management and Financing of Roads: An Agenda for Reform
No. 276 Johnson, Quality Review Schemes for Auditors: Their Potential for Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 277 Convery, Applying Environmental Economics in Africa
No. 278 Wijetilleke and Karunaratne, Air Quality Management: Considerations for Developing Countries
No. 279 Anderson and Ahmed, The Case for Solar Energy Investments
No. 280 Rowat, Malik, and Dakolias, Judicial Reform in Latin America and the Caribbean: Proceedings of a World Bank Conference
No. 281 Shen and Contreras-Hermosilla, Environmental and Economic Issues in Forestry: Selected Case Studies in Asia
No. 282 Kim and Benton, Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Onchocerciasis Control Program (OCP)
No. 283 Jacobsen, Scobie and Duncan, Statutory Intervention in Agricultural Marketing: A New Zealand Perspective
No. 284 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Roldos and Chiara, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Uruguay
No. 285 Brehrn and Castro, The Market for Water Rights in Chile: Major Issues
No. 286 Tavoulareas and Charpentier, Clean Coal Technologies for Developing Countries
No. 287 Giliham, Bell, Arin, Matthews, Rumeur, and Hearn, Cotton Production Prospects for tire Next Decade
No. 288 Biggs, Shaw, and Srivastiva, Technological Capabilities and Learning in African Enterprises
No. 289 Dinar, Seidl, Olem, Jorden, Duda, and Johnson, Restoring and Protecting the World's Lakes and Reservoirs
No. 290 Weijenberg, Dagg, Kampen Kalunda, Mailu, Ketema, Navarro, and Abdi Noor, Strengthening National Agricultual Research Systems in Eastern and Central Africa: A Framework for Action
No. 291 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Errazuriz and Francisco, SurveilIance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Chile
No. 292 Gorriz, Subramanian, and Simas, Irrigation Management Transfer in Mexico: Process and Progress
No. 293 Preker and Feachem, Market Mechanisms and the Health Sector in Central and Eastern Europe
No. 294 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Sturzenegger and Bebczuk, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Argentina
No. 295 Pohl, Jedrzejczak, and Anderson, Creating Capital Markets in Central and Eastern Europe
No. 296 Stassen, Small-Scale Biomass Gasifiers for Heat and Power: A Global Review
No. 297 Bulatao, Key Indicators for Family Planning Projects
No. 298 Odaga and Heneveld, Girls and Schools in Sub-Saharan Africa: From Analysis to Action
No. 299 Tamale, Jones, and Pswarayi-Riddihough, Technologies Related to Participatory Forestry in Tropical and Subtropical Countries
No. 300 Oram and de Haan, Technologies for Rainfed Agriculture in Mediterranean Climates: A Review of World Bank Experiences
No. 301 Edited by Mohan, Bibliography of Publications: Technical Department, Africa Region, July 1987 to April 1995
No. 302 Baldry, Calamari, and Yaméogo, Environmental Impact Assessment of Settlement and Development in the Upper Léraba Basin
No. 303 Heneveld and Craig, Schools Count: World Bank Project Designs and the Quality of Primary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 304 Foley, Photovoltaic Applications in Rural Areas of the Developing World
No. 305 Johnson, Education and Training of Accountants in Sub-Saharan Anglophone Africa
No. 306 Muir and Saba, Improving State Enterprise Performance: The Role of Internal and External Incentives
No. 307 Narayan, Toward Participatory Research
No. 308 Adamson and others, Energy Use, Air Pollution, and Environmental Policy in Krakow: Can Economic Incentives Really Help?
No. 309 The World Bank/FOA/UNIDO/lndustry Fertilizer Working Group, World and Regional Supply and Demand Balances for Nitrogen, Phosphate, and Potash, 1993/94-1999/2000
No. 310 Edited by Elder and Cooley, Sustainable Settlement and Development of the Onchocerciasis Control Programme Area: Proceedings of a Ministerial Meeting.
No. 311 Webster, Riopelle and Chidzero, World Bank Lending for Small Enterprises 1989-1993
No. 312 Benoit, Project Finance at the World Bank: An Overview of Policies and Instruments
No. 313 Kapur, Airport Infrastructure. The Emerging Role of the Private Sector
No. 314 Valdés, Schaefferin collaboration with Ramos, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Ecuador
No. 316 Schware and Kimberley, Information Technology and National Trade Facilitation: Making the Most of Global Trade
No. 317 Schware and Kimberley, Information Technology and National Trade Facilitation. Guide to Best Practice
No. 318 Taylor, Boukambou, Dahniya, Ouayogode, Ayling, Abdi Noor, and Toure, Strengthening National Agricultural Research Systems in the Humid and Sub-humid Zones of West and Central Africa: A Framework for Action
No. 320 Srivastava, Lambert and Vietmeyer, Medicinal Plants: An Expanding Role in Development
No. 321 Srivastava, Smith, and Forno, Biodiversity and Agriculture: Implications for Conservation and Development
No. 322 Charles M. Peters, The Ecology and Management of Non-Timber Forest Resources
No. 323 Edited by Dominique Pannier, Corporate Governance of Public Enterprises in Transitional Economies
No. 324 Cabraal, Cosgrove-Davies, and Schaeffer, Best Practices for Photovoltaic Household Electrification Programs
No. 325 Bacon, Besant-Jones, and Heidarian, Estimating Construction Costs and Schedules: Erperience with Power Generation Projects in Developing Countries
<section>Foreword</section>
Irrigation is the largest public investment in many countries in the developing world and is a primary area of international assistance. With total World Bank lending of 29 billion in 1991 US dollars, the World Bank has played an important role in financing irrigation investments in the world. The Asia region has been the chief recipient of World Bank lending for irrigation, receiving 70 percent. India, with 27 percent of irrigation borrowing, is easily the largest client. Today, the domestic demand for agricultural products is largely met. This success could not have been achieved without the last half-century's investment in irrigation.
As one of the principal inputs to food production in South Asia, irrigated agriculture continues to play a critical role in achieving food security and poverty alleviation and improving the quality of life. However, the constraints posed by land and water scarcity, population growth, increased demand for water for human and industrial use and rising incomes, and the associated need to raise the carrying capacity of the land in a sustainable manner require efficient and flexible irrigation and drainage systems.
While irrigation development in the region over the last 30 years can claim a considerable degree of success, it has not been without problems, some of which are yet to be solved satisfactorily. The problems do not generally relate to the basic hydrology or hydraulics of irrigation, but most frequently to the poor management of the water resources in the unique smallholder environment of the South Asian region.
This paper presents and discusses the issues that characterize smallholder irrigation in South Asia Land development for irrigation the design and management of water distribution, selection of crops, and the pattern of water use at the farm level must all be viewed in the context of the end user, the small largely independent cultivator. The degree to which the individual cultivator can reasonably be expected to forgo some of his independence in the interests of efficient use of a communal source of water becomes a central issue in the effective design and operation of smallholder irrigation in South Asia.
Alex McCalla
Director
Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
<section>Abstract</section>
A large amount of research has been carried out and a considerable body of literature has been generated on the socio-economic features of smallholder irrigation, in particular, as well as the technical aspects of irrigation, in general. However, the problems of applying such technology to smallholder irrigation are less well covered.
This paper presents the primary sociological, economic and technical factors influencing the design and operation of smallholder irrigation in South Asia. The main emphasis is placed on problems. The aim is to define the problems, without necessarily acknowledging any obligation to present solutions. Rather, the available options are described and possible direction of further development are suggested. Practical experience and illustrations, primarily from India, are presented.
<section>Chapter 1 - Introduction</section>
Most of the problems of smallholder irrigation involve not only technology but also sociological and economic factors. It is particularly unfortunate that practitioners in these specialties generally have a communication problem, even within the same agency. The answer to the frequently expressed plea for a more multi-disciplinary approach (usually aimed at irrigation engineers) is a better understanding by each specialty of the constraints which the others face in this area. The irrigation engineer needs to be familiar with the basic socio-economic problems of smallholder development, and the agro-economist and sociologist need to be better acquainted with the technical constraints on water distribution in circumstances of varying supply and demand.
In the following pages the principal factors entering into the design and operation of smallholder irrigation are discussed, with main emphasis on problems. Where the subject is contentious, which is often the case in this field, issues and options are presented. The targeted audience includes those working in the areas of irrigation engineering, agricultural economics, sociology, and development planning. As is appropriate to such a range of interest, the degree of technical detail has been kept to a minimum, with references added for those who wish further reading on particular subjects.
The aim is to define the problems, without necessarily acknowledging any obligation to present solutions. As yet, there are no entirely satisfactory solutions to many of the problems of smallholder irrigation. However, the available expedients are described, and the possible direction of further development is suggested.
The text draws upon two decades of experience in project development in South Asia, notably in India, in the service of international organizations. It is emphasized that the comments and opinions expressed are those of the author, and do not reflect the policies of any particular institution.
<section>Chapter 2 - Profile of the smallholder</section>
<section>Fractionation and consolidation of the smallholding</section>
The area under discussion embraces India with its neighbors Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal and Sri Lanka, and further afield Burma and Thailand. There is wide diversity in the character of the smallholder and the structure of the village society within these areas. But with the possible exception of Burma, there is a strong tradition of individual land ownership. This free-holder situation is largely preserved when the land comes under irrigation, a factor which greatly influences and in some respects complicates the design and operation of irrigation systems. It distinguishes the region from those countries with more authoritarian tradition, where land rights are either vested in the community or at least are subject to government intervention in matters of supply from public irrigation systems.
The factors influencing irrigation design are partly to do with the cultivator himself, and partly with the size of his holding and the extent to which it is subdivided (fractionated). The half hectare holding of a typical farmer may be divided between six much smaller parcels scattered over a wide area. There is, incidentally, considerable confusion in the use of the word "holding" in statistics of land distribution. The term may be used for an individual parcel, or for the total land owned by a cultivator without regard to parcelization, or for an "operational" holding which can include a number of holdings farmed as a family unit.
Inheritance is of course responsible for the diminishing size of holdings. It is also responsible for the strange shape of some holdings. To illustrate, a farmer may have one hectare in a single unit 40 m in width by 250 m in length. He has four sons who inherit equally, but instead of each receiving an area 40 m by 62.5 m, each receives a strip 10 m wide by 250 m in length, the reason being that the original holding runs down-slope with very shallow infertile soils at the upper end and deep valley-bottom lands at the lower. Equity demands that land productivity be divided between the four sons, although the narrow shape of each parcel received presents problems in cultivation and particularly in irrigation distribution. In the same connection, the reason for parcels originally being acquired in scattered locations rather than contiguously is frequently to include a proportion of different soil types in the family holding, for instance lowlands for paddy cultivation and
uplands for other crops. On inheritance the same mix may be preserved, even when it involves division of the separate areas into very small parcels.
Construction of an irrigation distribution and drainage system at the farm level, land shaping for irrigation and provision of formal farm access would be facilitated by land consolidation (consolidation of parcels), or at least by realignment or "rationalization" of property boundaries. However, in the area under discussion, such action is the exception rather than the rule, due largely to farmer resistance. A farmer whose family has toiled for generations to convert a stony shallow field into a reasonably deep fertile soil is not interested in exchanging it for a neighbor's less-improved land in the interests of land consolidation. Other objections include the concern of a large landowner whose title to some of his fields is on somewhat shaky ground and would not stand the scrutiny of consolidation as in West Bengal, and the conviction of the small landowner that he would be cheated by "government" in the same process. Some of the objections are removed in areas of deep
homogeneous soils, and consolidation has been successfully carried out in the past in such areas, or is currently being carried out, in some cases with detailed attention to equity. However, attempts to impose land consolidation in areas of diverse soil types and irregular topography as a prerequisite to irrigation, have generally not been successful in the area under discussion, nor have attempts to pool holdings into a communal farming operation. In general, irrigation has to be built around the existing property boundaries. An exception may occur where land redistribution is being carried out in parallel with development of an irrigation area, in which case lands "surplus" to the legal maximum size of holding become available for distribution, and may be divided rationally in that process.
To summarize, consolidation of fragmented smallholdings or realignment of boundaries considerably facilitates the design of water distribution to the farm (the tertiary level). However, where circumstances lead to profound reluctance on the part of smallholders to participate in such a process, experience has been that there is nothing to be gained by endeavoring to press it.
<section>Smallholder attitude toward farmer-owned and government systems</section>
The character of the individual smallholder in matters affecting irrigation and the nature of the village social structure are too diverse to allow anything but a few general observations. It should be noted that the term "village" as used here denotes an area which includes a group of dwellings (a village in the more popular sense) together with an associated area of farming lands. It is a political and social entity. The operation of a village irrigation system, owned and operated by the community, is often taken as the reference point on which to base the design of water-user groups in larger publicly-owned projects. The popular opinion that farmer-owned village irrigation systems operate very well and publicly-owned systems operate very poorly is not always supported by the evidence, but the history of the village system does give an indication as to what a smallholder and his peers will or will not do if left to their own. At one end of the scale of performance the
village systems do very well, using much ingenuity in coping with very variable seasonal supply of water, and producing a wide diversity of crops within a small area. Communal interest is put before the interest of the individual. Such performance requires a close social structure or a long tradition of authoritarian village leadership. At the other end of the scale, particularly where the traditional village authority has broken down under the influence of changing times, performance can be very poor.
In publicly-owned irrigation systems the farmer viewpoint changes radically. The interest of the individual and his family becomes the primary concern, and the interest of the group becomes secondary. Much attention has been given to the merits of delivery from a publicly-managed system to a farmer-managed unit, such as the service area (the "command") of a secondary or tertiary canal. The issue is whether an area managed by beneficiary cultivators, but supplied from a public canal, will be regarded by the cultivators as their own and treated with the same respect. Although management of water distribution within the tertiary command, and eventually the secondary, by water user groups is highly desirable, in fact cultivators are not generally convinced that the system within such an area is fully their own and should therefore be treated in the same manner as a village system. For one thing the supply of water to the area remains outside of their control (unless cultivator
management is extended upstream to the primary canal, which may or may not be practical). There are notable exceptions, but in general if government is in any way a partner in the irrigation of an area, cultivators appear to believe that government should assume all responsibility down to the farm turnout. A similar problem is encountered if any outside assistance, other than simply funds, is provided for the improvement of village systems. The problem of cultivator attitude to any intervention by government, and his readiness to drop responsibility for maintenance in the lap of government as soon as there is any such intervention, must be acknowledged and lived with, even if not fully understood or appreciated. Means of overcoming this attitude are still being sought.
<section>Cultivator willingness to undertake more intensive cultivation</section>
The small cultivator is, by and large, a hard worker, as evidenced by the typical scene of villagers setting out at dawn in single file for the fields, and returning only at dusk, or the farmer with his oxen puddling the paddy field in the torrential monsoon downpour while his wife drenched in rain and knee-deep in mud stoops in a nearby plot transplanting. And yet there are limits to what a cultivator can be expected to do, or is willing to do, limits which are not always acknowledged in project design or analysis. Anticipations regarding rate of up-take of irrigation, and projections of change to double or triple cropping made possible by the advent of water, are frequently not met in reality. The small cultivator, in general, is not yet fully trapped into the consumer economy. The idea of working in the extremely arduous conditions of the hot weather months, because supply from a tubewell would make a profitable crop in that season possible, may not be appealing. His
simple needs can be met without such labor. Even changing to double cropping may be unattractive, at least to the male members of a certain "tribal" village whose ambitions are limited to growing sufficient wet-season rice to ensure a supply of paddy-wine for the remainder of the year. This is an exception of course, and offset by the example of the Punjabi farmer, willing and physically able to work in all seasons, and whose ambitions extend progressively to motor-cycle, tractor, truck, and eventually a car repair shop and haulage business. The conclusion is that assumptions made during design, in pursuit of a favorable economic rate of return, should take into account the character of the particular cultivator who will be party to the project. Aside from attitude to labor, there may be constraints imposed by caste or custom on the type of agriculture which will be undertaken. For instance, raising of sheep or goats or other livestock (other than cows or water-buffaloes) is
not acceptable to most cultivators in the Indian sub-continent, and is left to particular castes. Fish culture (in ponds), which can be very profitable, is unlikely to be an attractive occupation to some, and would be positively ruled out to others, except with hired labor of another caste.
<section>Smallholder attitude toward credit</section>
A factor of particular importance in the development of an irrigation area is the need for credit and the attitude of the cultivator to its use. Short-term credit is required for crop production (fertilizer, seeds, cultivation), and long-term credit for farm improvement (land shaping for irrigation, sinking of wells etc). The problem is the reluctance of most cultivators to use other than minimum amounts of credit (except for marriages), resulting in a much slower rate of buildup of production from an area than is economically desirable from the institutional viewpoint, when the capital cost of the irrigation infrastructure is taken into account. In spite of the fact that he would probably be better off financially to use credit to the maximum a farmer generally prefers to go slowly, employing his own resources of family labor and animal-power for land shaping, and using much less fertilizer than optimum, until eventually his cash position permits more intensive production.
His reluctance to borrow is understandable, as the amount of money involved, judged by the standards of a cultivator accustomed to subsistence-level rainfed agriculture, is very large, and borrowing for agricultural purposes is not without risk. Crops may fail or market prices may fall. -A Collector (senior Indian administrative officer) recounts his experience in trying to better the lot of landless laborers living in squalid road-side shelters. He arranged the grant of small plots where each man could build a simple dwelling for his family. The men were profuse in their thanks, but a year later the Collector found that few had done anything about actually constructing a dwelling. On questioning one explained that he had no money to buy materials. "Then come with me to the bank and I will see that you get credit to buy bricks." But sir, how will I repay the loan? I barely earn enough to feed my family." Then we will ask for credit also to buy a buffalo, and its milk will
pay for both loans." But sir, if the buffalo should die?" The man was content to remain in his roadside shelter, warmed by the thought that he owned a little plot, something his son could inherit, and he wasn't about to put it at risk by borrowing against it.
Where cultivators are urged to borrow, particularly for land development (compulsion has been attempted in some areas), there is often no intention to repay. The loan becomes virtually a subsidy, and the bank obliged (by government edict) to issue such loans may become a casualty. The question of credit is clearly a subject on which the inclination of the cultivator may run counter to the plans of the development agency. In project planning, while stressing the need to provide ready access to credit in a developing area, a conservative view should be taken in projecting actual demand for credit.
The issue becomes more pointed if there is the intention to finance certain government constructed items such as water courses or deep tubewells through credit obligations issued against cultivators. The problem is the unwilling cultivator. Many irrigators given the choice between continuing with a service provided by government (usually at highly subsidized rates), and cultivator ownership and operation of the facility, will choose the former. Pride of ownership is likely to be secondary to cash considerations, and the cultivator may in any case be unwilling to be committed to the substantial debt obligation involved. The expedient of setting up an autonomous agency which borrows for the purpose of financing the departmental construction of the facility (for instance water courses), and in turn endeavors to recover the cost from the cultivators has been tried, as a means of avoiding the problem of farmer reluctance to incur debt. However, in most case arrears in recovery
from farmers have rapidly put the autonomous agency in an untenable financial situation. This does not appear to be the general solution. In plans for "privatization" of facilities (transfer of ownership to cultivators) which are increasingly being pressed by development institutions, the problems of cultivator aversion to debt and very poor repayment record will be key considerations.
<section>Theft and vandalism of control structures</section>
In the efforts of development institutions to improve the efficiency and productivity of smallholder irrigation, possibly the most frustrating experience is the very common occurrence of theft and vandalism of facilities, frequently by the cultivators themselves. Where the structure concerned imposes some constraint on the individual or local group, such as a gate at the entrance to a water-course, interference with the structure is understandable even if it is clear that increasing the diversion at that point will diminish the supply to others further downstream. If the supply channel can in anyway be regarded as a "government" channel, conscience is apparently clear (if conscience is a factor). Considerable ingenuity can be exercised by the cultivators in such operations, for instance herding water-buffaloes into a distributary canal, as a portable dam, causing the upstream level to rise and break through, with major flow into a nearby drainage channel from which water
flows to the fields of the perpetrators. On removal of the buffaloes flow through the breach continues, but no evidence remains that the hand of man was involved. Theft of items which are either saleable or of use on the farm or in the home is also very common. Saleable items include anything of copper, aluminum or brass including transmission lines or motor windings in tubewell areas, and brass hardware on gate structures. Theft of transmission lines is probably by professionals, not by cultivators, but theft of con