<title>Solar energy</title>
<section>Solar energy. Lessons from the Pacific Island experience</section>
WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPER NUMBER 244
ENERGY SERIES
Andres Liebenthal, Subodh Mathur, and Herbert Wade
The World Bank
Washington, D.C.
Copyright © 1994
The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/
THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C.
20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing May 1994
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries. colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the World bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 910, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna, 75116 Paris, France.
Cover photo caption: A solar photovoltaic household system in Indonesia, similar to those used in the Pacific Islands.
ISSN: 0253-7494
Andres M. Liebenthal is a principal economist in the Latin America and the Caribbean Technical Department, Environment Division at the World Bank. He was formerly a principal economist in Country Department III, East Asia and Pacific Region. Subodh Mathur is an independent consultant based in Bethesda, Maryland. Herbert Wade is with the Division of Energy Technology, Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok; much of his work for this paper was earned out while he was the senior engineer at the South Pacific Institute for Renewable Energy, French Polynesia.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
Data
Liebenthal, Andres, 1947
Solar energy: lessons from the Pacific Island experience/Andres Liebenthal, Subodh Mathur, and Herbert Wade. p. cm. -- (World Bank technical paper; no. 244. Energy series)
ISBN 0-8213-2802-6
1 Photovoltaic power systems--Pacific Area.
2. Photovoltaic power generation--Pacific Area.
I. Mathur, Subodh, 1951
II. Wade, Herbert, 1939- . m Title. IV. Series.
TK1087.L54 1994
333.79'23'099--dc20
94-13345 CIP
<section>Foreword</section>
Improvements in the efficiency of solar photovoltaic (PV) energy technologies and reductions in their costs are providing new opportunities to expand electrification in developing countries, particularly in areas remote from national and regional electrification grids.
This report on the experiences of several Pacific island countries provides a clear indication that in small, remote villages, off-the-shelf solar PV technologies are providing reliable power at costs less than those of the more commonly used diesel systems households running a few electric lights and a TV/VCR. Elementary as these uses may seem in developed countries, they represent vital access to light and information for isolated peoples. The report also confirms another point made repeatedly in our recent energy sector work: appropriate technical choices need to be complemented by effective institutional approaches. The Pacific island experience demonstrated that the success of solar PV programs depended not merely on the choice of technology but on adequate training of maintenance personnel, good fee collection systems, and careful financial management. The report indicates that for solar PV systems installed in areas where managerial and technical expertise is scarce,
ownership and maintenance of the systems by local, cooperatively owned utilities appears to be the soundest option.
The solar PV programs discussed in this report were singled out from a broader review of experience with renewable energy technologies in the Pacific islands, out of which solar PV emerged as one of the few options that proved both economically and technically successful in the local context. The economic viability results from solar PV's competiveness with conventional small-scale diesel power in remote locations. The technical viability reflects the relative robustness of currently available household-size systems, which require only limited maintenance. In addition, solar PV is environmentally attractive at both the global and local levels, and the systems are most efficient in tropical or subtropical regions, which have levels of incident solar energy per square meter twice those of many industrial countries. On several counts, then, the solar PV approach appears highly promising for small-scale applications in developing countries.
This report is among the first in a new Energy Series within the ongoing World Bank technical papers volumes. The new Energy Series technical papers will replace the Industry and Energy Department's "pink" series energy working papers. We are making this shift to take advantage of the World Bank's global distribution network for what we believe are publications of significance and widespread interest.
Richard Stem
Director
Industry and Energy Department
<section>Abstract</section>
The successful experience of the Pacific islands in using and maintaining solar PV systems indicates that such systems could come to play a substantial role in the electrification of rural areas in many developing countries. In particular, the Pacific island experience suggests that present-technology household-sized PV systems can provide reliable power at costs less than those of the more commonly used diesel systems in small. remote villages for consumers with a limited number of appliances, such as a few household lights and a TV/VCR. It also suggests that the long-term success of solar PV programs will depend on the establishment of effective institutional approaches for maintaining the systems, and it indicates that ownership and maintenance of the systems by utilities appears to be the soundest option.
In the Pacific islands, solar PV programs encountered a variety of difficulties in their early phases. Most of the early systems suffered from technical deficiencies-- stemming primarily from unreliable controllers, batteries, and appliances rather than the PV panels themselves. The lesson drawn is that systems must be appropriately designed, use reliable even if initially high-cost components, and be properly installed and adequately maintained. At the institutional level, the experience of the islands indicates that among the diverse approaches tried so far (including local cooperative ownership and government ownership and service), the one with the best record and greatest promise appears to be the provision of PV-based electricity by a utility on a fee-for-service basis.
Tuvalu provides a case study illustrating the potential effectiveness of solar PV systems in remote areas for rural electrification under appropriate institutional arrangements. The Tuvalu Solar Electric Cooperative Society (TSECS), formed in 1984, appears to have been successful because it has maintained a well-trained technical staff with local and visiting technicians; fee collection through an outside agency that prevents diversion of funds to other projects; local user committees to communicate with the utility; and an exclusive focus on PV systems, along with a variety of appropriate configurations.
A comparison of solar PV and diesel systems on the basis of life-cycle costs of providing the final services that the customer desires for a number of years (e.g., household lighting, refrigeration, or video) shows that the life-cycle costs of solar PV systems are marginally lower than those of diesel systems for households in remote rural areas. The difference in overall costs is about I to 14 percent, with the higher savings applicable to households with low energy consumption and lower savings applicable to households with higher energy consumption.
<section>Preface</section>
This report draws on and extends the results of a Pacific regional energy assessment conducted by the World Bank in cooperation with the UNDP/ESCAP Pacific Energy Development Programme, the Asian Development Bank, and the Forum Secretariat Energy Division. The assessment reviewed the issues and options associated with the development of the energy sector in 12 Pacific island countries: Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Western Samoa.
<section>Abbreviations and Acronyms</section>
AC
alternating current
Ah
Ampere-hours
CF
compact fluorescent
DC
direct current
ESU
Energy Studies Unit, University of the South Pacific
FSM
Federated States of Micronesia
GDP
gross domestic product
JICA
Japanese International Cooperation Agency kW, kilowatt kWh, kilowatt hour
PEDP
Pacific Energy Development Programme
PNG
Papua New Guinea
PREA
Pacific Regional Energy Assessment
PV
photovoltaic
PWD
Public Works Department
TSECS
Tuvalu Solar Electric Cooperative Society
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
V
Volt
Wh
Watt-hours
Wp
Watt peak
<section>Executive summary</section>
Poor experiences with conventional power systems and a desire to restrict petroleum imports have led most Pacific island countries to experiment with solar PV systems for rural electrification. Overall, our study found, the experience of the Pacific islands indicates that household-sized PV systems can be cheaper than diesel systems in small, remote villages for consumers with a limited number of appliances, such as a few household lights and a TV/VCR. This success, albeit on a limited scale, suggests that solar PV systems could play a substantial role in the electrification of rural areas in many developing countries, especially those in which electricity services are needed in isolated pockets of low load densities, where the viability of diesel-based systems is questionable.
Despite their promise, solar PV programs encountered a variety of difficulties in their early phases. In the Pacific islands, most of the early solar PV systems suffered from technical deficiencies--mostly stemming from problems with the reliability of controllers, batteries, and appliances, though generally not with the PV panels themselves. The principal causes were basically (a) the unreliable components; (b) inappropriate design, such as undersized PV panel arrays; (c) improper installation, so that the systems did not produce the expected amount of power; and (d) poor maintenance.
Although equipment failures plagued early PV systems, the technical aspects now appear to be well understood, and solar PV systems are now providing a reliable supply of energy at a price that householders find attractive; this is particularly evident in Tuvalu, as discussed below.
The experience of the Pacific islands in general indicates that the technical success of solar PV systems will be more likely if the systems are appropriately designed, use reliable though initially high-cost components, and are properly installed and adequately maintained. Thus, the main challenge for their proper maintenance and expansion in the Pacific islands may be the development of an appropriate institutional approach, and it is this aspect of the problem that forms an important focus for the present paper.
<section>Current institutional approaches for introducing solar PV systems</section>
The institutional approaches currently used to introduce PV systems in the Pacific island countries can be classified into six basic strategies, which have met with widely varying degrees of success.
a. Village-cooperative-owned and -maintained individual home systems, government installed, with government technical support. This approach was first used in Fiji in 1982-84 in three village cooperatives. By the fifth year of the project, two villages had no functional systems and the third only a few.
b. Government owned and installed, basic maintenance by owner, with energy office technical assistance on call. This is a common approach and has been used in the Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Tonga, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, and the Marshall Islands. In no case have the PV systems consistently performed as intended by the governments or as expected by the users. The systems have been abandoned, are operational at reduced capacity, or have had unacceptably high maintenance costs.
c. Commercially sold. vendor- or user-installed, user-financed, -owned, and -maintained systems with commercial maintenance available on call. All Pacific island countries have some domestic rural installations of this type, with Fiji, Kiribati, and PNG having the largest number. In general, these systems were undersized because of the purchasers' desire to keep initial cost at a minimum. Maintenance by individual owners has been poor and the cost of commercial maintenance unaffordable, so personally owned and installed systems have not been successful.
d. Commercially installed and owned, commercial maintenance on call. In 1983-84, a foreign owned, private company reported installing nearly 200 lighting systems in rural Fiji under a leasing arrangement that included a monthly fee and free maintenance on call. This business failed, partly because the maintenance costs proved higher than anticipated.
e. Commercially installed and owned, periodic commercial maintenance. In a pilot project for a new commercial company, a rural village in Fiji was equipped with well-designed, high-quality individual lighting systems, with lighting provided through the insertion of a plastic "key" purchased from the village store. Users appeared to like the systems, but the business did not have adequate financing, and it failed before the approach could be evaluated properly.
f. Cooperative-owned, -installed, and -periodically maintained systems with fee collections by the cooperative. This approach, used by the Tuvalu Solar Electric Cooperative Society (TSECS), has been successful in providing rural members with solar lighting, despite technical problems in the early years. It is discussed in detail below. A variant of this approach is being used by Kiribati, with the difference that the Kiribati solar utility is a government-owned corporation rather than a cooperative.
The Tuvalu Experience
Tuvalu's experience with solar PV power indicates that solar PV systems can be used successfully in remote areas for rural electrification (see Annex I for a brief description of Tuvalu). In Tuvalu, the chief agency responsible for developing solar PV energy is the Tuvalu Solar Electric Cooperative Society (TSECS), formed in 1984. TSECS is a commercial enterprise, registered under Tuvalu's Cooperative Society Act, with a charter to promote solar electricity for household lighting on the outer islands.
After several years of trial and error, TSECS is now able to provide reliable PV-based electricity for lighting needs on a fee-for-service basis to about 300 households on Tuvalu's outer islands. Solar lighting kits have also been installed on eight community meeting houses. At present, the membership in TSECS is limited by the availability of new PV units and not by the willingness of households to join.
TSECS is governed by a Management Committee, which consists of one member from each of Tuvalu's eight larger islands and reports directly to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies. Although the Management Committee sets the user fees, a Management Team located in Tuvalu's capital (Funafuti) handles the day-to-day operations and project implementation. The team consists of a manager appointed by the Management Committee and three technical/support staff who are appointed by the manager.
Each island has its own branch of the cooperative, and members of the Management Committee are elected annually to their posts by their respective branches. On each island, TSECS has a branch technical agent, who is responsible for the day-to-day maintenance and monthly fee collections. Each island also has a Branch Committee, which is composed of local cooperative members. The Branch Committees act as arbiters of local disputes and makers of policy for their specific island.
Maintenance and fee collections are performed monthly by a branch technical agent, who is a full-time TSECS employee. These technicians have received formal training. Further, senior technicians visit every site at least twice a year. Spare parts are stocked both at the main office and by the branch technicians; inventory control is managed by the main office.
In 1992, the initial cost of membership in TSECS was A$50 (US$40), with a monthly fee of A$6.25 (US$5.00) for a single-panel system, and A$7.60 (US$6.10) for a two-panel system. TSECS earned roughly A$1.00 per month (out of the single-panel A$6.25 charge), a level of tariffs that provides for operation and maintenance (O&M) costs but not for the expansion or the replacement of the solar panels at the end of their useful life.
The main ingredients of TSECS' success appear to be (a) good maintenance, provided by local technicians and visiting senior technicians; (b) good rate of fee collection by an impartial organization based outside the community and exclusive use of the fees for the project; (c) local user committees, which can arbitrate disputes between users and technicians about fee collections, disconnections, and poorly functioning systems, and keep the users informed about the functioning of the enterprise; (d) TSECS' exclusive focus on PV systems; (e) availability of systems of different sizes to meet the varying electrical needs and financial resources of the users; (f) a continuing and competent internal and external training program; and (g) readily available external technical support to assist with system design and training development.
Institutional Lessons Learned
The experience of the Pacific island countries--given the constraints associated with the low population density, low skill levels, and remoteness of the rural communities--suggests that the institutional approach most likely to succeed is provision of PV-based electricity on a fee-for-service basis by a utility rather than through the sale of hardware. This fee-based approach would require the utility to retain ownership and to maintain the small-scale systems installed in its customers' premises. Trained staff would visit the customers regularly to maintain the system, carry out repairs, and collect the service fee. The aim of the fee would be recovery of the utility's operating costs, including a capital recovery charge. A headquarters office would manage the accounts, inventory of spares, training, and procurement.
<section>Solar PV and diesel system costs compared</section>
Solar PV and diesel systems should be compared on the basis of life-cycle costs of providing the final services that the customer desires for a number of years (e.g., household lighting, refrigeration, or video). In particular, solar PV and diesel systems should not be compared on the basis of the cost per kilowatt hour of electricity produced under the two systems because such a comparison fails to account for the major operational differences between solar PV and diesel systems. The three broad components of life-cycle costs are (a) initial and future replacement costs of customer end-use appliances; (b) initial and future replacement costs of generation equipment; and (c) O&M costs.
Design Considerations
One critical design parameter is the reliability of the system, because the costs tend to increase sharply as the reliability of the system is increased to high levels. Another key parameter is the number of hours for which electricity will be available. A decision to supply diesel-generated electricity on a 24-hour basis will raise unit labor costs significantly for diesel systems but not for PV systems, almost all of which are equipped to charge batteries that provide power on a 24-hour basis. Hence, the power supply system should be designed so that it strikes a balance between the level of reliability consumers wish and the level of costs they can afford.
General Cost Considerations
Solar PV has an advantage over diesel-based power when (a) there is no existing power grid; (b) access to land is a problem; (c) diesel fuel is costly or reliable transportation for fuel is unavailable or costly; (d) there is high peak load for a short time; (e) the user population is likely to increase over time; (f) noise or air pollution is a concern; and (g) it is difficult to train and retain technicians for diesel systems.
However, solar PV is at a disadvantage over diesel systems when (a) village demands for power are high; (b) dense vegetation or high levels of cloudiness limit insolation; and (c) the special appliances or power conversion equipment necessary to operate with the DC electricity provided by PV systems are unavailable or expensive.
Life-Cycle Costs
Based on data and assumptions that appear appropriate for the Pacific islands, the life-cycle costs of solar PV systems are marginally lower than those of diesel systems for households in remote rural areas. The difference in overall costs is about I to 14 percent, with higher savings applicable to households with low energy consumption and lower savings applicable to households with higher energy consumption. One of the principal conditions for this result to hold is that diesel generation (fuel, labor, and parts) costs are high, in the range of 50 to 65¢/kWh, because of the small scale of operations in the rural areas, high fuel costs, and high transportation costs. Where diesel generation costs can be realistically expected to be lower than this range, the life-cycle costs of diesel systems are likely to be less than those for the solar PV systems. This conclusion may change, however, if--as expected for PV panels in particular--the capital costs of solar PV components
decline.
Another assumption in the life-cycle cost calculations is that both diesel and solar PV systems are maintained adequately. In remote rural areas, however, it may be easier to maintain the solar PV systems and preferable to install them. To begin with, routine maintenance of the relatively less complicated solar PV systems is simpler. Similarly, long-term maintenance is easier because PV systems do not need the kind of intricate repairs and periodic overhauls that diesels require. In addition, because diesel systems provide power centrally, inadequate maintenance can lead to outages that affect many consumers and thereby reduce utilities' revenues commensurately. Finally, poor maintenance curtails the working lives of the expensive diesel gensets. Solar PV systems thus may hold a distinct edge when resources for maintenance are limited.
The life-cycle cost comparison assumes that the average consumer load and number of consumers remain constant over the entire period. It is relatively easy to install additional solar PV systems when the number of consumers increases because solar PV systems are largely modular; in contrast, the initial capacity of the diesel systems has to be sized to take account of anticipated load growth. Therefore, the cost advantages of solar PV systems will be higher than indicated in the lifecycle cost calculations if the number of consumers increases steadily over time.
<section>Organization of the paper</section>
The paper is organized as follows: chapter 1 is a brief introduction; chapter 2 sketches solar PV power in the Pacific islands and derives lessons from this experience about the institutional conditions conducive to the successful development of solar PV systems; chapter 3 compares the costs of solar PV and diesel systems; and chapter 4 offers some conclusions. Technical details appear in three annexes.
<section>1. Introduction</section>
Following the oil crises of the 1970s, energy experts began to explore whether solar-based power generation held potential as an alternative petroleum-based fuels. Development of solar power has progressed considerably since then, yet its record of performance has been mixed, and it has not come into widespread use in either industrialized or developing countries. In the United States, for example, solar power generally is confined to niches such as highway signs, remote facilities, or vacation homes that are expensive to serve by conventional grid-based electricity supply. In the developing countries, solar power may have greater potential, since many of these countries receive a substantial amount of sunshine but do not already have extensive systems of grid-based electricity supply.
The experience of the countries in the Pacific islands indicates that for electrification in areas with low load density--usually found in rural districts with mainly house lighting loads--and where the load is not expected to grow rapidly, individual solar photovoltaic (PV) systems may be cheaper than the more typically used small diesel systems. Costs vary from case to case, but household-sized PV systems can be cheaper than and-based diesel systems in small remote villages for consumers with a limited number of appliances, such as a few household lights and a TV/VCR system. Such situations are expected to account for a growing share of rural electrification, particularly when electricity services are expanded into isolated pockets where the economic viability of diesel-based power generation is questionable.
Successful experience with solar PV power for rural electrification in the Pacific islands, although on a limited scale, suggests that solar PV may have the potential to play a substantial role in the electrification of developing countries. This report describes the evolution of solar power programs in the Pacific islands, derives lessons for the successful development of solar PV power in these and in other developing countries, and highlights the factors that determine the potential role of solar power.
<section>The energy sector in the Pacific Islands</section>
Pacific island countries' interest in energy matters surged in response to the oil price shocks of the 1970s, which had significant impacts on these open and fragile island economies. (See Annex 1 for a brief discussion of the economic conditions in the Pacific islands.) In the early 1980s, field missions and expert reports began to indicate that renewable energy technologies were becoming technically and economically viable and that the Pacific islands' energy environment--remote locations, small demands, high costs of petroleum imports, and abundant indigenous supplies of solar, biomass, hydro, wind, and oceanic resources--was ideal for the new technologies. I
Despite this focus on renewable sources of energy, during the 1980s petroleum product demand in the Pacific islands grew at an average annual rate of nearly 5 percent. That rate is projected to increase to 7 percent during the 1990s. Imported petroleum remains the chief source of primary commercial energy; the main alternative is hydropower, and solar PV systems are seen as having only a limited role. Approximately two-fifths of the imported petroleum, mainly in the form of automotive diesel oil (ADO!, is used for power generation. In aggregate, thus, the dependence of the Pacific island countries on petroleum has not been reduced appreciably, and it is not likely to be reduced over the coming decade.
<section>Rural electrification</section>
In many of the Pacific island countries, a substantial part of the population is already being supplied with electricity. Data are not available for all the countries, but more than 50 percent of the population in the Cook Islands, Marshall Islands, Palau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Western Samoa has been provided with electricity. In most of the countries, however, grid-based publicly distributed electricity is provided only on the main island, and the supply of electricity to rural areas and outer islands is very limited
<section>Failure of the conventional approach</section>
The conventional approach to rural electrification--establishment of isolated diesel stations operated by public works departments or national utilities--has yielded disappointing results. Despite considerable external assistance, a large proportion of rural power supply schemes are in decrepit condition and provide an unreliable supply, far below the standards required to stimulate economic development or even to meet the modest household needs of the consumers. This is largely a consequence of a lack of sufficient funds to cover operating costs, caused by the governments' inability to provide funds on a regular basis, external donors' reluctance to provide funds for operational expenses, and absence of adequate organization and incentives to collect revenues from the customers. Another principal cause is the difficulty of attracting and keeping technically skilled staff to operate and maintain the schemes.
<section>Potential of solar photovoltaic systems</section>
Their poor experience with conventional power systems and their desire to restrict petroleum imports has led most Pacific island countries to experiment with renewable energy resources for rural electrification and with solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. Most of the early renewable energy projects failed to provide a reliable supply of energy at a reasonable cost, and the solar PV systems experienced many problems during their introduction in the Pacific islands. However, many of the problems associated with solar PV systems appear to have been overcome, and, on an overall basis, the experience of solar PV systems indicates that under the right circumstances they can be an economical alternative to diesel generation for the electrification of remote rural areas.
<section>2. Solar energy in the Pacific Islands</section>
In general, the remote areas of the Pacific islands receive a high amount of sunshine, with few long cloudy periods and high levels of solar radiation on clear days because of the clean air. However, detailed measurements and records are limited regarding the amount of sunshine received at specific situations, such as the average bright day or the average cloudy day.
<section>History and prospects</section>
About 4,000 small-scale stand-alone PV systems have been installed in the Pacific island countries, typically involving two to eight panels for household lighting, water pumping, and refrigeration. Most of the countries have about 50 to 200 household systems each (Palau, FSM, Marshall Islands, Western Samoa, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Solomon Islands, Kiribati, Tonga, Wallis-Futuna, and New Caledonia), with more in PNG, Fiji, and Tuvalu, and considerably more (2,500 estimated in French Polynesia. Several countries have ambitious plans for PV expansion. Tonga, Kiribati, Tuvalu, and the Marshall Islands are considering PV as the primary technology of choice for future rural electrification. The draft development plan for the Marshall Islands, for example, calls for 1,500 future household PV lighting installations.
Pact Technical Problems
Most of the early solar PV systems suffered from technical deficiencies, and most countries had problems with the reliabil