<title>Rehabilitation of Degraded Forests in Asia</title>
Ajit K. Banerjee
Copyright @ 1995 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Mamufactured in the United States of America
First printing March 1995
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map m this volume do not imply on the part of the World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 910, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available tree of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'lena, 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0253-7494
Ajit K. Banerjee is a senior forestry specialist in the Environment and Natural Resources Division of the Asia Technical Department of the World Bank.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Banerjee, Ajit Kumar, 1931
Rehabilitation of degraded forests in Asia / Ajit K. Banerjee.
(World Bank technical paper, ISSN 0253-7494; no. 270)
Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
ISBN 0-8213-3119-1
1. Forest degradation--Asia.
2. Forest degradation
Asia. 3. Forest policy--Asia. 1. Title. 11. Series.
SD418.3.A78B36 1994
634.9'56'095--dc20 94 40154 CIP
<section>Recent world bank</section>
No. 189 Frederick, Balancing Water Demands with Supplies The Role of Management in a World of Increasing Scarcity
No. 190 Macklin, Agricultural Extension in India
No. 191 Fredenksen, Water Resources Institutions: Some Principles and Practices
No. 192 McMillan, Painter, and Scudder, Settlement and Development in the River Blindness
Control Zone
No. 193 Braetz, Conserving Biological Diversity: A strategy for Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Regiol'
No. 194 Saint, Universities 01 Africa: Strategies for Stabilization and Revitalization
No. 195 Ochs and Bishay, Drainage Guidelilzes
No. 196 Mabogunje, Perspective on Urban Land and Land Management Policies in Sub-Saharan
Africa
No. 197 Zymelman, editor, Assessing Engineering Education il. Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 198 Teerink and Nakashima, Water Allucation, Rights, and Pricing: Examples from Japan and the United States
No. 199 Hussi, Murphy, Lindberg, and Brenneman, The Development of Cooperatives and Other
Rural Organizatiotis: The Role of the World Bank
No. 200 McMillan, Nana, and Savadogo, Settlement and Development in the River Blindness Control Zone: Case Study Burkina Faso
No. 201 Van Tuijl, Improving Water Use in Agriculture: Experience in the Middle East and North Africa
No. 202 Vergara, The Materials Revolution: What Does It Meat for Developing Asia?
No. 203 Cleaver, A Strategy to Develop Agriculture in Sub-Sahara'' Africa and a Focus for the
World Bank
No. 204 Barghouh, Cromwell, and Pritchard, editors, Agricultural Technologiesfor Market-Led
Development opportunities in The 1990s
No. 205 Xie, Kuffner, and Le Moigne, Using Water Efficiently Techological Options
No. 206 The World Bank/FAO/UNIDO/lndustry Fertilizer Working Group, World and Regional
Supply and Demand Balances for Phosphate and 1991/92-1997/98
No. 207 Narayan, Participatory Evaluation: Tools for Managing Change in Water and Sanitation
No. 208 Bindlish and Evenson, Evalution of the Performance of T&V Extension in Kenya
No. 209 Keith, Property Tax: A Practical Manual for Anglophone Africa
No. 210 Bradley and McNamara, editors, Living with Trees: Policies for Forestry Management in
Zimbabwe
No. 211 Wiebers, Integrated Pest Management and Pesticide Regulafion in Developing Asia
No. 212 Frederiksen, Berkoff, and Barber, Water Resources Management in Asia, Volume 1:
Main Report
No. 213 Srivastava and Jaffee, Best Practices for Moving Seed Technology: New Approaches to
Doing Business
No. 214 Bonfiglioli, Agro-pastoralism in Chad as a Strategy for Survival: An Essay on the Relationship between Anthropology and Statistics
No. 215 Umali, Irrigation-Induced Salinity: A Growing Problem for Development and the Environment
No. 216 Carr, Improving Cash Crops in Africa: Factors Influencing the Productivity of Cotton, Coffee, and Tea Grown by Smallholders
No. 217 Antholt Getting Ready for the Twenty-First Century Technical Change and Institutional Modernization Agriclture
No. 218 Mohan, editor, Bibliography of Publication Technical Department, net, Africa Region, 1987 to December 1992
No. 219 Cercone, Alcohol-Related Problems as an Obstacle to the Development of Human Capital: Issues and Policy Options
No. 220 Kingsley, Ferguson, Bower, and Dice, Mananging Urban Environmental Quality it! Asia
No. 221 Srivastava, Tamboli, English, Lal, and Stewart, Conserving Soil Moistune and Fertility in the Warm Seasonally Dry Tropics
No. 222 Selvaratnam, Inovations in Higher Education: Singapore at the Competitive Edge
No. 223 Piotrow, Treiman, Rimon, Yun, and Lozare, Strategies for Family Planning Promotion
No. 224 Midgley, Urban Transport in Asia: An Operatiorial Agenda for the l990s
No. 225 Dia A Governance Civil Service Reform in Sub-Saharian Africa
<section>Foreword</section>
The rapid pace of worldwide deforestation disturbs the global ecology and hence attracts much attention. What does not catch people's notice so quickly is forest degradation. The process of degradation is often gradual, over a few years or a dozen, and people are likely to miss the change. But the change does take place. Over time biodiversity is lost and vegetation density and soil cover decrease, and these losses culminate in soil erosion, reduction in agricultural productivity, and ultimately loss of productive land that may have taken thousands of years to build. As productivity disappears, the people living on the forest fringe, or inside its boundary, and subsisting on its products and their labor are made destitute and are forced to join the unemployed in nearby villages or townships to eke out a meager existence. A large proportion of the poor in most cosmopolitan areas of developing countries are those deprived of their land in this manner. Rehabilitation of
degraded forests is thus a task that cannot be put off.
The extent of forests that have been degraded is not well documented because the definition of degradation is not very specific. However, many observers estimate that degraded forests cover millions of hectares and are spread throughout all of the Asian developing countries, with most in the tropical and subtropical belts. The task of rehabilitation therefore is not only urgent, it is also colossal.
There are other important reasons for timeliness. Taking on the challenge now rather than later would not only save the land from further
degradation, increase forest benefits, and improve the economic status of the people living m or near the forest, it would also cost less than if the work were delayed. Therefore, international development agencies and national policymakers would do well to give priority to the job and allocate appropriate resource for it.
In Asia, a working definition of degraded forest areas is: shindig cultivation areas, In rata grasslands, low-profile hacked forests, and overlogged forests. The success of rehabilitating these areas depends both on enactment and execution of appropriate policies and on application of correct technology.
The most important national policy would be to introduce measures that neutralize the causes leading to degradation. Another step could be to promote participatory forestry by which the population adjoining forests are given usufruct to the forests m exchange for managing and protecting them according to management plans drawn up with the government. This strategy would not only save forests from destruction but would also alleviate local poverty. Other efforts could include introducing policies that encourage low-impact harvesting and that generate higher forest rents and timber prices than those generally obtained by forest owners (primarily governments). In addition to these and other policy introductions, however, corrective technology must be applied.
This paper refers to but does not deal m depth with policy issues, except where policy
Foreword and technical aspects cannot be distinguished --as m taungya cultivation or participatory forestry. A number of thought-provoking papers have been written on these policy issues, but there is not enough documentation on the technology needed for rehabilitating degraded forests and, particularly, on the different manifestations of degradation m one place.
This. paper, therefore, focuses on technologies that have proven effective in some areas of Asia, on the expectation that, with ate-specific modification, they can be replicated in other areas. The paper is intended to be of general use to project managers during project preparation and supervision of forest rehabilitation projects.
Harold W. Messenger a Director Asia Technical Department
<section>Abstract</section>
The degraded forests discussed in this paper are those that have been so badly damaged they have completely lost their protective or productive functions--but still retain their potential to revive. The paper focusses on the major areas in Asia fitting this description: swidden agriculture areas in moist forests; human-induced extensive Imperata grasslands; repeatedly hacked, low-profile hardwood forests; and overlogged forests. The areas are defined carefully to determine their extent m
Asia; key characteristics are described; their impacts on the local ecology are evaluated; the social and economic pressure that prolong the degradation are analyzed; and technical methods for rehabilitating the damaged areas are proposed. Although the paper recognizes that policy interventions are also crucial, it targets a specific audience: governments and agencies that plan and prepare the technical aspects of projects for restore these important natural resource areas m Asia.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This study was begun the auspices of Asia Technical Agriculture Division (ASTAG) as a part of its Asia Initiative. The author wishes to acknowledge all contributors to that initial work, particularly Mr. Richard G. Grimshaw who was Division Chief of ASTAG and Ms. Alicia Grimes who prepared much of the literature research. Recognition is made also of Ms. Maritta Koch-Weser, Division Chief of ASTEN, who supported completion
of the project, and Mr. Norman Jones, who reviewed the paper extensively. Ms. Charlotte Maxey edited and prepared the final version for publication, and Mr. George Parakammanil created the cover design. The photographs were provided by the author and by Betsy McGean and Mark Poffenberger, consultants for the Asia Sustainable Forest Management Network and the World Bank.
<section>Abbreviations and acronyms</section>
DBH
Diameter breast height
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization
HA
Hectare
ISLS
Indonesian Selective Logging System
MAl
Mean annual increment
MUS
Malaysian Uniform System
NTPP
Non timber forest products
SMS
Selective Management System
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamization
<section>1 Introduction</section>
At the outset it is necessary to know what is meant by the term "degraded forests." A dictionary meaning would be "forests that are characterized by degeneration of structure or function." This is too broad a definition to be workable, however, as it would encompass almost all the forests that are not pristine. Barring a few spots in the world, all forests have been disturbed in some way or the other. Forests where swidden agriculture (defined on page 3) is practiced, where trees are logged or planted, or where local people gather products are degenerating or are at least losing their original character. At the other extreme, mismanagement and maltreatment have turned some forests into wastelands--little more than Bullied hill slopes with sparse vegetation or badlands with grasses predominant. Much of the primary forests have thus been converted into secondary forests or other vegetative forms. The question therefore arises whether all of these should be considered degraded
forests.
Another vegetation form that should be considered in defining degraded forest is the extensive grasslands of Southeast Asia. In the recent past, most of these grasslands were forests that have changed radically as a result of mismanagement. Should these grasslands be considered degraded forests?
Strictly speaking, most of these conversion processes should be considered as forest degradation and the resultant land as degraded for
ets. But again, this definition is too wide in that it ignores the difference between the small degenerative changes that accompany forest use in a restrained manner and at the other extreme the large-scale ongoing forest degeneration that results in unrehabilitable wastelands.
For this paper, degraded forests are defined as follows: forests with grossly understocked tree, shrub, grass or cultivation formations that, due to ongoing or comparatively recent biotic interference, have either degenerated or are progressively degenerating in their protective or productive functions but that still retain the potential to revive to become a sustainable economic forest formation.
This definition would include the following major categories of land uses in Asia, which will be the focus of this paper:
o Swidden agriculture areas in moist forests;
o Human-induced extensive Imperata grasslands of Southeast Asia;
o Repeatedly hacked, low-profile hardwood forests of, for example, Bangladesh, China, India, and Nepal; and
o Overlogged forests of South and Southeast Asia.
The objectives of this paper are to define and describe each of the above forest categories, determine its extent in Asia, describe key characteristics, evaluate its impact on the local ecology, analyze why over time more area is added to each category, and to propose economic rehabilitation methods. The rehabilitate
Introduction methods include: (a) policy interventions to prevent the causes that lead to degraded forests; and (b) technical interventions to rehabilitate the areas already degraded. Emerging evidence indicates that forest degradation is often driven by social and political forces that must be dealt with prior to the application of technical strategic. However, although policy
interventions are imperative and will be referred to where appropriate, the paper focusses on technologies for rehabilitation.
The target audience of the paper are those who are involved in the preparation and management of projects dealing with rehabilitation of degraded forests of Asia and elsewhere.
<section>2 Swidden agricultural areas</section>
<section>Introduction</section>
Swidden cultivation is an age-old agricultural system that involves clearing a site of vegetation by slash and burn methods, cultivating it for a short period, and then letting it lie fallow for a longer period to restore the natural vegetation. During the fallow period, the cultivator repeats the same process on other sites until the vegetation of the first site is restored and is ready to be cultivated again. Then the cultivator returns to the first site and starts the cycle over again. Slashing and burning nor only clears the area but also adds mineral vegetation ash as fertilizer to the soil. The system is also characterized by some or all of these features: absence of soil manipulation (except sometimes hoeing); use of simple planting methods such as seed broadcasting and, at most, some seed dibbling; the growing of a mixture of many crops (in contrast to the monoculture or simple species mixture of sedentary agriculture); and management of the system as a family
operation without engaging wage labor.
<section>Types of swidden</section>
Authors describe swidden cultivation according to movement of the cultivator with respect to the swidden area, length of fallow, economic dependency, or vegetation type.
Based on the criteria of movement of the swiddeners, Greenland (1974) classifies swidden cultivation into four types, the two more common of which are: simple shifting cultivation where dwellings of the cultivators shift along with the shifting of the site and recurrent cultivation where cultivation sites shift more frequently than the dwellings.
Swidden cultivation is also classified according to the length of the fallow period: short cultivation-short fallow, short cultivation long fallow, long cultivation-long fallow, and permanent field crops with swidden. Although there are no fast rules about the period of time involved, fewer than eight years is considered short fallow.
Depending on the degree of economic dependency of the cultivators on swidden cultivation, the following variations have been noted: exclusive dependence, major dependence, and contingent dependence (UNESCO 1983). The third refers to displaced communities or individuals who, having no other options, practice swidden cultivation temporarily until new innovations are introduced. For example, three categories of jhumias (Indian word for swiddeners) have been recorded in Tripura state of India: pure jhumias (exclusive dependence type), jhumias by choice (major dependence type) and incipient sedentary farmers (contingent dependence type). Similarly in Thailand, it has been observed that there are established swiddeners, pioneers and incipient swiddeners (UNESCO 1983).
<section>Swidden Areas</section>
Another classification has been based on whether the cultivators are born into the system, practice it by choice, or are forced to practice it for subsistence. For example, in the Philippines, the categories observed are: born kaingineros (Tayalog word for swiddeners), forced kaingineros, and speculative kaingineros (UNESCO 1983).
Classification has also been based on the type of vegetation the swiddeners remove. Vegetation may be primary forests, as removed by the Hmong (pioneers) of the Tbailand highlands, for instance; secondary forests, by the Karen of Northern Thailand (Grandstaff 1980) or the Dyak of Kalimantan (Hurst 1990); savannahs or grasslands, by the Benjarese of South Kalimantan (Dove 1984); and shrub or scrubland (UNESCO 1983).
To summarize, swiddeners in Asia are born into or forced into the practice of swidden cultivation, are exclusively or partially dependent economically on it, and use various types of vegetative formations in the system.
<section>Area in Asia under swidden</section>
The total area in Asia under swidden is not accurately known. Le Trong Cuc (1988) indicates that in Asia about 24.5 million families employ some form of shifting cultivation on 8.5 million hectares annually. He estimated the total area under swidden at 103 million hectares. FAO estimates that 30-80 million people are involved and that 15-120 million hectares of land are affected. Data on the extent of swidden cultivation for selected Asian countries are provided in table 2.1.
Special features of swidden in countries where this form of cultivation is significant are discussed below.
Bhutan. Bush-tallow shifting cultivation (called tsheri) is carried out maindy in the eastern zone. In other zones, particularly at higher elevations, grass-fallow shifting cultivation (pangshing) is also practiced. The area of tsheri or pangshing is not accurately known; however, the shining cultivation area is estimated at 141,000 hectares, or about I percent of the total land and 6.5 percent of the forest area in the country. Tsheri is carried out on slopes of 25 degrees to over 45 degrees, but usually below 35 degrees. Barring a few landslips, the tsheri areas do not show much erosion. The rotation cycle is about 8-10 years. Cropping patterns vary but usually involve only one crop in one cycle. The crops are maize, foxtail millet (Setana) and common millet (Panicum milaceum).
India. cultivation (called in northeastern India. bewar or penda in central India, and podu in southern India) is most prevalent in the states of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, and Tripura, and occurs only to a small extent in a few states of central and southern India. The nature of swidden cultivation varies from region to region and even within the same region. Some cultivators are totally dependent while others are partially or marginally dependent on swidden. Vegetation affected are the secondary forests of Arunachal Pradesh, the bamboo forests of Mizoram and Nagaland, the pine and subtropical forests of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, the moist and dry subtropical forests of central India, and the wet forests of southern India.
Studying the jhum of Meghalaya, Ramakrishna and Mishra (1981) report that it involves growing 30-35 crop species on one site and is based on the recycling of resources. Shortening the jhum cycle to the current 5-30 years is resulting in colonization by weeds (many exotic) and desertification (despite high rainfall).
The total area under shifting cultivation is estimated at 0.94 million hectares, and in 1956 involved 2.6 million people (Atal 1984).
Indonesia. In Indonesia, all major islands have forest areas cultivated by the swidden method (called ladang). The forests involved are Imperata grass areas, tidal swamps, upland forests and savannahs.
An estimated I million families are involved. Estimates of the area cultivated vary widely, from 33 million hectares (Atal 1984) to I million hectares (World Bank data). Inoue and Lahjie (1990), discussing the dynamics of swidden agriculture in East Kalimanthan, describe three systems of swidden that have varying sustainability. The first is the fully sustainable, rice-rattan forest swidden that is practiced by the Benuaq dayak people. The second is the least sustainable, paddy pepper swidden of the Buginese villages. The third is the (as yet) untested fruit tree-vegetable agroforestry system developed by the transmigrants.
Malaysia. There are both migratory and settled swidden cultivators throughout Malaysia. In Peninsular Malaysia, only 0.1 percent of the total land area is under this form of cultivation. In Sabah, 13 percent (43,130 hectares) of agricultural land comes under this category. Figures for Sarawak vary widely. One source suggests 0.5 percent (60,463 hectares), while another, using aerial photos, estimates 23.5
Table 2.1 Estimated extent of land under shifting cultivation in selected Asian countries
Area under
Percentage forest
Total land
Total forest
shining
under shifting
Country
area ( 00 ha)
area ( 000 ha)
cultivation ( 000 ha)
cultivation
Bangladesh
Bhutan
China (tropical)
46,000C
l30
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Thailand
Note: Data on shifting cultivation varies tremendously from author to author, therefore the following qualifications should be noted a. Total forest area includes both closed and open forests. b. Upadbyay 1988. c. FAO 1986. Percentage of tropical forest. e. World Bark dada. f. Saulei 1990. g. Hurst 1990 (2s percent of forest area).h. Bee 1957.
Source: WRI 1991, except where noted. percent of all land or 2,894,537 hectares (Atai 1984). ESCAP (1990) estimates that 4.7 million hectares have been affected by swidden cultivation.
In Peninsular Malaysia, there are both migratory and settled swiddeners. The former usually prefer cutting primary forests, though the government does not allow the cueing of trees older than seven years in swidden cultivation. In Sarawak, swidden was practiced by the Ibans, who migrated to this area more than four centuries ago. Although they Cut primary forests at the beginning, the government encouraged them toward secondary forests until they finally developed as settled agriculturists.
Myanmar. People living in the hilly areas that cover about 50 percent of the country continue to practice shifting cultivation. They usually do so in the subtropical wet hill, subtropical moist hill, and subtropical hill savannah forests, and the pine forests of the Shan and Chin states All of these areas cover an estimated 181,000 hectares (Blower 1985).
Papua New Guinea. Large parts of the secondary forests of Papua New Guinea are under shifting cultivation. A typical swidden farm (called ganden) has fruit plants such as Pomeria pinnata and Artocarpus atillis in the top canopy; food crops such as cane sugar, bananas, and taro in the middle canopy; and yam as the undercover (Allen 1985). Usually the cultivation period is 18 months for yams and a few years for bananas, after which the land lies fallow for 30 years. The total area involved is about 200,000 hectares (Saulei 1990). ESCAP (1990) estimates the total area involved at 400,000 hectares.
Philippines. Swidden farming is concentrated in northern Luzon and Mindanao, where 64 percent of the total swiddening families are located. Cultivation is divided into two subtypes: partial and integral systems. The former can be incipient or supplementary, while the integral system may be pioneer and established swiddeners. The total area involved is estimat
ed from 200,000 hectares (ESCAP 1990) to 331,000 hectares or about 3.5 percent of the forest area (Saulei 1990).
Thailand. Swidden is practiced in northern and in central Thailand, by groups of three basic types. The first are the pioneer swiddeners who affect a substantial portion of primary forests and cultivate poppy as a cash crop in addition to their subsistence dry rice crop, which is planted on rugged slopes above 1,200 meters elevation. These pioneers do not cut big trees but often lop them to allow more sunlight to reach the forest floor. Cultivators include Chinese immigrants (the Yeo and the Meo) and the Tibeto-Burman speaking groups (Latu, Lisu and Aka). The second are the established swiddeners who include the Austroasiatic-speaking Lua, Khmu, Htin, and Karen. They farm on gentler slopes at low elevations. The third are the incipient swiddeners who have recently moved in close to permanent lowland villages and who practice swidden of a very destructive nature The total area under shifting cultivation has been estimated at 400,000 hectares (ESCAP 1990).
Summary. It is obvious from the above discussion that the total number of cultivators in Asia--while not accurately known--is large, that the area under this form of agriculture is significant, and that the nature of swidden varies from site to site.
<section>Impacts of swidden on forests</section>
Swidden cultivation has variable impacts on forests and on the surrounding land, depending on the length of the fallow period. The main impacts from long- and short-fallow swidden are described below.
<section>Long-fallow system</section>
When long-fallow swidden is practiced, the primary forests will change over time to secondary formation. A few specific examples of conversion to secondary forests are presented
in the following discussion.
The established swiddeners of North Thailand practice a short-cultivation long-fallow system in tropical evergreen forests and, with increasing population, also enter the hill evergreen forests (Grandstaff 1980). Dominant species in tropical evergreen forests are Dipterocurpus costatus and Dipterocarpus alatus. The hill evergreen forests are semi-temperate and are characterized by Quercus, Lithocarpus, and Castanopsis species. Cuning and burning of the primary forests quickly produce a host of weeds. In due course, stumps of cut trees coppice, the reserve of seeds in the forest floor germinate, and climbers (aggressive vines) also appear. If the fallow period is more than five years, pioneer species follow. The most conspicuous are Trema spp., Macaranga sp., and Musanga cecropioides. The pioneers in due course recover to a secondary forest formation.
Vegetational changes suhsequent to swidden cultivation have been studied in a swidden farm in Burnihat of the Meghalaya state of India (Ramakrishnan and Mishra 1981). The first species to appear are a host of weeds that include Eupatorium odoratum (also found in the Thailand highlands); grasses such as Imperata cylindrica, Sacharum spontaneum, Thysanolaena maxima; and climbers such as Mikenia sp. If the area continues to remain fallow and is not burned, the grasses are replaced by bamboos such as Melocanna babusioides, Bambusa tulda, Dendrocalamus longisparhus, and D. hamiltonii. If this vegetation remains undisturbed, secondary forests develop that include Schima wallichii, Pinus roxturghti, Shorea robusta, Terminalia bellerica, and so forth. The vegetation formation following swidden cultivation would thus be weedy shrubs, bamboos or secondary seral trees, depending on the length of fallow.
In Indonesia, upon forest felling, two stages of succession take place. At first, short lived herbs such as Trema-Blumea balsamifera-broma angustum establish; then, they are followed by secondary trees such as Trema spp., Macaranga tanarius, M. denticulata,
Callicarpa tomentosa and Melochia umbellata. Abandoned cultivated land in south Banten and Western Java is invaded first by Imperata, later by shrubs such as Melastoma malabaricum, Lantana sp., and then by Vitex, Crewia, and Dillenia.
Whitmore (1975) describes the succession in parts of Malaysia. On clearing, Paspalurn conjugatum grass association invades. This takes two different successional paths, depending on the treatment The site goes through. If the site is burned, Imperata cylindrica appears and with continued burning becomes a permanent feature. If the site is not burned, secondary growth takes place. Giant herbs such as banana and ginger and pioneer trees such as Trema spp. and Macaranga come along. On further protection, secondary species would appear. In about 30 years, a mixture of pioneer and successional species build up a mosaic of tree associations.
In Kepong, Peninsular Malaysia, a 0.9-acre plot laid out in 1947, has been studied for 30 years. The plot was intensively farmed for a period and then left fallow. The weed species that appeared were (first) Melastoma malabathricum, which was replaced by the fern Gleichenia linearis. The latter did not allow any other crop to grow for a while, but after 15 years about 15 other species overtopped the Gleichenia. By 1976 the number had grown to 51 species in the site (Kochummen and Ng 1 977).
Therefore, in a long-fallow swidden system, secondary forests grow during the fallow if it is of adequate duration. Although the initial forest structure is altered, the ecosystem may still function satisfactorily. If swidden is discontinued, even the climax forest is likely to grow in the long run,
<section>Short-fallow system</section>
It has been proved beyond doubt that forests are affected adversely in a variety of ways by short fallow swidden (Inoue and Labjie 1990).
In the initial stages, the forest composition changes from a high forest to a low-profile
secondary forest, as in the long-fallow system. Because of continued more-inte