<title>Irrigation-induced salinity - A growing problem for development and the environment</title>
Dina L. Umali
WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPER NUMBER 215
The World Bank
Washington, D.C.
Copyright © 1993
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing August 1993
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. Any maps that accompany the text have been prepared solely for the convenience of readers; the designations and presentation of material in them do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Bank, its affiliates, or its Board or member countries concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area or of the authorities thereof or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries or its national affiliation.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, 27 Congress Street, Salem, Massachusetts 01970, U.S.A.
The complete back list of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0253-7494
Dina L. Umali is a consultant in the Agricultural Technology and Services Division of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department of the World Bank.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Umali, Dina L.
Irrigation-induced salinity: a growing problem for development and the environment / Dina L. Umali. p. cm. -- (World Bank technical paper, ISSN 0253-7494; no. 215)
Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
ISBN 0-8213-2508-6
1. Irrigation--Environmental aspects.
2. Water salinization.
3. Soil salinization.
4. Water quality management.
5. Soil protection. I. Title. II. Series.
TD195.H93U43 1993
333.76'137 - dc20
CIP
<section>Abstract</section>
Irrigation has contributed significantly growth in agricultural production in many developing countries during the last century. However, irrigation-induced salinity is an increasing problem in several of these countries, threatening the productivity of agricultural lands. FAO (1990) reports that about 20 to 30 million hectares are severely affected by salinity and an additional 60 to 80 million hectares are affected to some extent. In some regions, the impact of salinity is felt across international borders. This report reviews the extent of the problem in various countries and examines the technical, economic, social, and institutional factors contributing to the onset of irrigation-induced salinity. It subsequently reviews the array of strategies that can be pursued to ameliorate the problem. The report finds that poor water management (e.g. over application by farmers, excessive seepage throughout the irrigation system, absence of or inadequacy of drainage
infrastructures) is the primary cause of irrigation-induced salinity. Although salinity is a technical problem, it is also the product of several other factors. Distortive government policies contribute to inefficient water use, and poor project planning and implementation leads to the rapid deterioration of infrastructures. In some cases, the lack of or weak understanding of the problem or the lack of or weak commitment to environmental protection by public officials and policy-makers contributed to the spreading problem of salinity.
The battle against salinity has to be launched in three fronts. Governments have to commit to a policy of sound water management and to the fostering of an economic environment that promotes efficient water resource use, e.g. appropriate pricing of irrigation water. At the same time, country agricultural strategies should incorporate measures to promote the adoption of environmentally sound production methods, particularly efficient water-use among farmers. Greater effort also has to be directed towards the analysis of the environmental impact of projects that involve water resource use and development to ensure that only economically and environmentally sound projects are undertaken.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
I wish to thank Theodore Herman, Peter Streng, Herve Plusquellec, Ashok Subramanian (IPTRID), Thomas Brabben (IPTRID), Professor Lyman Willardson (Utah State University) and the participants of the Ninth Annual World Bank Irrigation and Drainage Seminar held in Annapolis, Maryland on December 8-10, 1992, for their valuable comments on previous drafts of this report. Barry Yatman's assistance in compiling the World Bank irrigation and drainage project and investment figures is also very much appreciated.
My special thanks to Shawki Barghouti for his commitment to and support of this study and to Lambert Smedema, Walter Ochs, William Easter, Jeremy Berkoff and Alfred Duda for the insightful discussions and helpful suggestions, which all helped to make this a better study.
Any errors remain the responsibility of the author.
<section>Foreword</section>
During the last century, irrigation has enabled the considerable expansion of cultivated land and the intensification of production, contributing significantly to the output increases achieved by many developing countries. Although urban and population pressures on agricultural areas continued to increase, the adoption of new high yielding varieties, greater use of fertilizers, and the expansion of irrigation spurred substantial rates of growth in agricultural production, offsetting the spiralling demands for food. Irrigation, thus, remains one of the potent forces for agricultural development. The continued intensive cultivation of many irrigated farm areas during the last century, however, was not without cost. It has also resulted in serious environmental degradation in many countries, including irrigation-induced salinity, waterlogging, soil erosion, and water pollution. These problems increasingly threaten the sustainability of irrigated agriculture in both developed
and developing countries.
This study on irrigation-induced salinity was initiated in response to the growing concern in the World Bank regarding the environmental impact of agricultural projects and the need to promote environmentally sound and sustainable agricultural development. Shawki Barghouti, former chief of the Agricultural Production and Services Division of AGR, was instrumental in motivating the preparation of this report. This report is designed to promote a greater understanding of the nature of irrigation induced salinity by drawing on the experiences from irrigation development projects supported by national governments and the World Bank. It examines the technical, economic, social and institutional factors contributing to the onset of irrigation-induced salinity, and reviews the array of strategies that can be pursued to ameliorate it. The study confirms that sustainable water resource management requires a comprehensive strategy emphasizing economic pricing, financial
accountability, fuller participation of stakeholders, and greater attention to environmental concerns, and whose successful fulfillment will require the strong commitment and efforts of farmers, governments and donors.
Michel Petit
Director
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Department
<section>Table of contents</section>
<section>Summary</section>
Irrigation has been and continues to be an important force in agricultural development. Irrigation enabled the expansion of cultivable land and the intensification of production, which spawned sizable production increases in both developed and developing countries. For some developing countries, its contribution to the attainment of development objectives of food security, poverty alleviation, and the improvement of the quality of life of the rural population has been significant.
The sustainability of irrigated agriculture, however, is now threatened. The expanded dependence on irrigation has not been without cost: salinity and waterlogging, soil erosion and sedimentation, the spread of disease-carrying organisms, and water pollution are a few of the serious problems that have gone hand-inhand with irrigation. UNEP (1987) estimated that the rate of loss of agricultural land is approximately 5-7 million ha per year and overall, salinization is the second major cause of such losses. In irrigated areas, it is the primary cause. As the Hydraulics Research Ltd. (1990, p. 1) reports, "...FAO earlier predicted that...[the area] under irrigation in the world will expand to 320 million ha by the year 2000. For many years, the rate of growth has been 5 million ha per year, but recently it has fallen to 2 million ha per year. However, this growth is counteracted by 2-3 million ha going out of production each year due to salinity problems-this means that
cultivated land is being lost at a similar rate to new land being brought into production..
This report describes the process by which irrigation-induced salinity develops and the extent of the problem in various countries. It examines the physical, economic, social, and political factors that spur the onset of salinity, drawing on the experiences in World Bank projects. It explores the role that: farmers, the government and donor agencies can play in dealing with the problem of irrigation-induced salinity.
Irrigation-induced salinity can arise as a result of the use of any irrigation water, irrigation of saline soils, and rising levels of saline ground water. When surface or ground water containing mineral salts is used for irrigating crops, salts are carried into the root zone. Most of the water returns to the atmosphere through transpiration by plants and through evaporation from the soil surface. In the process, the salt is left behind in the soil, since the amount taken up by plants and removed at harvest is quite negligible. The more arid the region, the larger is the quantity of irrigation water and, consequently, the salts applied, and the smaller is the quantity of rainfall that is available to leach away the accumulating salts. The amount of salt which accumulates is further influenced by the water table depth, the capillary characteristics of the soil, and the management decisions regarding the amount of water applied in excess of plant evapo-transpiration to leach
the salt away (Young and Homer 1986).
Although plants can tolerate and even require certain levels of salinity for growth, excess salinity within the root zone reduces plant growth. Moreover, different crops exhibit varying degrees of tolerance to salinity. For example, clover and rice are more sensitive to salts than barley and wheat. For rice, a salinity level of 7.2 dS/m will result in a 50 percent yield loss, while it will have no effect at all on barley. The impact of irrigation-related salinity is not restricted to the production areas alone. For example, the disposal of saline drainage water back into rivers have adverse effects on downstream riparians. In some regions, the effects are felt across international borders.
Very limited research has been done to empirically quantify the economic impact of irrigation induced salinity. Quantitativs measurements have generally been limited to the amount of land affected or abandoned. Of more critical importance is its impact at the micro-level on farm productivity and farm incomes and at the macro-level on the performance of the rural sector. The Secretaria de Agricultura y Recursos Hidraulicos (SARH, Secretariat of Agriculture and Water Resources, cited in World Bank 1991c) of Mexico found that agricultural productivity in the Northwest districts and Lerma Balsas region decreased between 30 to 50 percent in the last ten years due to salinity. In the Menemem irrigation and drainage project in Izmir, Turkey, the average net returns per ha for cotton and paddy production were TL307 and TL415 respectively in the salinity affected areas, which is equivalent 42 and 35 percent of the income in the unaffected areas (Republic of Turkey 1990).
The FAO report, An International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development. A Strategy for the Implementation of the Mar del Plate Action Plan of the 1990s (1990, p. 15) estimates that "...about 20 to 30 million hectares are severely affected by salinity and an additional 60 to 80 million hectares are affected to some extent.. Estimates of the area affected have ranged from 10 to 48 percent of total irrigated area. Clearly, the countries in the arid and semi-arid regions that ranked high in irrigation investments have extensive salinity problems: salinity-affected areas as a percentage total irrigated area amount to 11 percent in India, 21 percent in Pakistan, 10 percent in Mexico, 23 percent in China, and 28 percent in the United States. In the case of India, for example, 11 percent translates to 4.7 million ha, and given the generally small farm sizes, this translates to thousands of farm households: 100,000 households assuming an average farm size
of 5 ha. The newly-formed Central Asian Republics in the Aral Basin--Kazakhstan (17%), Turkmenistan (48%), and Uzbekistan (24%)-also exhibit serious salinity problems. In other regions, the effects are felt across international borders. The increasing use of the Euphrates system by Syria and Turkey not only reduces the flow of the river to Iraq, but is also contributing to degradation of water quality (higher salinity) for the downstream riparian (Keenan 1992b). Similar problems are being encountered in Israel and Jordan with respect to the Jordan River and the United States and Mexico with respect to the Colorado River (Keenan 1992b; Schilfgaarde 1992).
The Operations Evaluation Division (QED) of the World Bank reviewed 21 projects that were approved between 1961 and 1978 and completed in 1970-86. These comprised medium- and large-scale public irrigation systems which were typical of the Bank's lending policy for irrigation projects in the 1960s and 1970s. The OED evaluation found that more than half the 21 projects were very successful but had some degree of adverse impact on the environment (World Bank l991b). Increasing waterlogging problems were found in 11 projects and soil salinity problems were found in four (Pyongtaek-Kumgang Irrigation Project in Korea, the Seyhan Irrigation Project in Turkey, the San Lorenzo Project Irrigation and Land Settlement project in Peru and the Rio Sinaloa Project in Mexico), caused mainly by poor drainage. The drainage network was insufficient or incomplete in half of the 21 projects.
Although irrigation-induced salinity is a technical problem, the factors contributing to its existence are a complex web of technical, economic, political, and social elements. At the technical level, irrigation induced salinity has developed in some areas due to: (i) poor on-farm water use efficiency; (ii) poor construction, operation and maintenance of irrigation canals leading to excessive seepage; (iii) the inadequacy or lack of drainage infrastructure; and (iv) even when drainage structures are provided, their poor quality of construction, operation and maintenance. These technical problems, however, maybe the product of several other factors. Distortive government policies lead to inefficient use of water resources. In the case of irrigation water, it is frequently priced below its true economic value, thus leading to overapplication. Water use efficiency is further aggravated by a lack of awareness of farmers of more efficient and water application methods and poor
water management by irrigation authorities. Off-farm, excessive irrigation and drainage canal seepage can be traced to ineffective project planning, poor quality of construction, and inadequate monitoring and maintenance, which lead to rapid infrastructural deterioration. In some cases, no provision for drainage is made at all. These weaknesses in the planning and implementation of irrigation and drainage projects can stem from the shortsighted perspectives assumed by many policy makers. Often, there is a lack of or weak understanding of the consequences of inaction or at the extreme, weak or lack of commitment to environmental protection. In the presence of competing demands for financial resources, priority is directed to other areas other than salinity abatement. At the same time, donor agencies have inadvertently contributed to the problem. Weaknesses in donor project planning and supervision and, not until recently, the inadequate priority to environmental consequences
of projects, have similarly contributed to the problem.
In summary, poor project planning and implementation, scarce financial resources of governments in many countries to undertake corrective measures, the short-term outlook and inadequate priority assigned to agricultural sustainability and environmental protection by policymakers, and the inability of donor agencies to ensure adherence to project plans all contribute to the advent of salinity. The technologies exist to ameliorate or eliminate the problem and delays in taking action will only escalate the economic, social, and environmental damage and the cost of repairing such damage. In light of the externalities associated with corrective measures, governments will have to play a major role in correcting or alleviating salinity problems. Donor agencies will also have an important role in enhancing the capacities of governments to do so.
The battle against salinity will have to be launched in three fronts. Governments have to commit to a policy of sound water management and to the fostering of an economic environment promoting efficient resource use. At the same time, agricultural strategies should promote the adoption of improved production methods, particularly efficient water-use practices among farmers. Lastly, greater effort has to be directed at examining the environmental impact of projects that involve water resource use and development to ensure that only economically and environmentally sound projects are undertaken.
As the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) wisely describes it, ..."development which destroys the natural resources on which it is based is not development. (cited in FAO, 1990, p. 6). It is widely recognized that irrigation has been a powerful force in fostering development in many countries. But when it is pursued injudiciously, it can become the progenitor of agricultural devastation, embodied in form of irrigation-induced salinity. Irrigation-induced salinity has began to cause drastic reductions in agricultural productivity in many parts of the world and the time has come for farmers, governments and donors to take it seriously.
<section>Introduction 1</section>
Irrigation has been and continues to be an important force in agricultural development. The expansion of cultivable land and the intensification of production achieved through the use of irrigation have contributed to substantial production increases worldwide. For developing countries, its contribution to the attainment of development objectives of food security, poverty alleviation, and the improvement of the quality of life of the rural population has been significant.
During the mid-60s to the mid-80s, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that the expansion of irrigation accounted for over 50 percent of the increase in global food production (cited by World Bank-UNDP, 1990, p.3). Although irrigated area accounted for only 17 percent of global cropland in 1986, it accounted for more than one-third of total world food production. In fact, almost 60 percent of rice and 40 percent of wheat production in developing countries is on irrigated land (World Bank-UNDP, 1990). In India, where irrigation has been widely used prior to the 1950s, the contribution of irrigation has approached 100 percent (Frederiksen, 1989), while in the United States, about 25 percent of the value of agricultural production is grown on approximately 10 percent of the land as a result of irrigation (van Schilfgaarde, 1990).
World irrigated area grew more than 250 percent from 94 million ha in 1950 to 237 million ha in 1990 (World Bank-UNDP, 1990; FAO 1991). Five countries: China, India, the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the United States, and Pakistan accounted for almost two-thirds of irrigated area (Figure 1.1). Seventy-three percent is situated in developing countries, with China, India, and Pakistan accounting for 45 percent of the world total or 62 percent of the developing country total. Indonesia, Iran, and Mexico are the second three most important developing countries in terms of irrigated hectarage (FAO 1991).
The "sustainability of irrigated agriculture, however, now faces a growing ride. The expanded dependence on irrigation has not been without cost. Salinity and waterlogging, soil erosion and sedimentation, the spread of disease-carrying organisms, and water pollution are a few of the serious problems that have gone band-in-hand with irrigation. UNEP (1987) estimated that the rate of loss of agricultural land is approximately 5-7 million ha per year and overall, salinization is the second major cause of such losses. In irrigated areas, it is the primary cause.
As the Hydraulics Research Ltd. (1990, p.1) reports, ....FAO earlier predicted that...[the area] under irrigation in the world will expand to 320 million ha by the year 2000. For many years, the rate of growth has been 5 million ha per year, but recently it has fallen to 2 million ha per year. However, this growth is counteracted by 2-3 million ha going out of production each year due to salinity problems this means that cultivated land is being lost at a similar rate to new land being brought into production." Indeed, the same countries who have invested heavily in irrigation infrastructure are not having to deal with serious salinity problems.
Irrigation-induced salinity is without question an issue which had merited limited attention in the past. Amidst spiralling demands for greater agricultural production to meet the growing demand of exponentially increasing populations, the potential reduction in agricultural productivity due to salinity cannot be left unresolved. In seeking to contain, and if possible reverse, the damaging impact of salinity, several concerns move to the forefront. How extensive is the area affected by irrigation-induced salinity? What are the factors that contribute to the problem? What options are available for solving these salt related problems? What role can farmers, the government, and donor agencies play in alleviating these problems?
This study explores the answers to these questions. The study is divided into five sections. The following section describes the process by which irrigation-induced salinity develops, while section 3 surveys the extent of the problem in various countries. Section 4 examines the physical, economic, social, and political factors that spur the onset of salinity problems by drawing from experiences from World Bank projects. Finally, section 5 presents the major findings of the study and examines the role that farmers, the government and donor agencies can play in dealing with the problem of irrigation induced salinity.
<section>The nature and impact of irrigation-induced salinity</section>
The provision of irrigation water, particularly in arid and semi-arid areas, is one of the most important factors in the expansion of agricultural production and increasing productivity of cultivated lands. However, the onset of salinity problems in irrigated areas threatens the progress that has been made so far. In order to gain a better understanding of the problem, this section examines how soil salinity and alkalinity come about.
<section>Nature of irrigation-induced salinity</section>
Water serves as the vehicle by which salt is transported into and out of the root zone. The amount of water in the root zone is a function of the level of rainfall, irrigation applied, seepage from irrigation canals, and drainage; the rate of evaporation and transpiration; the depth of the water table; and the area's proximity and elevation relative to natural bodies of water. Figure 2.1 represents the cross section of an irrigated valley and vertical water movement in the soil profile. The salt content in the root zone of plants is therefore controlled by the difference between the volume and salt concentration of the water supplied to the production area and the volume and salt concentration of the water discharged from the same area. This can be expressed by the following relation:
- D[c]C[d] - S[p] - S[c]
Irrigation-induced salinity can arise as a result of the use of any irrigation water, irrigation of saline soils, and rising levels of saline ground water. When surface or ground water containing mineral salts is used for irrigating crops, salts are carried into the root zone. Most of the water returns to the atmosphere through transpiration by plants and through evaporation from the soil surface. In the process, the salt is left behind in the soil, since the amount taken up by plants and removed at harvest is quite negligible. The more arid the region, the larger is the quantity of irrigation water and, consequently, the salts applied, and the smaller is the quantity of rainfall that is available to leach away the accumulating salts. The amount of salt which accumulates is further influenced by the water table depth, the capillary characteristics of the soil, and the management decisions regarding the amount of water applied in excess of plant evapotranspiration to leach
the salt away (Young and Homer 1986).
In many arid and semi-arid areas, the soil strata are naturally saline. When these areas are developed for irrigation, the salt in the soil is mobilized by seepage water from canals and irrigation. If the volume of water applied is less than the volume of water needed to leach the salt away, the salt concentration at the root zone increases. In some cases, application of irrigation water results in rising saline ground water levels. When the watertable approaches the bottom of the root zone, capillary action results in the salinization of the root zone and the surface soil.
<section>Alkalinity: a related problem</section>
A problem closely related to the problem of irrigation-induced salinity is that of alkalinity or sodicity; its impact is manifested by the degradation of the soil structure. The application of irrigation water to areas with abundant salts (common in arid and semi-arid areas) and more than 15% exchangeable sodium lead to the formation of "alkaline. or "sodic" soils, through the process of alkaline hydrolysis. If the soil has a low chloride and calcium content and if the soil and/or irrigation water applied have abundant exchangeable sodium bicarbonate and/or sodium carbonate (over 15% exchangeable sodium), the clay particles in the soil adsorb the sodium and magnesium salts and swell. The soil loses its permeability (ability to conduct air and water) and filth (friability of the seedbed). When this occurs, water infiltration is hindered and plant roots/soil organism may be starved of oxygen (Rhoades 1990; Barrow, 1991).
Alkalinity may also induce calcium deficiency and various other micro-nutrient deficiencies because of the associated high pH and bicarbonate levels repress their solubilities and concentrations (Kijne and Vander Velde 1992). The addition of gypsum to the soil surface or to the irrigation water help to prevent or alleviate the problems of infiltration and seed emergence. In this study, alkalinity is also considered as an irrigation-induced salinity problem.
<section>Effects of salts on plants</section>
Although plants can tolerate and even require certain levels of salinity for growth, excessive salinity within the root zone reduces plant growth. A high salt concentration in the soil water can have both a physical and chemical effect on plants. Generally, the excess salts increase the energy that the plant must expend to acquire water from the soil and undertake the biochemical adjustments necessary to survive. Energy is diverted from the physiological processes necessary for plant growth, including cell enlargement and the synthesis of metabolites and structural compounds (Rhoades 1990a). At very high salinity levels, the osmotic potential outside the plant root falls below that of the osmotic potential inside the root and results in osmotic desiccation and wilting of the plant (Maas and Nieman 1978; Lauchli and Epstein 1990).
A soil salinity problem also implies the presence of high concentrations of certain ions, particularly sodium and chloride, relative to other ions. High concentration of some ions can obstruct the absorption of other essential elements, such as potassium or calcium that are readily available to plants at lower saline concentrations, thereby leading to critical nutrient deficiencies. Furthermore, the high concentration of certain ions, such as chloride, can have toxic effects on plants. Often, the toxic effects are indistinguishable from impact of nutrient deficiency (Läuchli and Epstein 1990).
Plant growth is suppressed when a threshold concentration value of salinity is exceeded. The threshold value is a function of the type of crop, the stage of plant growth, the irrigation method and frequency, and a combination of environmental (temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed) and edaphic (soil structure, soil fertility, and salt distribution in the soil profile) factors. The deleterious effect of salinity on plant development escalates as the salt concentration increases to the point of being lethal to the plant. Most plants are relatively salt-tolerant during germination and more sensitive during seedling emergence and early stages of seedling growth. Differences in salt tolerance for the same plant growth stage even occurs between different varieties of the same species. Rootstocks affect salt tolerances of trees and vine crops because they regulate the uptake and transfusion of toxic salts to the shoots. The type of irrigation method, for example sprinkler
irrigation, increases the potential damage due to foliar salt uptake and leaf burns resulting from spray contact of the foliage. The type of climate is a also major factor affecting salt tolerance because most crops can tolerate greater salt stress if the weather is cool and humid than if it is hot and dry (Maas 1990).
Maas and Hoffman (1977) estimated the salt tolerance of several crops using the following equation:
Y[r]= 100 - b (EC[c] - a)
where Y[r] is the percentage yield of the crop grown under saline conditions relative to the yield under nonsaline conditions; a is the threshold level of soil salinity at which yield begins to decline; b is the percentage of yield loss per unit increase in salinity in excess of a; and EC, is the soil salinity of a saturation extract measured in decisiemens per meter (dS/m). The toxic effects of specific ions, however, are not defined by this formula. Table 2.1 lists the salt tolerance threshold of selected crops and the salinity levels that will lead to yield losses of 10, 25 and 50 percent based on the formula developed by Maas and Hoffman (1977). Different crops exhibit varyin