<title>Medicinal Plants: An Expanding Role in Development</title>
Jitendra Srivastava, John Lambert, and Noel Vietmeyer
The World Bank Washington, D.C.
Copyright © 1996
The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing April 1996
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 910, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
The complete back list of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna, 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0253-7494
ISBN: 0-213-3613-4
Jitendra P. Srivastava is Principal Agriculturalist in the Agricultural and Natural Resources Department of the World Bank. John Lambert is professor of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada. Noel Vietmeyer is Senior Program Officer, Office of International Affairs, National Research Council, Washington, D.C..
Library of Congress Cataloging - in - Publication Data
Srivastava, Jitendra, 1940
Medicinal plants: an expanding role in development /Jitendra
Srivastava, John Lambert, and Noel Vietmeyer. p. cm.--(World Bank technical paper; no. 320)
ISBN 0-8213-3613-4
1. Materia medica, Vegetable.
2. Medicinal plants-Government policy.
3. Social medicine.
I. Lambert, John, 1938- .
II. Vietmeyer, Noel, 1940- . m. Title. IV. Series.
RS164.S73 1996
615'.32--dc20
96-13421 CIP
<section>Foreword</section>
This short concept paper is intended to serve as a preliminary exploration of the subject of medicinal plants in their role as biological resources. Various organizations among them the World Health Organization and the World Bank's own Human Development Department--are involved with issues surrounding the efficacy, safety and general health merits of healing plants. We concern ourselves only with ways and means of achieving and/or maintaining sustainable production of plant species already accepted for healthcare purposes.
It is a reality of many countries that millions of people employ plants they consider to have healing or preventative properties. Whatever the level of proven efficacy, these plants are economic resources of our times. Yet although millions of dollars are invested in supporting food and other crops, little or nothing is spent on supporting the world's medicinal-plant resource base.
The present paper is a step toward determining if this imbalance in priorities is justified. By concentrating on the agricultural potential, we hope to assist countries and development agencies in better dealing with their natural resource, human development, and general healthcare efforts.
This review has been jointly funded by the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department and the Research Support Budget of the World Bank.
Alexander F. McCalla
Director- Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
<section>Abstract</section>
Medicinal plants are commonly used in treating and preventing specific ailments and diseases and are considered to play a beneficial role in health care. Despite their importance, medicinal plants are seldom handled within an organized regulated sector; most are still exploited with little or no regard to the future. The paper outlines the importance and usage of medicinal plants in health care, national conservation activities m selected countries and in World Bank development projects. The final section focuses on developing country strategy needs for implementing policies covering medicinal plant conservation, cultivation processing and marketing. Medicinal plants are viewed as a possible bridge between sustainable economic development, affordable health care and conservation of vital biodiversity.
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
The authors wish to thank Alexander McCalla and Douglas Fomo for their support and encouragement and Robin Porter, Sector Library, World Bank for her efforts in locating and obtaining many of the documents reviewed for the paper. They would also like to thank V. Mackrandilal AF2AG, R Goodland, ENVDR; C. Mackinnon, ENVGC; J. Parrotta, AGRAF; and K. Shawe, NRL UK for their helpful comments on earlier drafts.
Partial financial support from the Research Support Budget of the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged. Sole responsibility for the content of the paper rests with the authors.
<section>Executive summary</section>
In virtually every developing nation, plants are used in medical practice. But now, as a result of rising numbers of people and of an aging populace, many medically important species are becoming scarce; some are facing the prospect of extinction. In India, for instance, providers to the indigenous health care systems have begun recognizing that supplies of raw plant materials cannot be guaranteed. As a precaution, they now require producers to deliver two year's supply in advance. As a further precaution, some are establishing farms specifically to cultivate medicinals.
Such experiences are by no means limited to India, and they serve to raise an alarm. As noted, most developing countries depend on plants for their traditional forms of medicine. Alternative sources of health care are unavailable for many of their peoples. What should be done to assure future supplies?
Despite the potential for disaster, few of the vulnerable medicinal species are today protected by conservation legislation. The new Global Biodiversity Strategy should be a help in protecting such a resource. However, until recently it was focused primarily on protected natural reserves, ignoring agricultural, marginal, and degraded lands, all of which are important sites of threatened medicinal-plant biodiversity.
Although the World Health Organization and other health-oriented institutions have supported medicinal-plant projects, the international development community at large has not addressed the issue of medicinal plants in the overall framework of natural resources. As of now, for instance, few developing countries or economic assistance organizations have any policy or strategy that addresses their roles, present or potential, in dealing with medicinal plants.
This neglect could be serious. Many seemingly unrelated projects--those dealing with conventional agriculture, forestry, land reclamation, rainforest protection and infrastructure development, for instance--affect medicinally important wild species. In addition, such high-value botanic resources might have immense value in development projects. In fact, medicinal plants may contribute to the success of future programs dealing with such diverse subjects as agriculture, forestry, biodiversity conservation, health care, and social and economic sustainability.
A successful strategy for medicinal species will involve economic, agricultural, social and environmental inputs. For this reason, the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department of the World Bank is undertaking an evaluation of the present situation and the likely future needs of the medicinal species. The present document is just a small first step. Its purpose is to elicit comment and suggestions for the main paper, yet to come. This second review will focus primarily on three countries, analyzing and drawing lessons from their separate approaches to the regulation and development of medicinally important plants. From that, it is hoped, will come important lessons for all nations.
<section>1. Introduction</section>
Despite all the progress in synthetic chemistry and biotechnology, plants are still an indispensable source of medicinal preparations, both preventive and curative. Hundreds of species are recognized as having medicinal value, and many of those are commonly used to treat and prevent specific ailments and diseases.
At least four out of every five of those plants are collected from the wild, most from the floras of developing countries. Medicinal properties may be present in one or all of their parts: root, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit or seed.
While in industrialized countries health providers have reduced their dependence on the Plant Kingdom, the majority of developing countries still rely on herbal remedies. However, in a complete turn-around, modern science and Western medicine are getting interested in the healing herbs once more (Eisenberg, et. al., 1993; Grunwald, 1994). Indeed, "phytomedicines", are beginning to link traditional (homeopathic) medicine and modern (allopathic) medicine. As a result of the new openness from leading industrialized nations, a wealth of technical information is now coming available, notably from sophisticated laboratories who are analyzing herbal ingredients and their effects with the latest technologies.
<section>Definition</section>
In the past a number of definitions for the term medicinal plant have been offered. and Soejarto (1991) imply that it is only when medicinal properties are proven by Western research should a species be labeled a "'medicinal plant." Fellows (1991), on the other hand, suggests that the term indicates merely a species known to beneficially modulate the physiology of sick mammals, and that has been used by mankind.
For present purposes, we are employing the following definition:
Medicinal plants are those that are commonly used in treating and preventing specific ailments and diseases, and that are generally considered to play a beneficial role in health care.
<section>World Trade</section>
Medicinal plants are already important to the global economy. In 1980, for instance, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated the world trade at US$500 million. Moreover, as above noted, demand is steadily increasing not only in developing countries but also in the industrialized nations. In both Europe and North America, for example, the demand is being fueled by an outburst of consumer interest in products that are "all-natural" as well as by aggressive marketing of herbal remedies (Lewington, 1993).
Box 1: Growth of a Global Industry
Herbal Medicine Sales
Annual Growth Rates by Region (%)
Region
Million US$
Region
EU
EU
Rest of Europe
Rest of Europe
Asia
SE Asia
Japan
Japan
North America
India/Pakistan
Total
This rising global interest is now creating burgeoning legitimate and "'underground', trades in plant materials, many of which are already being routinely moved around the world. Most samples are collected in developing countries in a completely unregulated manner. In Nepal, for instance, numbers of medicinal plants are being uprooted and sold as raw products to India, where they are graded, packaged and exported (Edwards, 1993).
<section>Usage in Developing Nations</section>
WHO estimates that approximately 80% of the developing world's population meet their primary health care needs through traditional medicine (Bannerman, 1982). Many different systems exist: the Ayurvedic, Unani, and Siddhi in India; the Kampo in Japan, the Jamu in Indonesia; and more.
In China, plant-based medicine is the backbone of the health care for perhaps a billion people; botanicals are used for the primary health care needs of 40% of China's urban patients and over 90% of its rural patients. In the traditional decoctions as well as in the officially decreed medicines, huge quantities of plant materials are used. Indeed, the annual demand has been reported to exceed 700,000 tons (Xiso-Pei-gen, 1991). The economic value is also huge. In 1987, for instance, China's traditional plant remadies were valued at US$571 million, and its country-vide sale of crude plant drugs was put at $1.4 billion (Li Chaojin, 1987).
Box 2: The Mongoose Knows
Before a mongoose attacks a snake, reported the botanist Rumphius in the 1700s, it fortifies it self by eating the leaves of the serpent-root plant. And if a mongoose gets bitten, it seeks out the serpent root, eats the leaves, rolls around three or four times, rests a little as if drugged; then, regaining strength, rushes back to the attack.
Maybe there is nothing to this story from the great naturalist who lived his life in what is now Indonesia, but since 1949 the serpent root's magical powers has certainly excited the world's medical establishment. That year the British Heart Journal reported that the plant is `'clinically effective for treating high blood pressure." Three years later, Swiss researchers discovered that a chemical in the root, is an antihypertensive and sedative. Called reserpine, it became the world's first tranquilizer, thereby opening up a vast new field of therapy, previously unsuspected.
Reserpine extracted from the roots of various species of Rauvolfia is now known to not only calm the central nervous system but to lower blood-pressure and control heart-beat arrhythmia. Most of it comes from India, where the powdered root has been in use for at least 2000 years, notably for treating mental illness. Not until 1952, when reserpine was isolated from the raw plant extract, did its use in Western medicine begin to take off. Nowadays, the drug is mainly used to control high blood pressure but it is still one of the most effective tranquilizers, and makes the lives of millions of schizophrenics far more bearable.
In the 3 5 years since the serpent root gave the world its first tranquilizer, this wild Asian plant and its botanical relatives in Africa have risen to become of major economic and medical importance. Already by 1961, the consumer market for prescription drugs from serpent-root species exceeded US$100 million in the United States alone. These days, more than 22 million prescriptions for reserpine and 5 million for serpent-root extracts are dispensed annually in the U.S In addition, 2 million prescriptions for combinations of serpent root and other drugs are filled each year.
All this goes to show that the mongoose probably knew what it was doing. Rumphius's story offered a provocative lead to a breakthrough in medicine, but it took us 200 years to realize it. And hundreds of other provocative leads and a lot of healing power remains in plants still to be explored. Hopefully, people will get to investigate them soon, or it may be too late; the plants just may not be around anymore
In South Asia the situation is similar. There, some 800 million people (out of a total population of ova one billion) rely on herbal medicines. In India, for instance, traditional health systems run parallel to the modern health-care sector. Officially recognized and fully sanctioned by the government, these traditional systems (such as Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Tibetan) are comparable to the modern one in their degree of organization and research. Indian records estimate that the traditional health sector encompasses 55,000 licensed pharmacies, 13,770 dispensaries, 7,000 licensed manufacturing units, 16,990 hospitals, 98 Ayurvedic colleges, and 400,000 registered practitioners (versus 332,000 registered physicians). India,s traditional health sector actually accounts for an estimated 35 million persondays of employment annually and therefore is an important income generator.
<section>Usage in Industrialized Nations</section>
Different levels of medicinal-plant usage are found in different industrialized countries, but all the levels are surprisingly high. For example, the German herbal-product market in 1989 was estimated at US$1.7 billion. And of the 500 million prescriptions written each year in the United States one in four is reported to involve a pharmaceutical derived from a leafy plant, an amount estimated in 1990 to be worth US$11 billion a year. Furthermore, almost all countries have a second outlet for plant-derived pharmaceuticals: non-prescription drugs. Many laxatives, cough and cold preparations, and over-the-counter sleep remedies come from plants.
The natural products in these prescriptions and over-the-counter preparations include:
1 quinidine, suppresser of out-of-sequence heartbeats from the bark of Cinchona sp.;
2 quinine, antimalarial from Cinchona sp.;
3 pilocarpine, glaucoma treatment from Brazilian Pilocarpus sp.;
4 picrotoxin, used worldwide as a nervous system stimulant from Anamirta sp.;
5 L-Dopa, treating Parkinson's disease form Mucuna sp.;
6 bromelain, anti-inflammatory from pineapple Ananas sp.;
7 scopolamine, sedative from Datura sp.;
8 digitalin and digoxin, heart drugs from foxglove Digitalis sp.;
9 atropine, powerful pupil-dilator from belladonna Atropa sp.;
10 curare, muscle relaxant (notably used in surgery) from Chondrodendron sp.;
11 ephedrine, decongestant from Chinese Ephedra sp.;
12 ipecac, emetic and dysentery cure from Central American Cephaelis spp.; and
13 sennosides, laxative from Senna spp.
Some of these therapeutic compounds are now easier or cheaper to synthesize in industrial facilities. However, in the above list, numbers 1-7 are extracted from plant sources while those listed in numbers 8-13 can be produced synthetically but in developing countries at least still come mainly from the plant sources (Famsworth and Soejarto, 1991).
When the overall benefits to society are taken into account, the value of plant-derived pharmaceuticals is even more surprising. Principe (1991) estimates the total economic value to the United States to be at the very least $68 billion annually. In other words, when the improvements in people's health and capacities are factored in, the country reaps a financial dividend about six times the already large market value of the plant products themselves.
<section>2. The resource base</section>
The number of plants that are used medicinally is very large. The Natural Products Alert (NAPRALERT) database at the University of Illinois has documented the ethnomedicinal uses for more than 9,000 species, including monocotyledons, dicotyledons, gymnosperms, pteridophytes, bryophytes and lichens Farnsworth and Soejarto, 1991). The number officially sanctioned due to proven efficacy is less, but still impressive. India, for example, formally recognizes just over 2,500 species as having true medicinal value (Jain and DeFilipps, 1991). In the Third World as a whole, it is estimated that over 6,000 plants are authorized in traditional medicine (Huxley, 1984). This is perhaps an underestimate because Chinese traditional medicine alone employs an estimated 5,000 officially sanctioned plants (Farnsworth and Soejarto 1991).
The number of plant-derived compounds known to be pharmacologically active is also large. Worldwide, at least 121 chemical substances of known structure are extracted and purified for medicinal purposes (Anon, 1982). A much larger number of raw, extracts are used in traditional medical practices. Although these are not purified into separate compounds, many are believed to exert therapeutic effects good enough to be proven effective by modern analysis.
<section>Uncontrolled Exploitation</section>
Despite all their importance, medicinal plants are, for the moment at least, seldom handled within an organized, regulated sector; most are still exploited with little or no regard to the future. As noted, escalating consumer demand is already resulting in the indiscriminate harvest of wild plants. This is damaging both ecosystems and their precious biodiversity. The damage is especially serious when bark roots, seeds and flowers all essential for the species, survival--are removed.
Concern is growing that many medicinal plants (not to mention the knowledge about their use) are on the verge of extinction. The need to protect rare medicinal plants seems to be urgent. Samples collected today may in the future be found to combat dreaded diseases, but there is no guarantee that the plant will then still exist. This could be unfortunate not only for the patients but for the countries that could develop lucrative industries out of the budding resource.
China's situation gives some sense of the scope of this problem. There, more than 80% of the 700,000 tons of plant material harvested each year comes from wild sources. The destruction of forests, overgrazing of meadows, expansion of industry, and increasing urbanization, as well as the excessive collection of wild plants all mean that the natural sources of medicines for a billion people are being rapidly reduced.
In country after country, reducing exploitation rates is clearly necessary if vulnerable wild populations are to survive, let alone to recover. A look at the legislation regarding harvesting and trading indicates that it is ineffective as it now stands. New policies and rigid enforcement are needed.
Although it is obvious that the economic value of medicinal plants is enormous, the true size of the sector is undetermined. Data are scarce or non-existent; detailed information on medicinal plants is seldom collected (and in some cases deliberately so). As a result of the uncertainty, no conservation action has been taken for most of the threatened species.
<section>National Conservation Activities</section>
Despite the fact that not much is being done to conserve medicinal plants, a few governments are trying to protect some local species. Their efforts include improving the methods of collection as well as the deliberate cultivation of the plants. The goal is normally to ensure proper quality control and to regulate commerce for the protection of both producer and consumer. These few governments are also involved in educating their populations and in creating greater awareness of the importance of medicinal plants as a whole. Examples follow.
China
· Some 35,000 items of ethno-pharmacological data have been entered into data bases.
· The Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, a WHO Collaborating Centre of Traditional Medicine, in Beijing specializes in the research of medicinal plants.
· The Center of Traditional Medicine which includes a genebank and a botanical garden in Beijing, with branches in Yunnan and Hainan Island--undertakes R&D in medicinal plants. (These programs all operate under the auspices of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.)
Thailand
· Thailand's Primary Health Care Program recognizes and even promotes herbal and traditional medicine.
· A National Committee on Medicinal Plants has been established and charged with developing a nationwide policy. This policy will include support for ethnomedical and botanical surveys, an information system and data base, the manufacture and export of traditional medicines based on plants, and the conservation and cultivation of medicinal plants on a national basis.
Indonesia
· A medicinal-plant garden Hortus Medicus Tawangmanguensis) has been established at the Center for Research and Development of Industrial Plants.
· The Department of Health operates a country-wide program called "the living pharmacy" to take the benefits of medicinal plants to the various and widely scattered rural areas throughout the archipelago.
India
· The Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddhi medicine and homeopathy undertakes R&D into botanicals.
· The Indian Pharmacopoeial Laboratory analyzes traditional healing-plant materials.
· The Indian Forestry Service and the Forestry Research Institute both have programs on the planting and encouragement of medicinal herbs in the forest understory.
· The Botanical Survey of India includes medicinals in its assessments of the Subcontinent's plant resources.
· The State Department of Tribal Welfare promotes herbal medicines because the tribal peoples tend to rely on these even more than most Indians.
· The Arya Vaidya Sala, an important center of Ayurveda medicine at Kattakkol in the state of Kerala, operates a college, hospital, factory, and research laboratory for medicinal plants. It also operated a herbal garden and two farms that cultivate medicinals.
· The Tropical Forest Research Institute at Jabalpur in the state of Madhya Pradesh emphases medicinal plants that can be grown among the trees. It cultivates and distributes plant materials to pharmaceutical enterprises.
Bangladesh
· The newly established Research Institute on Herbal Medicines has recently been preparing a "'formulae', of traditional medicines. This formal document--being constructed with inputs from government, universities and private organizations--will establish protocols for evaluating traditional remedies, as well as the processing, production, licensing and marketing of medicinal plants.
Sri Lanka
· The Ministry of Indigenous Medicine has established (with WHO assistance) medicinal plant nurseries. It has also declared a number of natural areas to be "Medicinal Plant Reservations."
· The Bandaranaika Memorial Ayurvedic Research Institute undertakes research into medicinal plants as well as into the formulation of products from them.
· The Royal Botanical Gardens in Peradeniya and several private gardens maintain living medicinal plant collections.
· Botanical surveys that include therapeutic plants are being carried out by the Wildlife Conservation and Forest Departments.
Ethiopia
· The Biodiversity Institute (formerly Plant Genetic Resources Center) plays a leading role in getting medicinal plants into cultivation. It has a well established program of conserving plant genetic resources and is complementing its gene banks by establishing on-farm conservation. It recently established a collaborative program with regional traditional health practitioners, providing among other things land for growing medicinal plants.
<section>International Conservation Activities</section>
Although the situation is hardly clear, one can say with confidence that globally speaking little has been done to conserve medicinal plants in any organized fashion. In spite of the rising trade in medicinals, few policies at the national and international level encourage cultivation programs or protect the resource base. Moreover, since the 1988 Chiang Mai Declaration Saving Lives by Saving Plants (WHO/IUCN/WWF, 1993), few genetic conservation efforts now incorporate species used in traditional medicine. Many countries have "'gene banks" of course, but these repositories are mainly dedicated to food-crop germplasm, not many contain any medicinal plants.
The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR ) - with its network of 17 international agricultural research centers and programs in natural resource management, germplasm conservation, institution building, and networking--would seem to be well placed to play a role in medicinal plant conservation and cultivation. However, its primary focus is food crops, and a review of past CGIAR Annual Reports fails to reveal attention to any medicinal-plant activities.
Privately funded international agencies seem to be the current leaders in conserving medicinal plant biodiversity, or at least in highlighting the need. These organizations include the World Conservation Monitoring Center (WCMC), the World Wildlife Fund for Nature (WWF), the Nature Conservancy, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and several botanic gardens (notably, Kew, Edinburgh, New York, and Missouri Botanical Gardens). One notable endeavor is the joint collaboration between IUCN, WWF and the International Plant Genetics Resources Institute (IPGRI), which has drawn up guidelines for establishing a network of wild-species seedbanks in botanic gardens.
Many non-government organizations (NGO's) are collaborating with local interest groups to strengthen the traditional healthcare systems. A few are also assisting in programs to conserve and cultivate medicinals.
<section>3. Medicinal plants in world bank projects</section>
At present medicinal plants are hardly a priority in the World Bank's financial, analytical and/or advisory services. A preliminary review of abstracts listed in the Lending Operations Database and the Report Bibliography Service turned up only six references to the words ""medicinal plant,, and "traditional medicine" in the period covering FY 79 to the present. These six were the following:
· Projects in both Pakistan and Indonesia seeking to overcome constraints to incorporating traditional-health practices into government healthcare efforts.
· A general review of traditional medicine in Sub-Saharan Africa, which had found that traditional medicine was an important source of healthcare for educated, as well as less privileged, people. (It also concluded that traditional healers were important human resources.)
· Projects in Turkey, India and Madagascar that were establishing programs to conserve and cultivate a range of genetic resources, including some medicinal plants. Each project was oriented particularly toward strengthening institutional capabilities, and dealt with the plants only secondarily.
A search of Operational Directives, Operation Policies, Bank Procedures, and Good Practices, revealed only one reference to medicinal plants. This (found under Good Practices) covered a sector wide strategy for forestry development. In one section the strategy emphasized the economic importance, particularly to the poor, of non-timber forest products (notably, nuts, fruits and medicinal plants). It noted that information on these products is rarely available or analyzed.
Three recent World Bank publications, two: Investing in Health, 1993; and Better Health in Africa, 1994, clearly recognized the role traditional healers can play in helping the informal health sector and modern healthcare systems, but neither provided any detail. The third publication, Traditional Knowledge and Sustainable Development (Davis and Ebbe,1995) discussed the contribution and importance of plants in traditional medicine to the health and well-being of the world's population.
Country reports dealing with China, India, Indonesia, Philippines, and Pakistan identify medicines, crude drugs, and/or pharmaceuticals in production and export trade tables (see, for example, China: Foreign Trade Reform, 1994, pp 262, 263, 303).
The country reports from China also identify medicinal-plant components in three projects:
· Jiangya Dam sub-project. An important component of this activity in Hunan Province is the resettlement of 14,000 people. These are mainly farm families skilled at growing rice, wheat, maize and soybean, with some rapeseed and tobacco as cash crops. Most are to be resettled at higher elevations in the river valley where they will have to develop new farm lands and new crops. They are expected to switch to predominantly cash-crop production that will include medicinal plants, tea, and fruit trees.
· Southwest Poverty Reduction Project. Livelihoods in the project area in Guizhou, Guangxi, and Yunan provinces are mostly based on subsistence farming; the families have very limited resources and access to only small amounts of cash. The objective of the Bank-supported component is to increase agricultural incomes. In this regard, approximately 10,000 