<title>Organic and compost-Based growing media for tree seedling nurseries</title>
Joan H. Miller and Norman Jones
WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPER NUMBER 264
FORESTRY SERIES
The World Bank
Washington, D.C.
Copyright © 1995 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing April 1995
Technical Papers are published to communicate the results of the Bank's work to the development community with the least possible delay. The typescript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors. Some sources cited in this paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., Suite 910, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna, 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0253-7494
Both authors work for the World Bank. Joan H. Miller is a consultant to the Natural Resources Division, and Norman Jones is a senior forestry specialist in the Natural Resources Division of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Department.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Miller, Joan H., 1961
Organic and compost-based growing media for tree seedling nurseries/Joan H. Miller and Norman Jones
p. cm.--(World Bank technical paper, ISSN 0253-7494; no.
264. Forestry series)
Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
ISBN 0-8213-3039-X
1. Trees--Seedlings, Container. 2. Forest soils. 3. Potting soils. 4. Forest nurseries. 1. Jones, Norman, 1934
II. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
III. Title. IV. Title: Organic and compost-based growing media for tree seedling nurseries. V. Series: World Bank technical paper;
no. 264. VI. Series: World Bank technical paper. Forestry series.
SD404.3.M55 1994
634.9'564--dc20 94-23707
CIP
RECENT WORLD BANK TECHNICAL PAPERS
No. 251 Sharma, Rietbergen, Heimo, and Pa tel. A Strategy for the Forest Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 252 The World Bank/FAO/UNIDO/lndustry Fertilizer Working Group, World and Regional Supply and Demand Balances for Nitrogen, Phosphate, and Potash, 1992/93-1998/99
No. 253 Jensen and Malter, Protected Agriculture: A Global Review
No. 254 Frischtak, Governance Capacity and Economic Reform in Developing Countries
No. 255 Mohan, editor, Bibliography of Publications: Technical Department, Africa Region, July 1987 to April 1994
No. 256 Campbell, Design and Operation of Smallholder Irrigation in South Asia
No. 258 De Geyndt, Managing the Quality of Health Care in Developing Countries
No. 259 Chaudry, Reid, and Malik, editors, Civil Service Reform in Latin America and the Caribbean: Proceedings of a Conference
No. 260 Humphrey, Payment Systems: Principles, Practice, and Improvements
No. 261 Lynch, Provision for Children with Special Educational Needs in the Asia Region
No. 262 Lee and Bobadilla, Health Statistics for the Americas
No. 263 Le Moigne, Subramanian, Xie, and Giltner, editors, A Guide to the Formulation of Water Resources Strategy
No. 264 Miller and Jones, Organic and Compost-Based Growing Media for Tree Seedling Nurseries
No. 265 Viswanath, Building Partnerships for Poverty Reduction: The Participatory Project Planning Approach of the Women's Enterprise Management Training Outreach Program (WEMTOP)
No. 266 Hill and Bender, Developing the Regulatory Environment for Competitive Agricultural Markets
No. 267 Valdés and Schaeffer, Surveillance of Agricultural Prices and Trade: A Handbook for the Dominican Republic
No. 268 Valdés and Schaeffer, Surveillance of Agricultural Prices and Trade: A Handbook for Colombia
No. 269 Scheierling, Overcoming Agricultural Pollution of Water: The Challenge of Integrating Agricultural and Environmental Policies in the European Union
No. 270 Banerjee, Rehabilitation of Degraded Forests in Asia
No. 271 Ahmed, Technological Development and Pollution Abatement: A Study of How Enterprises Are Finding Alternatives to Chlorofluorocarbons
No. 272 Greaney and Kellaghan, Equity Issues in Public Examinations in Developing Countries
No. 273 Grimshaw and Helfer, editors, Vetiver Grass for Soil and Water Conservation, Land Rehabilitation, and Embankment Stabilization: A Collection of Papers and Newsletters Compiled by the Vetiver Network
No. 274 Govindaraj, Murray, and Chellaraj, Health Expenditures in Latin America
No. 275 Heggie, Management and Financing of Roads: An Agenda for Reform
No. 276 Johnson, Quality Review Schemes for Auditors: Their Potential for Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 277 Convery, Applying Environmental Economics in Africa
No. 278 Wijetilleke and Karunaratne, Air Quality Management: Considerations for Developing Countries
No. 279 Anderson and Ahmed, The Case for Solar Energy Investments
No. 280 Rowat, Malik, and Dakolias, Judicial Reform in Latin America and the Caribbean: Proceedings of a World Bank Conference
No. 281 Shen and Contreras-Hermosilla, Environmental and Economic Issues in Forestry: Selected Case Studies in Asia
No. 282 Kim and Benton, Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Onchocerciasis Control Program (OCP)
No. 283 Jacobsen, Scobie and Duncan, Statutory Intervention in Agricultural Marketing: A New Zealand Perspective
No. 284 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Roldos and Chiara, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Uruguay
No. 285 Brehrn and Castro, The Market for Water Rights in Chile: Major Issues
No. 286 Tavoulareas and Charpentier, Clean Coal Technologies for Developing Countries
No. 287 Giliham, Bell, Arin, Matthews, Rumeur, and Hearn, Cotton Production Prospects for tire Next Decade
No. 288 Biggs, Shaw, and Srivastiva, Technological Capabilities and Learning in African Enterprises
No. 289 Dinar, Seidl, Olem, Jorden, Duda, and Johnson, Restoring and Protecting the World's Lakes and Reservoirs
No. 290 Weijenberg, Dagg, Kampen Kalunda, Mailu, Ketema, Navarro, and Abdi Noor, Strengthening National Agricultual Research Systems in Eastern and Central Africa: A Framework for Action
No. 291 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Errazuriz and Francisco, SurveilIance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Chile
No. 292 Gorriz, Subramanian, and Simas, Irrigation Management Transfer in Mexico: Process and Progress
No. 293 Preker and Feachem, Market Mechanisms and the Health Sector in Central and Eastern Europe
No. 294 Valdés and Schaeffer in collaboration with Sturzenegger and Bebczuk, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Argentina
No. 295 Pohl, Jedrzejczak, and Anderson, Creating Capital Markets in Central and Eastern Europe
No. 296 Stassen, Small-Scale Biomass Gasifiers for Heat and Power: A Global Review
No. 297 Bulatao, Key Indicators for Family Planning Projects
No. 298 Odaga and Heneveld, Girls and Schools in Sub-Saharan Africa: From Analysis to Action
No. 299 Tamale, Jones, and Pswarayi-Riddihough, Technologies Related to Participatory Forestry in Tropical and Subtropical Countries
No. 300 Oram and de Haan, Technologies for Rainfed Agriculture in Mediterranean Climates: A Review of World Bank Experiences
No. 301 Edited by Mohan, Bibliography of Publications: Technical Department, Africa Region, July 1987 to April 1995
No. 302 Baldry, Calamari, and Yaméogo, Environmental Impact Assessment of Settlement and Development in the Upper Léraba Basin
No. 303 Heneveld and Craig, Schools Count: World Bank Project Designs and the Quality of Primary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa
No. 304 Foley, Photovoltaic Applications in Rural Areas of the Developing World
No. 305 Johnson, Education and Training of Accountants in Sub-Saharan Anglophone Africa
No. 306 Muir and Saba, Improving State Enterprise Performance: The Role of Internal and External Incentives
No. 307 Narayan, Toward Participatory Research
No. 308 Adamson and others, Energy Use, Air Pollution, and Environmental Policy in Krakow: Can Economic Incentives Really Help?
No. 309 The World Bank/FOA/UNIDO/lndustry Fertilizer Working Group, World and Regional Supply and Demand Balances for Nitrogen, Phosphate, and Potash, 1993/94-1999/2000
No. 310 Edited by Elder and Cooley, Sustainable Settlement and Development of the Onchocerciasis Control Programme Area: Proceedings of a Ministerial Meeting.
No. 311 Webster, Riopelle and Chidzero, World Bank Lending for Small Enterprises 1989-1993
No. 312 Benoit, Project Finance at the World Bank: An Overview of Policies and Instruments
No. 313 Kapur, Airport Infrastructure. The Emerging Role of the Private Sector
No. 314 Valdés, Schaefferin collaboration with Ramos, Surveillance of Agricultural Price and Trade Policies: A Handbook for Ecuador
No. 316 Schware and Kimberley, Information Technology and National Trade Facilitation: Making the Most of Global Trade
No. 317 Schware and Kimberley, Information Technology and National Trade Facilitation. Guide to Best Practice
No. 318 Taylor, Boukambou, Dahniya, Ouayogode, Ayling, Abdi Noor, and Toure, Strengthening National Agricultural Research Systems in the Humid and Sub-humid Zones of West and Central Africa: A Framework for Action
No. 320 Srivastava, Lambert and Vietmeyer, Medicinal Plants: An Expanding Role in Development
No. 321 Srivastava, Smith, and Forno, Biodiversity and Agriculture: Implications for Conservation and Development
No. 322 Charles M. Peters, The Ecology and Management of Non-Timber Forest Resources
No. 323 Edited by Dominique Pannier, Corporate Governance of Public Enterprises in Transitional Economies
No. 324 Cabraal, Cosgrove-Davies, and Schaeffer, Best Practices for Photovoltaic Household Electrification Programs
No. 325 Bacon, Besant-Jones, and Heidarian, Estimating Construction Costs and Schedules: Erperience with Power Generation Projects in Developing Countries
<section>Foreword</section>
Forests have been called the lungs of the world, providing oxygen essential for life. Forests also provide a livelihood for nearly 500 million people across the globe. Clearly, they represent an important resource for all. However, an accelerated rate of destruction of primary forests, especially in the 1980s, caused concern as this great resource was threatened. The Bank's World Development Report 1992 estimated that 17 million to 20 million hectares of forests are being lost every year, mainly in developing countries. This is clearly not a sustainable level of use.
To address the very real needs for protection and conservation of forests and the need for development, the World Bank has taken a lead in pioneering efforts at sustainable development, with attention to forestry concerns. The Bank seeks to address two key forestry challenges: to slow the alarmingly rapid rates of deforestation, and to ensure adequate planting of new trees to meet the rapidly growing world demand for wood.
This technical paper helps address the latter challenge. In addressing technical issues of growing media for tree seedlings, the Bank is working with others to achieve the much larger goal of adequate planting of new trees of superior quality. This paper outlines processes for making nursery operations more efficient, benefiting nursery and plantation managers, whatever their scale of operations. We hope this paper will bring those working for goals similar to ours one step closer to achieving sustainable development.
Gershon Feder
Acting Director
Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
The World Bank
Washington, D.C.
<section>Abstract</section>
Experience in the support of tree planting projects has indicated that inadequate attention is currently paid to root development on container grown seedlings, particularly for projects in the tropics. A literature review combined with extensive consultation with international tree planters in both tropical and temperate countries indicated that organic matter should form the major fraction of the container media. This component is not easily obtained in many tropical and subtropical countries. However, elements for the manufacture of compost are often available or could be made available. The paper outlines the characteristics of good potting media indicating to nursery or plantation managers the type of product they should aim at. This is followed by a section dealing specifically with different methods of making compost because this is likely to be the most important component of their organic fraction. Finally there is a chapter dealing with raw materials for making
compost and how they can be blended. In order to limit the text to the general aspects of good media, details concerning facts about the components of compost, the chemistry of composting and other practical aspects of potting media preparation are included in a series of annexes.
<section>Preface</section>
The World Bank funds the planting of many thousands of hectares of tree plantations every year with a high percentage of the trees raised in containers. Field examination of several projects revealed that after planting, growth was much poorer than expected. Nursery managers tend to relate the quality of their crops to the appearance of the shoot systems which are pampered under nursery conditions and often manipulated by adding nutrients. Root development is equally important, but, unfortunately, frequently overlooked and, to quote Paul Ryan of the Bank's Regional office in Kenya, "what you do not see is more important than what you do see"! Part of the problem lies in the type of container used and the quantity and quality of root development within the container during the nursery phase.
Problems concerning the type of container to use are discussed in a separate technical paper (Josiah and Jones, 1992). To ensure that transporting and transplanting have minimal negative effects on the plants, the roots of the plants must effectively bind the media within the container. For this to occur root formation in the container must be extensive and preferably rapid. The intention of this paper is to concentrate on media used in containers. During field visits in many tropical and sub-tropical countries throughout Africa, Asia, and Latin America it was noted that the most common ingredient for container media is soil usually mixed in varying proportions with sand and organic matter (often farm-yard-manure). Yet, in temperate countries the major component of all container mixtures is organic matter, most commonly peat. Discussions with many experienced nursery managers in tropical, sub-tropical, and temperate countries brought out a few simple points:
- in temperate countries organic container mixes are easily obtained, but not so in the tropics and sub-tropics;
- organic mixtures are much lighter in weight and therefore cheaper to transport than soil based mixtures;
- plant roots tend to thoroughly bind organic mixtures even after a relatively short growing period while this seldom occurs in soil based mixes;
- watering regimes are more easily handled for organic mixtures than soil based mixtures;
- organic mixtures hold water better in transit which gives plants a better chance of survival after transplanting.
With all these benefits, one must wonder why the extensive tree plantation investments in tropical and subtropical countries continue to concentrate on soil based, or more accurately "mineral" mixtures. The amount of organic matter added is usually small, making little difference in the weight, water holding capacity, or root binding needs. The reason for this is that organic ingredients are difficult to find in adequate quantities and at satisfactory prices in tropical and subtropical countries. Probably the fundamental reason is that the financial benefits have not been evaluated due to the fact that gains through improved planting stock are linked with genetic rather than physical improvements. A thorough review of the literature gives no indication of the economic benefits from an improved potting medium yet nursery managers lucky enough to have an organic medium never revert to mineral mixtures.
Often responsibilities of nursery management end when plants leave the nursery and therefore feel little "ownership" of the plantations. All too often the target for management groups is quantity rather than quality, since numbers are tangible while quality is subjective. Once nursery management is convinced that organic mixtures produce better planting stock, the system for obtaining the necessary ingredients will take on the same importance as obtaining the correct seed, correct species, adequate water, good containers, correct fertilizers, and all the other fundamental requirements of a good nursery.
It should be the task of nursery managers to attain the best possible root growth quality for their plants by adapting well proven, worldwide results to local situations; this will require a completely different approach to obtaining container mixture ingredients The objectives of this paper are to present the scientific benefits of organic container mixtures in comparison with mineral mixtures and to indicate how the basic ingredients for a good organic mixture can be made (i.e. compost). The use in temperate countries of easily obtainable organic media ingredients has demonstrated their value - not in financial terms but in biological terms.
It is hoped this paper will create an understanding among people involved with tree planting, whether part of large or small-scale tree plantation programs, to take an in-depth look at the root development on their planting stock and begin to develop means by which it can be improved. An attempt has been made to anticipate likely problems which will confront management and suggest solutions. Using good organic potting mix may be cost effective as well as biologically desirable, the savings in transport costs alone could possibly offset the cost of manufacturing suitable organic mixes.
When searching the literature for this paper a wealth of valuable information emerged on various aspects of potting mixture production and the processes of composting. In order to provide the reader with a comprehensive view of the key issues for planning, the paper has been separated into a general overview in the main text for the non-technical reader followed by six annexes in which composting and potting media methodologies are described in technical terms. The purpose of the annexes is not to provide the reader with a complete "how-to" of composting and nursery potting mixes because such a manual is beyond the scope of this publication as potting mix production can be a complex subject. In putting together this publication, the intent is to indicate the issues and, for potential practitioners, provide a point of departure for experimentation. This latter point is very important; production of proper mixes will require experimentation and trial and error. No publication
can tell you how to successfully produce potting mixes appropriate for all species, region, available raw materials, etc.
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
The authors would like to thank the International Tropical Timber Organization and the International Society of Tropical Foresters for their support and cooperation. They also would like to thank N. Khouri, SA3AG, C.J. Pieri, AGRTN, J.W. Smyle, ASTEN; and A.R.Yates, AF4AG for their helpful comments on earlier drafts. Robert Hydon and Lisa Barczak provided additional editorial and formatting assistance.
The support and assistance received is deeply appreciated, the sole responsibility . for the content of the paper, however, rests with the authors.
<section>Introduction</section>
Investment in forest tree planting is increasing annually, FAO surveys indicated that forest plantations in the tropics alone expanded from a total of 18 million hectares in 1980 to 44 million hectares in 1990. In tropical and subtropical countries the majority of trees planted are raised in containers. However, the most intensive research on producing good containerized planting stock, has been carried out in temperate countries. Nursery research has demonstrated that development of a fibrous root system is essential for good quality seedlings. Root absorptive efficiency is directly related to its surface area and fibrous roots provide greatest surface area. Development of fibrous roots is related to the porosity of the potting mixture which in turn is related to the organic fraction of the mixture. The organic fraction of a mixture helps resist compaction and retain water, while still maintaining porosity for movement of air and growth of roots.
Organic ingredients, such as peat and humus, are readily obtained in many temperate countries. Large nurseries in America and Europe can purchase commercial, ready-made potting mixtures, eliminating the need for nursery managers to make their own mixes. The most commonly used materials are peat moss, vermiculite, perlite, sand, and sawdust. In tropical and subtropical countries (such as China, India Nepal and Nigeria)' importing the vast quantities of potting mixtures or their components which would be needed is too costly. Therefore, virtually all nurseries must rely entirely on local ingredients for their potting media. Unfortunately, in most of the tropics and subtropics there is a shortage of organic matter as it is favored by farmers for their crops, fed to their animals, or burned as fuel.
<section>Objectives and layout</section>
The main objective of the paper is to stress to planners and managers of forest plantations, whether in the private or public sector, that if the planting stock is to be raised in containers it is essential that the mixture in the containers provides the best possible conditions for optimal root growth. Years of research prove the need for a good fibrous root system and such root development is promoted in organic media.
A review of literature on nursery potting media in the tropics and subtropics, indicates that the basic ingredients are usually soil, sand, and farmyard manure. There are reports of literally thousands of experiments in which these ingredients are used in varying combinations and always the organic fraction is very small. This is true despite it having been extensively demonstrated that potting mixtures with a high mineral fraction, while supporting good shoot development in nurseries do not permit growth of high quality fibrous root systems. Additionally, in many cases the soil included in the mixture had very high clay or silt fractions. Inevitably these components accumulate in the bottom of the container, eliminating air spaces thereby creating totally unsuitable conditions for root growth.
Few tropical and subtropical nurseries have access to good organic potting media. In South Kalimantan a FINNIDA-supported nursery developed an excellent medium based on readily available peat in the area. The ASEAN/Canada Seed Project in Thailand has also developed an excellent mixture from processed coconut husk. Also in Thailand, a newly formed tree planting company had compost made on contract while more recently a private plantation company installed its own process for manufacturing vermiculite. In Andhra Pradesh, India a private company is also focusing on vermiculite as a major component of their potting medium. Although vermiculite is not an organic component, it imparts desirable physical qualities to the texture of the potting media (i.e good porosity) which promote development of good, fibrous roots.
Throughout the tropical world ingredients can be found for the production of potting media. It should be possible for nursery managers anywhere in the tropics to find a source of material which can be composted and developed as a suitable potting media. In industrial countries, compost making has always concentrated on the use of wastes or low cost materials. The same approach can be followed elsewhere.
The body of this paper discusses potting media and their characteristics, the importance of organic material (i.e. from compost) in potting mix', and the production of compost for use in nurseries. Annexes I - IV provide background information on some basic, commonly used components of potting media, the chemistry and processes of composting, review of composting methods, and finally a listing of materials which have potential for use in composting operations at seedling nurseries. Annex V reviews composting and the use of wood products while Annex VI describes an innovative process, worm composting. In addition, there is a glossary to familiarize readers with some of the terms used in the text
<section>Potting media characteristics & components</section>
The purpose of a potting media is to satisfy the needs for good seedling growth within the limited space of a container and to prepare it for successful transplanting into the field. The media physically supports a growing seedling and both stores and supplies nutrients (and trace elements), water, and air to the root system. The better the media, the better will be development of a healthy, fibrous root system and subsequently a better quality seedling is produced which will survive after outplanting and commence growth quickly. These features alone impart a financial value to the use of better potting media which is unfortunately never measured. There are few natural materials with all the elements required for healthy root growth so potting media are usually blends of different elements. The assembly and often production costs of suitable elements are absorbed into overall nursery expenses so the cost and benefit are not calculated, hence management has to rely on faith
in biological fundamentals when allocating funds for potting media
<section>Characteristics</section>
To achieve its function, growing media used in container nurseries should be:
- light-weight,
- good porosity;
- well-drained but with good water holding capacity,
- slightly acidic with good cation-exchange-capacity;
- able to maintain a constant volume when wet or dry,
- free of insects, diseases, and weed seeds;
- low in silt, clay and ash content;
- easily stored for long periods of time without changes in physical and chemical properties; and
- easily handled and blended.
The development of a healthy, fibrous root system (Figure I ) needs a media with these good physical properties. Any nutrient or chemical deficiencies can be compensated for with additions of fertilizers and amendments.
Physical Properties
Porosity is one of the most important physical properties in a growing media because it determines the space available in a container for air (aeration), water, and root growth (Liegel and Venator, 1987). Aeration is important because the root system "breathes" (exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide) in the large, air-filled pores (macropores). Poor aeration will adversely affect root form (morphology) and structure (physiology) and will lead to decreased seedling vigor (Scagel and Davis, 1988).
The growing media must also allow adequate drainage from macropores so that water does not remain in the bottom of the container where it would inhibit root respiration. The presence of macropores is a function of particle size, particle arrangement, and the degree of compaction.
Although good drainage is desired, so is a high water-holding capacity. Since the volume of the container is small, water must be available to seedlings between irrigations. The presence of small pores (micropores) help retain water Organic material provides a large number of micropores, so they improve the water-holding capacity of potting medias.
The total porosity (percentage of air space divided by total container volume) of a good growing media for container tree seedlings should exceed 50% and the aeration porosity (the percentage of air space remaining after saturation when water has freely drained) should range from 20-35%, depending on the media. A method for determining porosities is found in Box 1. Overall, a balance of both macro- and micropores is necessary for a high quality container media.
Porosity of growing media is affected by its particle size range, size class mixture, particle characteristics, texture, and their changes over time Increasing particle size increases the aeration porosity but water-holding capacity declines. The optimal particle size range varies depending on the material being considered. (For example, the desired particle size for peat moss in growing media is from 0.6-0.8 mm and for pine bark is about 0.5 mm). The internal pores within individual particles also affects the water- and nutrientholding capacities of a component.
Over time, porosity tends to decrease due to compression, breakage, mixing, and shrinkage. Drainage problems occur from decomposition of materials and siltation caused by irrigation and root growth or as the fine particles settle to the bottom of the container. Pore space becomes filled with roots during seedling growth which decreases aeration porosity. Plants which have to remain in containers for more than one growing season may need a particularly coarse textured material to accommodate roots. Naturally, this will require more frequent watering of seedlings especially in the first season but few tropical species need such long nursery periods.
Chemical Properties
The chemical properties which determine suitability of a growing media are primarily: pH, cation-exchange-capacity (CEC), and fertility. If conditions are not favorable chemically, then additives can be used to correct the potting mix. The desired pH of most growing media is slightly acid, ranging from 5. 5-6. 5, but the pH for optimal plant growth is species dependent. When pH levels are not within the desired range, nutrients either become unavailable or toxic and microorganisms in the potting media will be affected. Regardless, pH is easily controlled by chemical additives (e.g. lime or sulfur).
Cation exchange capacity (CEC) is a measure of a soil or potting media's ability to hold nutrients. A low CEC (<10 meq/100 g in sand) means that nutrients will not be retained, they will was washed out (leached) from the mix during watering. A high CEC (140 meq/100 g) results in nutrients being held to the mix and available to the seedlings. As a result a high CEC medium is able to continually provide nutrients to the seedling. A mixture's CEC cannot be determined outside of a laboratory, but as a general rule, the greater the addition of organic matter or compost the higher the CEC of the mix.
Management of nutrient supply to seedlings in the nursery is extremely important. Irrespective of the fertility of the individual components which make up the potting mix, the nursery manager must always be prepared to provide any additional nutrients which are required. Some nursery managers prefer a low fertility so they can completely control the nutrient balance for the young seedlings. Initially, low fertility in a growing media may even be desirable during germination because nutrient requirements (except for phosphorus) duri