<title>Nutrition learning packages</title>
World Health Organization
Geneva
<section>Preface</section>
The Nutrition Learning Packages are for trainers to use in teaching community health workers to carry out the nutrition element of their jobs. They support the publication: Guidelines for training community health workers in nutrition, 2nd ed. (World Health Organization, 1986), which contains nine training modules giving the information on nutrition needed by community health workers. The training modules also contain guidance for trainers, and include sample exercises to be used with trainees.
The nine Nutrition Learning Packages complement these training modules. They review some nutrition information, but concentrate mainly on enabling trainers to help trainee community health workers develop the skills they need to teach nutrition in the community.
Each package contains a selection of materials, for example, information sheets, question-and-answer sheets, and ideas for role-plays and demonstrations. Each Nutrition Learning Package has a contents list where the materials are listed and the aims of the package clearly stated. Each package also contains suggestions for trainers on using the materials. The choice of materials in practice will depend on the tasks the trainees will need to be able to carry out in the community.
The term community health worker is used throughout the Nutrition Learning Packages, but the materials can be adapted and used for all types of community workers who deal with nutrition. They can also be adapted to be especially relevant for the local situation.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This publication has been made possible through the Joint WHO/UNICEF Nutrition Support Programme (JNSP). This Programme supports a number of coordinated activities in developing countries which form part of national nutrition programmes and which try to improve the nutritional statue of children and mothers. These activities are within the health sector and related sectors such as agriculture, education, and community development. The Joint WHO/ UNICEF Nutrition Support Programme is funded by the Government of Italy.
The materials in this publication were selected and adapted by Joan Allen Peters, Director, School of Nutrition and Home Economics, Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. The sources of the materials are listed on page vii. The Learning Packages have been pretested in several countries, including Bahrain, Burma, Ethiopia, Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania, and have been modified in the light of comments and suggestions from a number of people with long experience of training and education in nutrition and health.
The artwork was prepared by Janet Moore.
The World Health Organization is a specialized agency of the United Nations with primary responsibility for international health masters and public health. Through this organization, which was created in 1948, the health professions of some 165 countries exchange their knowledge and experience with the aim of making possible the attainment by all citizens of the world by the year 2000 of a lever of health that will permit them to lead a socially and economically productive life.
By means of direct technical cooperation with its Member States, and by stimulating such cooperation among them, WHO promotes the development of comprehensive health services, the prevention and control of diseases, the improvement of environmental conditions, the development of health manpower, the coordination and development of biomedical and health services research, and the planning and implementation of health programmes.
These broad fields of endeavour encompass a wide variety of activities, such as developing systems of primary health care that reach the whole population of Member countries; promoting the health of mothers and children; combating malnutrition; controlling malaria and other communicable diseases including tuberculosis and leprosy; having achieved the eradication of smallpox, promoting mass immunization against a number of other preventable diseases; improving mental health; providing safe water supplies; and training health personnel of all categories.
Progress towards better health throughout the world also demands international cooperation in such masters as establishing international standards for biological substances, pesticides and pharmaceuticals; formulating environmental health criteria; recommending international nonproprietary names for drugs, administering the International Health Regulations; revising the International Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death; and collecting and disseminating health statistical information.
Further information on many aspects of WHO's work is presented in the Organization's publications.
Joint WHO/UNICEF
Nutrition Support Programme
WHO Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Nutrition learning packages.
1. Nutrition - education
2. Community health aides - education
3. Teaching
4. Child nutrition
5. Infant nutrition
I. Joint WHO/UNICEF Nutrition Support Programme
ISBN 92 4 154251 9 (NLM Classification: QU 18)
© World Health Organization 1989
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention. However, this guide is intended for adaptation to conditions in different countries or communities and any part of it may be freely adapted, translated, or used in any form for non-profit-making purposes. Prior permission to do so need not be obtained from the World Health Organization, but appropriate reference should be made to this source. If a translation of the entire work is envisaged, however, inquiry should be made to the Office of Publications, World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland, to ensure that such a translation is not already available.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organization concerning the legal statue of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers' products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
PRINTED IN ENGLAND
88/7814-J.B. OFFSET-6500
<section>Sources of materials contained in the Nutrition Learning Packages</section>
All these materials have been used with the permission of the organizations and individuals responsible for their development.
The following are adapted from Creating good health by Ben Essex and George Fargo. Ciba-Geigy, Basel, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 1
Introducing yourself to others
Nutrition Learning Package 8
Rules of good communication
Communications in the village
Nutrition Learning Package 9
Working with others
Choosing the problem to work on first
Overcoming barriers
The following are adapted from Helping health workers learn by David Werner and Bill Bower, Hesperian Foundation, Palo Alto, CA 94302 USA, 1983.
Nutrition Learning Package 1
Learning about the community
Looking at community leadership
Nutrition Learning Package 2
Why do we weigh babies?
Learning to use growth charts
Learning to understand growth charts
Nutrition Learning Package 8
Ideas and methods for trainers teaching nutrition
Nutrition Learning Package 9
Solving nutrition problems in the community
The following are adapted from Bridging the gap, Save the Children, 54 Wilton Road, Westport, CT 06880, USA, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 2
Weighing children
Nutrition Learning Package 5
Food habits chars
Nutrition Learning Package 6
Community nutrition graph
Nutrition Learning Package 8
Priority messages
Pretesting
Nutrition Learning Package 9
Discussion-starter
The following are adapted from Finding the causes of child malnutrition, by Judith and Richard Brown, Task Force on World Hunger, Atlanta, GA 30308, USA, 1983.
Nutrition Learning Package 1
Looking at different food problems and their causes
Nutrition Learning Package 2
The arm tape
The following are adapted from Healthy pregnancy feeding and caring for children, Medex Primary Health Care Series, No.33, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, 1983.
Nutrition Learning Package 2
When to use an arm tape
Nutrition Learning Package 3
Breast-feeding questionnaire
Nutrition Learning Package 4
Feeding a young baby
Nutrition Learning Package 5
Good care begins before a baby is born
Nutrition Learning Package 6
How can you tell whether a child is becoming weak and thin?
Why do children become weak and thin?
Making sure a child does not become weak and thin
The following is adapted from A traditional birth attendant's training kit, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 2
How to make an arm tape
The following are adapted from Breastfeed your baby a multimedia teaching kit, Caribbean Food and Nutrition Institute, Jamaica, 1979.
Nutrition Learning Package 3
Messages for mothers
Suggestions for group activities on breast-feeding
Questions to help get group discussion started
The following is adapted from Nutrition handbook for community workers, Caribbean Food and Nutrition Institute, Jamaica, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 5
Nutrition during pregnancy and breast-feeding
How to identify undernourished pregnant women
The following is adapted from A guide to feeding the weaning age group in the Caribbean, Caribbean Food and Nutrition Institute, Jamaica, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 4
Planning meals using the multi-mix principle
Using the multi-mix principle for weaning
Making and storing safe weaning foods
The following is adapted from Rural home techniques, food preservation series, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, 1975.
Nutrition Learning Package 4
Some ways to store foods to keep them cool and clean
The following are adapted from Introduction to training: clean water and clean community - prevention and care of diarrhoea, Medex Primary Health Care Series, No. 32, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, 1982.
Nutrition Learning Package 7
What is diarrhoea and what causes it?
Why is diarrhoea dangerous?
The following are taken from materials prepared by the Diarrhoeal Diseases Control Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1980.
Nutrition Learning Package 7
How can a community health worker prevent diarrhoea and other infections?
Care and treatment of children who have diarrhoea
Nutrition and infections
<section>How to use the Nutrition Learning Packages: A guide for trainers</section>
<section>The learning package approach</section>
The materials in the Nutrition Learning Packages are designed to involve trainees actively in their own learning. Self-tests, role-plays, discussions and exercises require trainees to think, discover, discuss and solve problems, rather than to learn facts by memory. This way of learning is called participatory learning. It has been found more effective than just reading or listening to lectures.
The trainees are expected to do some of their learning in a local community. Community-based training helps trainees learn with, and from, the community. They learn to work with people, instead of doing things for people.
This way of training may be new to some trainers and teachers. If it is new to you this Guide for trainers will help you use the participatory approach. Another effective way to learn this method of training would be through a workshop based on Guidelines for training community health workers in nutrition and these Nutrition Learning Packages. We hope many countries will choose to introduce the Nutrition Learning Packages through a special workshop for trainers.
<section>Your role as a trainer of community health workers</section>
The Nutrition Learning Packages contain many learning activities in which you, the trainer, and the trainees work together to learn to how to carry out the tasks of the community health worker. It may not be possible in the time you have been given to include all of these tasks in your training programme. So how do you decide what to include? The answer is not to choose the topics you like to teach, or think would be interesting, but to choose topics based on the tasks community health workers must be able to undertake in the community.
<section>What do trainees need to know?</section>
As a trainer, you must decide what nutrition information, skills and attitudes community health workers will need to perform their tasks well. You will have to cover the most important information, skills and attitudes in the first training programme, and include the rest in follow-up training session, or regular in-service training.
You can make a list of the information, skills and attitudes community health workers must learn, and another list of those that are useful to learn. After each training session you should find out whether the trainees have learned this important information. Some of the self-tests in the Nutrition Learning Packages can easily be adapted and used to help you find out what the community health workers have learned.
Community health workers may need a lot of time and practice to develop the skills they must learn. Your training programme must give them the opportunity to start developing these skills. Some of the activities outlined in the Nutrition Learning Packages will help you provide these opportunities for community health worker trainees to practise certain skills in the community. You can evaluate their learning of these skills through observation.
Attitudes are perhaps the hardest to teach and to evaluate or test. Community health workers often learn these best and most easily through watching you, and other trainers, as you teach and work with them, and with people from the community. Some of the role-playing exercises in the Nutrition Learning Packages may help you, and the trainees, examine your attitudes to health, nutrition and community work.
<section>How do people learn?</section>
Here are some things we know about learning:
o People learn for themselves. No one can do it for them. Learning takes place inside each person's head.
o People must want to learn. They will not learn if they do not want to.
o People need to try out what they learn. They need to correct their mistakes and see if they are making progress.
o People need to practise ideas as well as skills. For example, if you hear an idea only once, and do not think of it again, it is unlikely that you will remember it.
o People learn and remember things that are interesting, pleasant or exciting, more than things that are boring and unpleasant.
o People learn more easily if what they are learning is organized, logical, and practical. They learn more easily if new things are related to things they already know.
o People learn better if they participate and are active in their learning.
o People need to know what it is they are trying to learn. They need clear objectives.
<section>How can you help people learn?</section>
We have seen how people learn. How can you as a trainer help trainees to learn? You can:
o Help motivate trainees. Can you give them good reasons for wanting to learn?
o Help trainees to make sense of what they are learning. Can you show them how it relates to what they will do in the community?
o Tell them how they are getting on. Can you evaluate their progress, encourage them, and correct their mistakes?
o Give them plenty of practice. Do they have chances to repeat what they learn?
o Try to make the learning situation interesting and pleasant. Are some things exciting to them?
o Organize what is to be learned well. Do trainees find the training logical and easy?
o Arrange for plenty of participation and involvement. Does the group take part in activities such as role-playing and discussions?
o Help trainees to see clearly what they are trying to learn. Do they know what they are expected to learn for their jobs as community health workers?
<section>Providing a good learning experience for trainees</section>
What must you as a trainer do to provide a training experience that helps trainees to learn? You must:
1. Organize the lessons or sessions.
2. Choose the learning methods.
3. Direct discussions.
4. Reinforce learning.
5. Evaluate the trainees' learning.
6. Evaluate your performance as a trainer.
<section>1. Organizing the lessons or training sessions</section>
o To create a good learning atmosphere be friendly and interested in what trainees say. Listen more than you talk. Arrange the seats in a circle to help discussion. This is better than the classroom style with the teacher at the front behind a desk. Show concern for trainees who are quiet and shy. Encourage them to speak. Don't allow the more forceful and confident trainees to interrupt you or the quieter trainees.
o Invite comments on your work. Admit your mistakes and weaknesses. Remember, you are all learning together. The important thing is to learn from mistakes.
o Use discussion more than lectures. Ask questions rather than always giving facts and information.
o Give trainees time to practise skills. They can do this through workshops, role-plays, and activities in the community.
o Each lesson or session should involve:
(a) sharing knowledge (using information from the Training Modules').
(b) practising skills (using exercises from the Training Modules and the Nutrition Learning Packages).
(c) discussing how to take the knowledge and skills into the community (and doing it whenever possible).
(d) evaluating to make sure that everyone understands and has learned (through questioning, observation and discussion).
(e) follow-up (discussing what trainees have done in the community to use what they have learned in previous sessions) .
(f) assessment (finding out how well trainees have learned what they need to know).
The Nutrition Learning Packages contain activities and materials that can help you in many of these tasks. You can use them for early training of community health workers and also for later on-the-job or in-service training.
<section>2. Choosing appropriate training methods</section>
How can you choose training methods that help trainees to learn? The Nutrition Learning Packages use a variety of different training methods. Some of these are: demonstrations; role-playing; games; talks or lectures; and visual aids. How do you decide which method to use? Here is a list of questions. Use it as a checklist when deciding on training methods. Your answers will help you make the choice.
o What tasks will community health workers carry out in the community?
o What are their past experiences? Do they communicate more by talking than by writing? Are they used to reading to learn? Do they learn most often by watching others, by listening to stories or in other ways? How much formal schooling have they had?
o Are they men or women? Quiet or outgoing? Confident or shy? Are they able to accept criticism?
o Will they be working in the community with people who are similar to them in culture, education, language, and customs?
o How much time, help, and money do you have for training? How much equipment, such as blackboards and slide projectors, do you have? How many resources such as books, posters and visual aids, and how many facilities, such as electricity and space, do you have?
o How many trainees are in the group? Are there too many to do much individual work? Are there enough for role-playing and group work?
o Are you teaching:
FACTS (knowledge)?
SKILLS (how to do things)?
ATTITUDES (ways of thinking and feeling about things)?
o When you are teaching:
FACTS-Use talks or lectures, handouts, slides, books, and examples of real experiences.
SKILLS - Use description with step-by-step handouts; demonstrations and handouts; practice through role-playing, demonstrations given by trainees, and work in the community.
ATTITUDES-Use yourself as a role model. Trainees will learn by watching you. Use direct experience with people in the community; discussions with other trainees to share experiences; role-playing in which trainees practise seeing each other's points of view.
You will not always use all the methods for each learning experience. But you can often combine two or three methods in one learning session as do the Nutrition Learning Packages.
Don't forget that the trainees will use you as a model. If you use a variety of methods to help them learn, they will do the same when working in the community.
It is important that trainees have plenty of time to practise their knowledge and skills and to develop good attitudes in a setting as nearly like the real situation as possible. Let them work in the community as much as possible during training.
Some training methods used in the Nutrition Learning Packages are outlined below.
<section>(a) Giving a talk or lecture</section>
Most teachers feel comfortable giving a talk. This is usually the way in which they are trained. A talk or lecture is often not the best way to help trainees learn, but there are times when it is convenient to give a short talk before or after other learning activities.
When should you give a talk?
o To give specific information.
o To reach a number of people at one time.
o To introduce a new or unfamiliar topic.
Why are talks not always useful?
o When people only listen to information, they may not remember much of it. A talk does not help someone to learn a skill.
o Not all trainers make a talk interesting by using pictures, discussions or other activities.
How should you prepare a talk?
o Decide what the trainees need to learn.
o Gather information from your own experience and from books and manuals.
o From this information choose what the trainees need to know.
o Arrange the material in a logical way. Study it until you are familiar with it.
o Decide how much time you will spend on each point. Don't try to cover too much material in one talk. It is better to make two short presentations instead of one long one.
o Write an outline of what you are going to say.
o Plan the questions you will ask, and the visual aids you will use.
What is the best way to give a talk?
o Use simple language. Speak to express what you mean, not to try to impress trainees with your knowledge.
o Speak loudly and clearly, but in a friendly way.
o Use large pictures and visuals that the whole group can see easily, or pass small ones around for each member of the group to look at separately.
o Ask questions.
o Start a discussion.
o Summarize the important points on the blackboard or on large sheets of paper.
o Use a handout for the summary.
<section>(b) Giving a demonstration</section>
When should you give a demonstration?
o To show how to do something (a skill).
o To reach a number of people at one time.
o To make an idea easier to understand.
Why are demonstrations useful ?
o Trainees learn best when they use all their senses: sight, hearing, touch and maybe also taste and smell.
o Demonstrations make an idea easier to understand. For example, it is easier to learn how to make a weaning food for a baby by watching it done, than by being told how to do it in a lecture. The best way is to watch it done, and then to do it yourself.
You will find a suggested demonstration in Material 4E of Nutrition Learning Package 4.
How should you plan a demonstration?
o Decide what the trainees need to learn.
o Study any information available on what you want to show.
o Make step-by-step notes on how you will give the demonstration, and on what you will tell trainees at each step.
o Prepare all the materials for the demonstration . Use things that can be found in the community, such as local foods and equipment.
o Practise doing the demonstration until it is easy for you.
What is the best way to give a demonstration?
o Explain what you are going to do and why.
o Explain and show each new practice or habit step-by-step. Be sure everyone can see.
o Repeat any steps that are difficult.
o Ask trainees to help you with the demonstration.
o Speak loudly, clearly and simply. Be as natural as you can.
o Follow the step-by-step notes you made beforehand.
o When you finish, ask some of the trainees to do one or more of the steps so that you can check on how well they have understood. This gives them a chance to practise. If possible, hold a workshop where all the trainees can practise what you showed. This follow-up is important.
o Ask the group what they learned from the demonstration.
o Summarize important points.
How can you encourage discussion after the demonstration?
o Ask trainees what they liked best about the demonstration, what they learned, and what parts could be changed so they would be easier to understand.
o Discuss how and when trainees might use demonstrations in the community. When is a good time to use a demonstration? What are the important things to think about when giving a demonstration in the community?
o As trainees give you the answers, write them on a blackboard or large piece of paper so that everyone can see.
<section>Outline for planning a demonstration</section>
1. What is the aim of this demonstration?
2. What materials and equipment will I need?
Materials
Equipment
3. What steps must I do and what points must I make at each step?
Steps
Points
(a) _________________________________
(b) _________________________________
(c) _________________________________
(d) _________________________________
4. What kind of follow-up will I use?
5. How will I know whether the demonstration has helped the people who watched it learn something new?
<section>(c) Role-playing</section>
Role-playing is like acting out a drama in front of the rest of the group. In a role-play, trainees (and sometimes the trainer as well) pretend to be other people. Each person takes the role of someone else. They speak and act as they think these people would in a given situation. The rest of the group watch and pretend that the role-players really are the people they are acting. The group learns by seeing and discussing how people behave in a certain situation. Here are two examples of role-plays.
o Four trainees take it in turns to pretend to be a community health worker explaining to three mothers the importance of preventing diarrhoea in their children.
o A large group of trainees pretend to be village leaders discussing how to get some families to stop polluting the village well.
Other examples of role-plays are given in the Nutrition Learning Packages 1, 2, 8, and 9, Materials 1A, 2B, 2C, 8B, 9C and 9D.
When should you use role-playing?
o To move discussion forward when it is stopping. You could say (for example): 'Imagine you are a mother whose child has been sick with diarrhoea for four days and is not getting better. How would you feel? What would you do?
o You can also use the role-plays for more people and for a longer time, for example, for the whole group for a whole session or for half of a session.
Why is role-playing useful?
o When people pretend to be someone else, they are more comfortable saying how they feel than when they are asked directly about their own feelings.
o Role-playing helps people understand how others feel.
o It can also be used to help trainees practise how to teach or how to communicate with others.
How should you use role-playing?
o Choose a topic or problem.
o Choose the 'actors'.
o Give the role-playing information like a story. For example: 'You are a community health worker. You have just come to visit Mrs Mwangi because you have heard that her four-month-old baby is very sick. You know that last year Mrs Mwangi's 18-month-old child died after severe diarrhoea. What will you do? What will you say?
o The 'actors' can present the role-play in front of the rest of the group. Or pairs of trainees can take turns acting out the situation, and the whole group can then discuss what happened.
o Summarize the discussion by pointing out the ideas and problems raised. Could this happen to a community health worker when he or she is really working in a village? What should she or he do in the real-life situation?
Why is role-playing important as a learning method?
o Role-playing can be a good learning method. It can show more about people, and how they behave, than pictures or demonstrations can .
o Seeing the role-play about the mother with the baby who has diarrhoea will probably not tell you much about diarrhoea, but will tell you how the mother thinks and feels, and what she says and does, about her baby and about diarrhoea.
o Role-playing can also help community health workers practise how to do their jobs in the community.
Why is a discussion necessary after role-playing?
o Just watching role-playing does not help people learn. The trainer must lead a discussion afterwards to make sure trainees have drawn out of the role-play all the things that can be learned.
o Always discuss what happened in the role-play, how the people felt, why the things happened, and what can be learned from this.
Trainers and teachers often forget that the discussion after role-playing is more important than the role-play itself. They think that trainees learn just by watching the role-play. If trainers and trainees do not discuss the role-play enough, a good opportunity for learning is lost. If you learn to use role-playing well, it can be a good way to help people learn.
It takes time and practice to use role-playing well.
<section>(d) Games</section>
When is it a good idea to use games in learning?
o To start discussion.
o To get trainees interested in a topic.
Why are games useful in learning?
o Most people enjoy playing games. They are fun and they involve everyone.
How can you use games in training?
o Be sure you are familiar with the game. Know the rules. It helps to have tried it with a small group first so that you understand how it works.
o Trainees must also understand the rules of the game. Explain the rules carefully.
o The game must introduce a new idea or ideas that are an important part of the information you want to teach.
o Everyone must have a chance to play the game.
o The follow-up must include a group discussion.
How can you use games as part of a training programme?
o In Nutrition Learning Package 3 there is a Nutrition Snakes and Ladders Game (page 66). Get your group to play the game and then discuss with trainees whether or not it is a good game, i.e. does it help them learn information they need to know.
o Ask trainees whether they know any games that people in the community play. List these on the blackboard or on a large sheet of paper. Discuss ways in which these games could be adapted to help people in the community learn about nutrition.
o Divide trainees into small groups, of no more than 5 people per group. Ask each group to develop a new game related to something they want to help people in the community learn. It could be based on a game already played in the community.
o Bring the groups together. Each group presents its game. One person in each group should lead the game. The others play it and answer the follow-up questions asked by the leader.
o After each game, ask trainees to discuss how interesting and effective they thought the game was. How might they use it in teaching the community?
<section>(e) Visual aids</section>
Visual aids include pictures, drawings, slides and flannelgraphs.
The Nutrition Learning Packages contain some visual aids, for example, charts that can be used to help trainees learn. Some useful slides and flannelgraphs are listed under Resource materials for learning on pages 24-25. You may want to make some visual aids of your own for your training course, but as learning to make visual aids would take a whole training course in itself, all we can do here is give you some help in knowing when to use them. Some books listed in the Resource list for training on page 23 describe the use of visual aids.
When should you use visual aids?
o To get trainees interested in a subject.
o To start discussion.
o To save time (a picture can show quickly something that would take many words and much time to describe).
o To reinforce learning.
Why are visual aids useful in training?
o Visual aids can give a more accurate idea of something than words alone, as long as photographs, drawings or diagrams are carefully chosen or prepared.
o People remember pictures better than words they hear.
o If p