<title>Education for health - A manual on health education in primary health care</title>
World Health Organization Geneva 1988
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
The World Health Organization is a specialized agency of the United Nations with primary responsibility for international health matters and public health. Through this organization, which was created in 1948, the health professions of some 190 countries exchange their knowledge and experience with the aim of making possible the attainment by all citizens of the world by the year 2000 of a level of health that will permit them to lead a socially and economically productive life.
By means of direct technical cooperation with its Member States, and by stimulating such cooperation among them, WHO promotes the development of comprehensive health services, the prevention and control of diseases, the improvement of environmental conditions, the development of human resources for health, the coordination and development of biomedical and health services research, and the planning and implementation of health programmes.
These broad fields of endeavor encompass a wide variety of activities, such as developing systems of primary health care that reach the whole population of Member countries; promoting the health of mothers and children; combating malnutrition; controlling malaria and other communicable diseases including tuberculosis and leprosy; coordinating the global strategy for the prevention and control of AIDS; having achieved the eradication of smallpox, promoting mass immunization against a number of other preventable diseases; improving mental health; providing safe water supplies; and training health personnel of all categories.
Progress towards better health throughout the world also demands international cooperation in such matters as establishing international standards for biological substances, pesticides and pharmaceuticals; formulating environmental health criteria; recommending international nonproprietary names for drugs; administering the International Health Regulations; revising the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems; and collecting and disseminating health statistical information.
Reflecting the concerns and priorities of the Organization and its Member States, WHO publications provide authoritative information and guidance aimed at promoting and protecting health and preventing and controlling disease.
ISBN 92 4 154225 X
© World Health Organization 1988
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention. For rights of reproduction or translation of WHO publications, in part or in toto, application should be made to the Office of Publications, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. The World Health Organization welcomes such applications.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers' products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
TYPESET IN INDIA
PRINTED IN ENGLAND
94/10325 -JB -4000
The first version of this manual was prepared under a contract between the World Health Organization and the African Regional Health Education Centre, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. Under the direction of the Head of Department, Professor A.B.O.O. Oyediran, three staff members wrote the original document: Dr J. D. Adeniyi, W. R. Brieger, and B. E. Bassy, with graphic art provided by S. Iyi Ojediran. This was pre-tested with the family visitors, field overseers, and community nursing staff at the Igbo-Ora Rural Health Centre, Ibarapa Project, University of Ibadan.
The World Health Organization circulated over 100 copies of the original draft throughout the world for comment in 1980. Upon receipt of these comments, the services of W. R. Brieger as writer, A. Kaplun as editor, and G. Auberson as graphic artist were obtained, to produce a revised version of the manual. The World Heath Organization produced and circulated 7000 copies of a provisional version of the manual in 1984.
With feedback from the provisional version, W. R. Brieger and H. D. Ogden made final modifications to the text.
The John J. Sparkman Center for International Public Health Education, Birmingham, Alabama, USA, is associated with the publication of this manual as part of its agreement for collaborative cooperation with the World Health Organization.
<section>A message from the Director-General of the World Health Organization'</section>
World health will improve only if the people themselves become involved in planning, implementing, and having a say about their own health and health care. But involvement will not just happen.
How serious are we about involving individuals, families, and communities? Are we prepared mentally and professionally to listen to their concerns, to learn from them what they feel is important, to share with them appropriate information, to encourage and support them? Are we ready to assist them in choosing from alternative solutions, in setting their own targets and evaluating their efforts?
In many cases, so far, the answer is 'No'. We can go on and on developing plans: nothing will happen unless all health workers, all health managers, and key professionals in other sectors come to realize what is at stake.
To overcome these particular stumbling blocks, I see three major requirements.
First, health workers must understand that the concept of primary health care involves new roles for them, and a new outlook. Not only should we be concerned with disease prevention and control, we must also be concerned with health promotion and care. And not least with development in general and with people. Our health technologies must be based on what the people themselves want and need. In other words, the health worker should learn first and foremost to act as a 'facilitator' of action by individuals, families, and communities. We must stop trying to fit communities into systems and programmes that we devise without a real and deep feeling for the social aspects of health problems or the economic constraints not to speak of the cultural dissonance that is often the backlash of such programmes.
Second, health workers must accept their new roles. More yet: they must be in to 'try them out', to adapt them, to broaden their scope and innovate in the partnership approach. Their main concern must be to find ways of helping individuals and communities become self-reliant. It must be made clear that advocating self-reliance in health matters in no way means abdicating our responsibilities and passing them on to others. Both lay persons and professionals are essential. They cannot replace each other, but they must work together.
This brings me to my third point: health workers must have the necessary skills to perform these new roles effectively and to make efficient use of existing knowledge. This calls for a training force fully familiar with accumulated experience. and keen to provide the kind and quality of professional preparation needed. It also calls for full backing from health managers for such training.
H. Mahler
Director-General
World Health Organization
<section>Introduction</section>
The goal to which WHO and all its Member States are pledged is 'Health for All by the Year 2000'. This inspiring goal can be attained only if health workers and the people themselves work effectively together.
Primary health care has been identified as the means of attaining this goal. Primary health care seeks to meet the essential health needs of as many people as possible, at the lowest possible cost. It includes the work of health centres, clinics, dispensaries, and doctors' offices in communities and neighborhoods. But it also includes what individuals and families can do for themselves.
It is in this context that education and communication for health are especially important. For the truth is that individuals and families not doctors and other health workers make most of the important decisions that affect their health. Mothers decide what food to give their families and how to prepare it. Families decide when to go to a doctor or clinic, where to go, and whether or not to follow the instructions they receive from a health worker.
If these millions of daily decisions are to be made wisely, people need to be equipped with the knowledge and skills necessary to exercise individual and community responsibility. Primary health care is therefore very much concerned with health promotion and education.
To achieve effective participation by the community and individuals, two things need to be done.
Governments need to facilitate more community involvement in decision-making.
People need to be informed of their potential for improving their health through their own efforts.
The first the governmental decisions initially a political issue, but once the government decides to commit itself to community participation in health and development, it becomes a communications issue. 'All' in 'Health for All' means 'everybody'. In almost every country, there are media that can reach the whole population everybody with the message that they have an opportunity and a duty, as a matter of national policy, to contribute to their own health. People need to learn that their government is asking for their help in health improvement.
The second is basically an educational issue. People need to know how to carry out this mandate for their own benefit. This involves the adoption of certain types of behavior and styles of living beneficial to health in individuals, families, neighborhoods, and communities. It also involves educational assistance in building up more effective ways of organizing measures at the local level to identify and tackle local health problems.
As already suggested, major objectives of education for health are to enable people:
- to define their own problems and needs
- to understand what they can do about these problems with their own resources combined with outside support
- to decide on the most appropriate action to promote healthy living and community well-being.
Using this manual
Health education is central to primary health care, which in turn is the primary means of achieving 'Health for All'. Therefore, health education is a vital duty of health and other community workers who take part in primary health care.
This book is mainly addressed to such workers, in both urban and rural communities. It provides guidelines and ideas that public health officers, community nurses, agricultural extension workers, and other people who carry out education for health can adapt for use in their communities.
It is designed also to help them develop training programmes and technical support for community health workers. In this way the appropriate skills and techniques can be passed on to men and women who can use them in their community efforts.
Finally it is hoped that this manual will illustrate the link between health education efforts and communication at all levels, from the national to the local. National expressions of commitment to 'Health for All' can help to establish a climate that will encourage people in urban neighborhoods and rural villages to work together for health. The community worker can take advantage of this spirit to advance specific projects.
This guide is specifically intended to help the reader:
- to integrate effective learning methods and approaches into the planning, delivery, and evaluation of primary health care services
- to design, carry out, and evaluate health activities, working with groups and individuals and using methods appropriate to the local culture and based on available resources
- to transfer educational and planning skills to community health workers and the community at large
- to promote effective interaction between person-to-person education at community level and communication to larger audiences through media of a local, regional, or national nature.
Health education focuses on people's ways of life and behavior. In this manual:
- Chapter I explores the relationship between health and the behavior of individuals, groups, and communities. It shows the importance of understanding the many reasons for people's behavior.
- Chapter 2 deals with health education as 'people working with people', establishing good relationships, avoiding prejudice, knowing how to communicate clearly and how to promote partnership with people in achieving their goals.
- Chapter 3 reviews the skills needed for planning community health action. Such skills include collecting information, deciding on priorities, setting objectives, taking action, and evaluating results.
- Chapter 4 deals with health education as a process of counselling for individuals and families.
- Chapter 5 explores methods for the health education of groups, including formal and informal community groups, children at school, people in the same work-place, and the health care team itself. Methods for training groups are also included.
- Chapter 6 discusses techniques and approaches for working with the community as a whole.
- Finally, Chapter 7 describes various health education methods and media that can be used to promote wiser decision-making and improved health behavior. It deals with person-to-person methods, with use of mass media, and with the effective combination of these approaches.
<section>The concept of primary health care</section>
The primary health care concept incorporates certain fundamental values common to the overall process of development but with emphasis on their application in the field of health, as follows:
- Health is fundamentally related to the availability and distribution of resources not just health resources such as doctors, nurses, clinics, medicines, but also other socioeconomic resources such as education, water and food supply.
- Primary health care is thus concerned with ensuring that the available health and social resources are distributed equitably, with due consideration for those whose needs are greatest.
- Health is an integral part of overall development. The factors influencing health are thus social, cultural, and economic, as well as biological and environmental.
- The achievement of better health requires much more involvement by people, as individuals, families, and communities, in taking action on their own behalf by adopting healthy behavior and ensuring a healthy environment.
Primary health care is the first level of contact of individuals, the family and community with the national health system bringing health care as close as possible to where people live and work, and constitutes the first element of a continuing health care process.
Primary health care is the key to the attainment by all peoples of the world by the year 2000 of a level of health that will permit them to lead a socially and economically productive life.
Declaration of Alma-Ata, 1978
<section>Chapter 1: Health behavior and health education</section>
We have to think of many things when we want to help individuals, families, and communities prevent disease and promote health.
Spreading the word about what people should do to be healthy is important. But this is not enough. We have to understand that, in many situations, it is not only the individual who needs to change. There are other things that influence the way people behave: the place in which they live, the people around them, the work they do, whether they are able to earn enough money all these things have a great influence, and we must take them into consideration.
Our first effort must be therefore to listen, to learn, and to understand.
In this chapter we will see:
- The factors that influence health and illness including people's own actions
- What makes people behave as they do
- Changes occurring in behavior, naturally or through planned action
- Ways to help people improve their behavior
Then we will discuss:
- What we really mean by health education
- Who is a health educator
<section>Health, illness, and behavior</section>
An important background to health work is knowledge of what makes, and keeps, people healthy and why they become ill.
Dangers to health
A basic training in health tells us that many things, such as those listed below, are dangerous to health. You can probably think of more.
Living things
Tiny organisms such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, worms, and amoebae may enter the body through contact (touch), swallowing, and breathing, or through the bites and scratches of insects and other living things, and cause disease.
The bites and stings of animals such as scorpions and some snakes, bees, jellyfish, and spiders are dangerous to health.
Eating or touching certain plants can cause poisoning or rashes.
Non-living substances
Touching, swallowing or breathing substances such as kerosene, insecticides, gas, fertilizers, lead, and acid can poison or damage the body.
Alcohol, cigarettes, drugs used for non-medical reasons, like marijuana, and even medicines (if not taken correctly) can cause mental and physical illnesses.
Natural events
Floods, earthquakes, wind-storms, and similar events can cause injury and death.
In the natural process of growing older the human body becomes weaker and is more likely to suffer from illnesses.
Man-made environmental factors
Unguarded cooking fires, overcrowded houses, open gutters, broken bottles, open knife-blades, and poorly constructed roads and buildings can lead to accidents.
Stressful and difficult conditions at work, in the family, and in the community can lead to mental and physical illness.
Heredity
Certain diseases such as sickle cell anaemia, diabetes, and some forms of mental retardation can be inherited. The disease characteristic is passed on from mother, father, or both parents to the child.
The things listed can certainly cause disease or injury, but alone they are not enough to do so. When there are open fires, bacteria, kerosene, or other dangerous things in the environment, people are not always injured, and do not always become ill. If people know how to deal with these dangerous things, trouble can be avoided.
Healthy and unhealthy behavior
People stay healthy or become ill, often as a result of their own action or behavior.
Here are some examples of how people's actions can keep them healthy:
- Washing hands and plates with soap and clean water kills some of the bacteria that cause disease.
- Using mosquito nets and insect sprays helps to keep disease carrying mosquitos away.
- Putting kerosene bottles out of the reach of small children avoids the danger of children drinking from them and poisoning themselves.
- Carefully guarding cooking fires from children reduces the risk of burns.
In health education it is very important to be able to identify the practices that cause, cure, or prevent a problem. Let us look at a common health problem and see what kinds of behavior are involved.
Diarrhoea is a common symptom of many diseases that are often the result of poor sanitation. It is a serious problem, especially in young children.
Here are some of the practices that can cause diarrhoea:
- Feeding children with feeding-bottles, as these are often difficult to keep clean.
- Drinking river, stream, or pond water without purifying it.
- Not washing hands before eating.
- Not washing plates, cups, and spoons, or washing them with plain water only.
- Defecating anywhere on the open ground. Infected faeces may contaminate objects that small children pick up and put in their mouths.
- Leaving refuse in the open, so flies can breed on it.
- Leaving food uncovered so that flies can contaminate it.
- Eating raw fruits and vegetables without washing them.
- Cooking food only partly, so that not all germs are killed.
- Using left-over food that has not been thoroughly reheated or that has spoiled.
Here are the kinds of action that can help control diarrhoea in a sick child:
- Giving the child plenty of liquids such as fruit juice and clean water.
- Continuing breast-feeding, rather than changing to a bottle, for children who are not completely weaned.
- Giving the child an oral rehydration drink made from clean water, salt, and sugar (check at your local clinic the formula that is accepted for use in your own country).
- Continuing feeding nutritious foods that will not upset the child's stomach (for example, avoid peppery foods).
- Going to the health worker the next day if the diarrhoea is not stopped by the simple actions just mentioned.
The following practices help prevent diarrhoea:
- Breast-feeding all infants.
- Filtering or boiling drinking-water from streams.
- Collecting drinking-water from sanitary wells or protected springs.
- Washing hands with soap and water before and after eating.
- Washing plates, cups, and spoons with clean water and soap.
- Defecating in latrines, and always washing hands with soap and water afterwards.
- Covering food to protect it from dust, insects, and other animals.
- Putting waste in a dustbin or a pit covered with soil, or burning it.
- Washing all food items.
- Washing hands with soap and water before preparing food.
- Cooking vegetables in boiling water.
Can you think of any other practices or kinds of behavior that cause, control, or prevent diarrhoea?
Think of other health problems. What kind of behavior can cause you to get a splinter in your foot? What kind of behavior can prevent this? What kind of behavior helps spread scabies? What kind of behavior prevents it? Look at other common health problems in your area. Name the kinds of behavior that cause, cure, and prevent them.
<section>Understanding behavior</section>
There are many reasons why people behave the way they do. If we want to use health education to encourage healthy ways of life, we must know the reasons behind behavior that causes or prevents illness. This knowledge will help us select the right educational methods for the problem at hand. Four main reasons for people's behavior are given below.
Thoughts and feelings
We have many kinds of thoughts and feelings about the world we live in. These are shaped by our knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and values, and they can help us decide whether to behave in one way or in another.
Knowledge
Knowledge often comes from experience. We also gain knowledge through information provided by teachers, parents, friends, books, and newspapers. We can usually verify whether our knowledge is correct or not. If we cannot verify this directly ourselves, we know people who can. The child who puts a hand in the cooking-fire gains knowledge about heat and pain. That knowledge stops the child doing the same thing again. A child may see a hen cross the road and be hit by a vehicle. From that experience the child should learn that the road can be dangerous, and to be more careful when crossing.
Beliefs
These are usually derived from our parents, grandparents, and other people we respect. We accept beliefs, without trying to prove that they are true. For example, in many countries there are beliefs regarding which foods a pregnant woman should and should not eat. In one country people believe that a pregnant woman must avoid eating certain meats: if not, her baby will behave like the animals from which the meat comes. These beliefs discourage pregnant women from eating certain foods. Think of other examples.
Every country and community has its own beliefs. In one country people believe that if a pregnant woman eats eggs, she will have a difficult delivery. But in another country people believe that a pregnant woman must eat eggs so that her baby will be strong and healthy. Beliefs are part of the way people live. They indicate what is acceptable and what is not. As beliefs can be held very strongly, they are often difficult to change. Sometimes health workers themselves believe that any traditional belief is bad and must be changed. This is not necessarily right. First, health workers should find out if the belief is harmful, helpful, or neutral. Once you understand how the belief affects people's health, then you can concentrate on trying to change only the harmful beliefs.
The belief that pregnant women should not eat eggs looks like a harmful one because eggs are a good source of protein, and the mother needs to produce a strong and healthy baby. Before making a judgement about changing this belief, one should find out if the mothers in question are allowed to eat other good sources of protein such as meat, fish, beans, cheese, and groundnuts. If they get plenty of protein from other foods, it is not necessary to worry too much about the belief concerning eggs.
In one country there is a belief that, if a pregnant woman walks in the hot sun in the middle of the day, evil spirits will enter her body and damage the unborn child. One may not think that this belief is true. But it is sensible to encourage pregnant women not to overwork themselves when it is too sunny and hot. This type of belief may actually be helpful.
In many countries mothers put beads and charms on their children. They believe these beads will help the child. Some beads are believed to make teething easier, some to prevent illness, and others to protect against evil eye. One may doubt these beliefs. At the same time it is difficult to see any danger in the beads. Belief in their powers is probably a neutral belief, doing neither good nor harm.
If it is not certain that a belief is harmful, it is better to leave it alone. If too many of their beliefs are challenged people may get angry and not cooperate with the health workers.
If we study people's beliefs carefully, we may even find ways of making them useful. For example, one health worker found it possible to tell if children were growing or losing weight by observing the beads they wore. The beads around a growing child's arm would be tight. The beads would hang loosely if the child was losing weight.
Make a list of the beliefs people in your community have about food. Which of these are harmful, helpful, or neutral? What do people in your village believe is the cause of fever? Which of these beliefs are harmful, helpful, or neutral? In some cases you may not be able to tell whether a belief is helpful, harmful, or neutral. In this case you must study the belief more carefully until you are certain of its effect on health.
Attitudes
These reflect our likes and dislikes. They often come from our experiences or from those of people close to us. They either attract us to things, or make us wary of them. Here is an example.
Mrs Mendoza's baby had a mild cold, so she took the baby to the health centre. The staff on duty that day were very busy and shouted at Mrs Mendoza 'Do you want us to waste our time over a simple cold? Come back when we are less busy.
Mrs Mendoza did not like being shouted at. This experience gave her a bad attitude toward the health staff. She does not like or respect them now. This bad attitude could discourage Mrs Mendoza from attending the health centre next time her child is sick. However, an attitude about one thing alone does not always change how a person will behave. Mrs Mendoza may feel strongly that the drugs given at the health centre are very effective. Because of her attitude toward the drugs, Mrs Mendoza may still go to the health centre for help even though she still has a bad attitude towards the staff.
Attitudes can also come from other people's experiences.
Mrs Toro, for example, remembered that her neighbor's baby was successfully treated at the health centre. The positive attitude towards the health centre, which Mrs Toro had gained from her neighbor's experience, encouraged her to go to the health centre next time her own baby was sick.
On the other hand, situations do not always allow us to behave according to our attitudes. Maybe Mrs Toro is afraid of the dark, or possibly the health centre might be closed at night. If the baby fell sick at night, she might go to the old grandmother next door instead of walking to the centre in the dark. This does not mean her attitude towards the health centre has changed.
Attitudes are sometimes based on limited experience. We may form attitudes without understanding the whole situation. For example:
Mr Nola had bad results from a packet of seeds he bought in the town From his experience with only one packet, he formed the attitude that the shopkeeper who sold the seeds was a bad person Because of this attitude, Mr Nola decided never to go to that person's shop again
There are many possible reasons why the seeds grew poorly. It was not correct to blame the shopkeeper without looking into the situation more deeply.
Think about your own attitudes Take, as an example, sprays for killing insects You may have seen many different sprays which do you think are good? Which is the best? Why do you have these attitudes about these sprays? How do these attitudes affect your behavior? Do you always buy the spray you feel is best If not, why not?
Values
These are the beliefs and standards that are most important to us. People in a community share many values. For example they may want their community to be stable and happy. One way to work towards these values is by cooperation. Cooperation means working together to solve problems. It makes life easier. For example, in a community that values stability and happiness if one family wants to build a new house, the other villagers will cooperate together and help with the building.
The welfare of children is another value. By taking good care of children, parents will benefit: when healthy children grow up, they will be able to take care of their parents in old age. The value attached to children may encourage a mother to stay at home and care for a sick child instead of going out to visit her friends.
Think about your own values . What are the things that are most important in your life? How do the values affect your own behavior? Think about the values of the community where you work What values do you share with these people? Are any of your values different from theirs? How do the community's values encourage people to behave towards each other and with regard to health?
People who are important to us
A second reason for our behavior is the influence of people who are very important to us. When someone is important to us, we often listen to what he or she says and try to do what he or she does.
Among these important people are parents, grandparents, village leaders, religious leaders, close friends, workmates, people with a lot of experience and special skills, and people who try to help us when we need it (teachers, health workers, social workers).
Schoolteachers are very important to their pupils. If pupils see teachers washing their hands before eating, they may copy this behavior.
Everyone likes to have friends. Because they are important to us, we often copy their behavior. If a teenage boy has close friends who smoke cigarettes, he may start to smoke too.
Mr Tome is an old, experienced farmer. When he tells the other farmers not to plant their crops until they see the new moon after the first rain, they will follow his advice. Even if the agricultural agent gives them different advice, these farmers may tend to respect and copy the actions of the old man. They may not want to listen to a young extension agent who, in addition, may come from a different town.
Who are the respected people in your family? Who are the important and respected people in your village? What kinds of behavior do these important people encourage in your family and in the community?
Resources
A third reason for people's behavior is whether or not they have certain resources. Resources include facilities, money, time, labour, services, skills, and materials. The location of material resources is also important. If a resource is found a long way from the community it may not be used. Having a lot of things to do in a short time often affects people's behavior. For example:
Time
Time is a valuable resource.
Mr Aba is a tailor. He has a lot of work to do because a holiday is coming soon. If he ca