<title>Guidelines for training community health workers in nutrition</title>
Second edition, reprint 1995
World Health Organization
Geneva
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
The World Health Organization is a specialized agency of the United Nations with primary responsibility for international health matters and public health. Through this organization, which was created in 1948, the health professions of some 190 countries exchange their knowledge and experience with the aim of making possible the attainment by all citizens of the world by the year 2000 of a level of health that will permit them to lead a socially and economically productive life.
By means of direct technical cooperation with its Member States, and by stimulating such cooperation among them, WHO promotes the development of comprehensive health services, the prevention and control of diseases, the improvement of environ mental conditions, the development of human resources for health, the coordination and development of biomedical and health services research, and the planning and implementation of health programmes.
These broad fields of endeavour encompass a wide variety of activities, such as developing systems of primary health care that reach the whole population of Member countries; promoting the health of mothers and children; combating malnutrition, controlling malaria and other communicable diseases including tuberculosis and leprosy; coordinating the global strategy for the prevention and control of AIDS, having achieved the eradication of smallpox, promoting mass immunization against a number of other preventable diseases; improving mental health; providing safe water supplies; and training health personnel of all categories.
Progress towards better health throughout the world also demands international cooperation in such matters as establishing international standards for biological substances, pesticides and pharmaceuticals; formulating environmental health criteria; recommending international nonproprietary names for drugs; administering the International Health Regulations; revising the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems; and collecting and disseminating health statistical information.
Reflecting the concerns and priorities of the Organization and its Member States, WHO publications provide authoritative information and guidance aimed at promoting and protecting health and preventing and controlling disease.
Cover illustration by Farida Zaman
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION GENEVA 1986
First edition, 1981
Second edition, 1986
Reprinted 1991, 1993, 1995
ISBN 92 4 154210 1
© World Health Organization, 1986
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention. For rights of reproduction or translation of WHO publications, in part or in toto, application should be made to the Office of Publications, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. The World Health Organization welcomes such applications.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers.
TYPESET IN INDIA PRINTED IN ENGLAND
95/10712 - Spottiswoode/TWC - 3OOO
A number of the illustrations in this volume reproduce or are based on illustrations in King, M. et al., Primary child care. A manual for health workers, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1978, by kind permission of the publishers.
<section>Preface to first edition</section>
The trainers of community health workers for whom this book is primarily intended will probably already know the technical information on nutrition that it contains. Many of them, however, will not be familiar with the task-oriented approach that is adopted here. It is hoped that they will find this book useful either for preparing and carrying out a new nutrition training plan or for revising an existing plan to make it more practical and effective. Supervisors will find much in these pages to help them in the guidance and on-the-job training of community health workers under their supervision. The community health worker who has completed training based on this manual can also use it for reference and as a continuing guide to help her in her daily contacts with families. Finally, this book explains the basic nutrition tasks of the community health worker to other health and development workers in the community. It will serve them all as a guide in determining the areas in
which they can work together to solve the nutritional, health and related problems that are their common concern.
<section>Preface to second edition</section>
After its publication in 1981, the first edition of this book was field-tested in a number of training centres for community health workers in developing countries. This second edition has been prepared by Dr K. Bagchi on the basis of this experience. In addition, many trainers from both developed and developing countries who used the first edition sent in suggestions for improvement independently, and this edition also includes their recommendations. The World Health Organization is grateful to all of them.
The first part of this book consists of three chapters that should be read by all trainers. The first introduces the guidelines; the second deals with teaching skills, and is intended to help trainers teach better; those who are not formally trained as teachers will find it useful to study the teaching methods described. The third chapter presents some basic facts about foods to help trainers focus on the basic nutritional knowledge community health workers will need in order to work effectively.
The second part of the book contains the training modules. Each module deals with one topic and describes specific tasks related to it. The modules in this edition are essentially the same as those in the previous edition, though some of them have been modified considerably. In most cases, the training content has been made shorter. The modules on nutrition and diarrhoea and nutrition and infections in the previous edition have been condensed into one module in this edition. The last module is new and contains useful practical information on how to apply all the knowledge learnt during training to the nutritional problems in the real-life community situation.
This book should be used as a model, and national trainers must adapt it to suit local needs by introducing locally relevant examples of nutritional problems and exercises. (A recent WHO publication, Nutrition learning packages, describes useful training activities and contains material for adaptation.) This has already been done with the previous edition, which now exists in several languages including Arabic, Burmese, French, Hindi, Malay, Spanish, and Thai. We hope that this revised edition will prove even more useful than the first.
Dr Alberto Pradilla
Chief, Nutrition, WHO, Geneva
<section>Chapter 1 Introduction</section>
Malnutrition
In most developing countries the majority of the population-the rural population especially-does not receive even the most basic health care or any nutritional advice. Malnutrition usually stems from poverty and from ignorance of what are the right foods to eat. At the same time it increases the problems caused by the lack of health care because it weakens the body's defences against disease. People weakened by malnutrition and disease do not have the energy to overcome poverty and are helpless to improve their own situation. Malnutrition, therefore, is not merely one of the greatest public health problems in the world today, it is also both a result and a cause of social and economic under-development.
The root of the problem is in the home: to solve it, the family must be helped to learn better habits of nutrition and must be served by better health care. In an increasing number of countries, the person responsible for health care at the family level is the community health worker. In a primary health care system, she occupies a key position, being the first point of contact that the family has with the health services. It is she who first treats the members of the family for their illnesses and who gives them advice on health matters. It is essential, therefore, that she should be properly trained to deal with the most prevalent health problem she is likely to meet- namely, malnutrition.
The community health worker's nutrition tasks
There are many tasks she will have to perform to overcome the malnutrition problem. Studies conducted in recent years by the World Health Organization and others have shown that the majority of these tasks are common to community work in most developing countries. They can be grouped into eight main categories-namely:
o Getting to know the community needs
o Measuring and monitoring the growth and nutrition of children
o Promoting breast-feeding
o Giving nutritional advice on feeding infants and young children
o Giving nutritional advice to mothers
o Identifying, managing, and preventing nutritional deficiencies
o Providing nutritional care during common infections
o Conveying nutritional messages to the community.
The need for a change in nutrition training
The training in nutrition that the community health worker receives commonly suffers from three main defects.
First, because nutrition trainers are often professionals from different disciplines (doctors, nutritionists, or nurses, for example), they naturally tend to teach what they themselves learned during their own professional training. This often leads to the training being biased towards the profession of the trainer and being aimed at too high a level of learning. A doctor, for instance, may attempt to make his trainees learn details of the clinical aspects of nutrition that a community health worker does not really need to know and may not be able to understand. Moreover, the training frequently relies too much on learning technical information from textbooks and not enough on learning how to deal with practical problems of nutrition.
Secondly, the training is based mainly on lectures, during which the trainees remain passive listeners. There is no exchange of ideas between them and the lecturer that would help them remember the information he is attempting to pass on. Thus, lecturing is not always the best method of conveying information to the trainees.
Thirdly, there is a lack of simple training material designed specifically to teach community health workers how to perform certain tasks. Most manuals on nutrition concentrate on technical aspects of the subject. They do not specify the tasks the trainees will be expected to perform. They do not explain how the training should be conducted so that the trainees learn the necessary skills. And they do not indicate how to check whether the trainees have in fact learned those skills.
The purpose of these guidelines
The guidelines presented here have been prepared to help trainers overcome these problems. They are designed to train a community health worker to improve nutrition in her area by learning in a practical way the most important things she will need to know and do.
They are based on the following main considerations:
1. The training should be directed to the performance of specific tasks. These are the activities that the community health worker will need to carry out in order to deal with the nutritional problems in her area. The performance of these tasks requires certain skills; and these skills in turn have to be based on a knowledge of certain facts. For instance, if a child has diarrhoea the community health worker needs to know that the loss of water and salts from the body is dangerous and that this loss must be replaced by a special solution of salts and sugar in water. She also needs to be able to prepare the solution and feed it to the child, and to convey to the mother the importance of this task so that the mother can do it herself next time.
2. The community health worker should be trained to perform a limited number of practical tasks for the improvement of health and nutrition. The amount of theoretical information given during the training can be restricted to the minimum necessary for understanding the importance of those tasks.
3. To be fully effective, training requires the maximum participation by the trainees themselves. This can be achieved by what is called the "teaching-learning" method. It differs from conventional teaching in that it is more concerned with stimulating a trainee to acquire the knowledge she needs to perform a task successfully than with simply transferring knowledge from a teacher to a pupil. Using the modules in this book, the trainee will participate actively in her own training.
4. It is very important for the trainees to have a strong motivation to learn their job and to serve the community. This should be taken into account when selecting persons for training as community health workers. During the training period, the trainer should try to increase this motivation, in order to encourage the trainees to learn better and to help them to do their community work effectively.
5. As far as possible, the training should be given near the community in which a trainee will be working later. It is much easier for her to understand the problems she is learning to solve if she can relate them to the actual conditions she will meet in the community.
6. The trainees will have to acquire certain knowledge and skills that may not seem to be directly related to the technical aspects of nutrition. This is because the whole community must participate as much as possible in solving their own problems if activities or programmes to improve nutrition are to be successful. The community health worker will need, for instance, to be able to communicate with the community, to motivate and organize community groups to solve their own problems, to show leadership, and to analyse problems before proposing solutions for them.
7. The duration of the training will depend upon the educational background of the trainees, upon how many tasks they will be expected to perform, and upon how complicated these are.
8. Training is not necessarily completed in a set period of time or at the end of the formal training course. The supervisor will need to judge how effectively a community health worker is doing her job, to see what further training she may need, and to help her to acquire that training. This should be an encouragement to the community health worker to improve the service she can give. Refresher training at regular intervals will increase the effectiveness of community health workers.
How trainers may use these guidelines
Trainers who wish to develop nutrition training plans for community health workers for the first time may do so by following the steps listed in the next chapter. For the training itself they may use the modules given in the second part of this book. Depending on the situation in the local communities and on the qualifications of their trainees, one or more of the modules may need to be adapted to suit local conditions, customs, and resources. The length of the training period can be set when this has been done.
These guidelines provide a model of a nutrition training plan-the trainer should modify them to suit local needs.
Each of the training modules deals with one topic and describes tasks associated with it. For example, Module 2 is entitled "Measuring and monitoring the growth and nutrition of children". To carry out the tasks described in each module, community health workers will have to learn several subtasks. It should be noted that a community health worker will not necessarily perform all the tasks described in the guidelines every day. Rather, her daily activities will depend upon the type of nutritional problems in the community she is serving. Furthermore, nutritional problems in a community often vary with time.
The subtasks in each module form the learning objectives, which are given at the beginning of each module. For example, the learning objectives of Module 2 are:
o Explain the relationship between growth, development, and nutrition
o Find out the age of a child by using a local-events calendar if the mother is not sure of the age of her child
o Weigh a child accurately to within 100 grams
o Record the weight of a child on a growth chart
o Explain to the mother the features of the growth chart and how it will help her decide whether or not the child is doing well
o Interpret a child's growth pattern from the weight changes recorded.
The learning objectives also indicate what tasks a community health worker will be able to perform after the training is over.
The second section of each training module is entitled Training content. This section contains the basic training information about each module. After learning the training content the trainees should be able to:
o Understand why the task described in the title of the module is important
o Understand what subtasks and skills are required for carrying out that task
o Carry out the subtasks and practice the skills.
In this section, the training material is arranged in the same order as the learning objectives. The training content also describes the skills which must be acquired in order to carry out specific tasks. For example, the training content relating to the task of nutritional monitoring of young children describes in detail what a growth chart looks like, how the chart is to be used, how to weigh a child accurately, how to assess the correct age of the child, how to record the weight on the chart, and so on. In other words, the training material imparts the knowledge necessary to understand the importance of specific tasks, and also describes the skill required for each.
At the end of each section on training material there is a list of training methods suitable for that particular module. Here again, the trainer should remember that these are only examples and that other methods may be used if they are found to be more suitable for the trainees in a particular training situation.
The last section of each module presents practical exercises. These can be used in two ways. The trainees can use them as practical tasks to practice skills. And the trainers can use them as practical tests to assess how well the trainees have learnt the skills. As explained earlier the exercises are based on different training methods. Some involve practical work (for example, weighing a baby) and certain others are based on community survey work. In addition, there are some role-playing exercises for practicing and testing communication skills. It should be noted that the exercises given in this book are only examples. Trainers are advised to devise, if necessary, new exercises that suit local conditions and customs better.
<section>Chapter 2 Teaching for better learning</section>
The purpose of teaching is to facilitate learning. This is not an easy task. Teaching is commonly perceived as standing before a group of students and lecturing. Although this method of teaching is useful in certain situations, it is not always the best method of imparting information. Experience has shown that in the case of trainee community health workers lecturing alone is not enough to help them learn the necessary skills. This chapter considers the teaching and learning difficulties of trainers and trainee community health workers, respectively, and describes teaching methods suitable for training community health workers in nutrition.
Lectures alone are not enough to help trainees learn the necessary skills.
Teaching difficulties of trainers
Trainers of community health workers in nutrition often have different educational backgrounds (medicine, nutritional science, nursing, midwifery, etc.). Although all trainers have the necessary knowledge about nutrition, they often do not have enough knowledge about teaching methods that can facilitate learning. This is so because they have not been trained to be teachers. Thus, a good doctor, a good nurse, or a good nutritionist is not necessarily a good trainer as well.
Trainers of community health workers often have no formal training in teaching.
Therefore, it is recommended that, before starting to teach, all trainers should learn the basic principles of teaching, formulating a curriculum, and planning a lesson. They must also know the advantages and disadvantages of the commonly used teaching methods and aids.
Points to remember in planning a training course
Objectives of the course
The main aim of a nutrition training course for community health workers should be to train the students to carry out the tasks the, will be responsible for upon completion of their training. The trainer should obtain the job description of the community health workers he is expected to train to know what tasks should be included in the training course. It is most important to know exactly what tasks the trainees must learn. If the trainer is unsure about these tasks, it is very likely that the course will become excessively theoretical, dealing with the principles and science of nutrition rather than their application.
How much theory should be taught?
To be able to understand the reasons for carrying out particular tasks, the trainees must be taught some basic scientific facts about nutrition and human biology. The trainer must decide how much theoretical knowledge community health workers require in order to do the tasks well. In this regard the following points should be considered:
(a) Some trainers want to teach everything. This is not only impossible, but also not necessary.
(b) A good trainer should consider the subtasks associated with each task separately. He should then list these topics under two categories: "must learn" and "useful to learn". The first should include all the information all trainees must learn. After each lesson the trainer should ensure that the essential information has been learnt by each trainee. The second category should include information that may be useful to the trainees but is not essential for the performance of the tasks. The trainer should not spend much time on these topics. He should only guide the trainees as to where they can find that information. Often too much time is wasted on details that are of little importance to the objectives of the course. Sometimes the trainer may have difficulty in deciding what to teach and what to omit. In such situations the trainer should try to decide what the students would do poorly if this detail were left out. If the answer is "nothing", then that detail should be
left out.
The trainer must specify and define the learning objectives clearly.
Helping students to learn
The role of the trainer is help the students to learn. The learning process can be made easier with the help of different teaching methods and aids. Lecturing is just one way of helping the trainees to learn; there are other, better methods. For example, the trainees can be given a hand-out and then asked to participate in a discussion on the subject of the hand-out. Another way is by assigning a task that requires the students to do something or to observe a real-life situation. The following Chinese proverb may be useful to remember in this context:
o Hear and you forgot
o See and you remember
o Do and you understand.
In the usual classroom teaching, most trainers prefer to lecture because it is the easiest thing to do. Moreover, in most training schools facilities are lacking for teaching by other methods. If lecturing is the only feasible method of teaching, some simple techniques can be used to improve its effectiveness.
Some simple ways of improving lectures
Planning topics in the lecture
First make a list of the topics to be covered in the lecture. This list should be in the order in which the topics must be learnt. Then decide what information and facts are essential for teaching each of the topics. Such planning facilitates the learning process.
Unplanned lectures confuse students.
Giving the lecture
There is no one ideal way of giving a lecture. The style of lecturing depends on the subject of the lecture and the type and level of the trainees. With experience most trainers develop an effective way of lecturing. The following are some useful suggestions:
(a) Find out how much the students already know. What the trainees already know determines what they can learn next. An example will illustrate this point. If the trainer is going to lecture on the nutritional care of young children, the trainees should have already learnt about the nutritional values of commonly available foods in the community. Similarly, the trainees must know about monitoring the nutritional status of young children with the help of a growth chart before they learn about the identification and management of protein-energy malnutrition. In training courses in which several trainers lecture one group of trainees, this practice is sometimes not followed. Often, lectures are fixed according to the convenience of the trainers.
Before giving a lecture find out what the trainees already know.
(b) Before starting the lecture summarize the main topics to be covered. It is a good practice to tell the trainees at the beginning of the lecture what topics are going to be covered and what is their importance with regard to the tasks the trainees will be expected to perform in the community. If the blackboard is normally used, write the headings of all the topics in the lecture before starting the lecture. This will help to create interest in the subject among the students.
Write the topics of the lecture on the blackboard before starting the lecture.
(c) Make the lecture interesting. Standing before a group of trainees and talking in a dull and monotonous voice is the surest way of making the lecture ineffective. Some ways of making lectures more interesting are: asking questions, telling some real-life experiences related to the topic, and posing problems and asking trainees to suggest ways of solving them.
(d) Speak loudly enough. Speak loudly so that those sitting at the back of the class can hear clearly. Experience has shown that trainee community health workers are likely to remain quiet and not ask the trainer to speak louder even if they cannot hear clearly.
(e) Face the trainees and speak clearly. It is most important to face the students while giving a lecture. Many trainers spend a lot of time looking at their notes or facing the blackboard while lecturing. This is a bad practice. It results in students losing interest in the lecture. Lecturing to a class of students should be regarded as similar to talking to a small group of people. Look at each of your trainees from time to time while giving the lecture. This is called "making eye contact".
(f) Use simple language. Speak in as simple language as possible so that all the trainees understand everything you say. Often, persons training to become community health workers have a poor educational background and therefore may have difficulty in understanding difficult words. Moreover, they may be from different regions of the country and may speak different dialects or even different languages.
Three simple rules for making a lecture effective:
o Speak loudly and clearly
o Face the trainees
o Use simple language.
(g) Use visual aids whenever possible. During a lecture it is good to use visual aids, such as a blackboard, charts, slides, or photographs to explain certain ideas. When properly used, visual aids can create interest in the subject among the trainees and can break the monotony of the lecture. Many trainers use visual aids, but not always in the best way. Here are some simple rules:
o Write clearly. Trainers should remember that students have a tendency to copy everything that is written on the blackboard. Quite often trainers write only a few words or incomplete sentences on the blackboard and speak the rest of the sentence. This may result in the trainees writing down a jumble of words which they will not be able to understand later. Therefore, all writing on the blackboard should be clear and legible. The trainer should also make sure that trainees in all parts of the classroom can clearly see the blackboard.
o Draw simple diagrams. If a diagram or a rough illustration is necessary to explain something, make sure that the drawing is as simple as possible. It should be noted that while the trainer may find a diagram simple it may still be confusing to the trainees. Avoid using graphs, bar diagrams and similar illustrations because these may be difficult for the trainees to understand.
(h) To conclude the lecture summarize the main points again. Some time should be kept at the end of the lecture for summarizing the main points which the trainer wants the trainees to remember. This will also provide an opportunity for the trainer to find out how much the trainees have learnt.
Teaching of skills
Community health workers have to acquire certain skills to perform the tasks required to provide health care to the community. In nutritional care, for example, community health workers have to perform tasks such as weighing children to monitor their growth, identifying children who are at risk of becoming malnourished, and advising mothers on how to feed young children. To do any one task well, the community health worker must first understand why that is necessary; for this she will need to have knowledge. Then, she must learn the skills needed to carry out that task.
Community health workers need to learn three types of skill to do their job well. First, they must have reasonable manual dexterity. For example, they would need to use their hands skillfully in weighing children and recording the weights on growth charts. Such skills are called manual skills. Second, they would need thinking skills, for such tasks as identifying children at risk of becoming malnourished, for example. Finally, they would need the ability to convince mothers and other people to change some of their habits and practices. For this they would need communication skills. (For example, community health workers would have to convince parents to get their children immunized.)
Skills cannot be learned through lectures and demonstrations alone. They have to be practiced. Community health workers will need a lot of practice in doing tasks before they develop the necessary confidence to do those tasks independently.
Teaching of skills is best done in three steps. First, describe the task and the skills required to do it. Then demonstrate the skills. Finally, allow the trainees to practice the skills. The first two steps should be done at the same time so that the trainees understand the link between them. Once the trainees have understood why a task is necessary and how to do it, they should start practicing it quickly, while it is still fresh in their minds.
Three steps in teaching particular skills:
o Describe the task and skills required to do it
o Demonstrate the skills
o Allow the trainees to practice them.
Description of skills
First, the trainer should describe the task and the skills required to do it. He should also explain why the task is necessary, under what circumstances it is required, and what might go wrong if the skills are not learned properly.
For example, to do the task of monitoring growth by using a growth chart, a community health worker will need to learn various skills, including:
o Convincing mothers to bring their babies for weighing
o Checking the accuracy of weighing-scales
o Weighing babies correctly
o Recording their weights on growth charts
o Interpreting growth curves
o Giving appropriate advice to mothers.
In a lecture, the trainer should first describe the above task and skills using visual aids (such as pictures of a weighing-scale and a growth chart). While describing each of the above skills the trainer should point out what might go wrong and what would be the result of a mistake; for example, that if the weighing scale is not checked properly before use all results would be wrong.
Several skills may be needed to do one task.
All skills should be learned and practiced separately.
Demonstration of skills
After describing and explaining the task and associated skills, the trainer should demonstrate each skill separately. Sometimes, persons other than the trainer may do the demonstration. For ex