<title>Calliandra calothyrsus - Production and use: A Field Manual</title>
Editor:
Mark H. Powell
Forest, Farm, and
Community Tree Network
© Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, 1997
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced without written permission from the copyright owner.
Powell, M. H., editor.
Calliandra calothyrsus production and use: A field manual
Published by Winrock International and the Taiwan Forestry Research Institute with financial support from the Council of Agriculture, Taiwan, Republic of China. Published in cooperation with the Agency for Forestry Research and Development, Ministry of Forestry, Republic of Indonesia; the Forestry Research Program on behalf of the Overseas Development Administration, United Kingdom; and the United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tropical Forestry Program.
Winrock International
Forest, Farm, and Community Tree Network (FACT Net)
38 Winrock Drive
Morrilton, Arkansas 72110-9370, USA
Telephone: 1-501-727-5435
Facsimile: 1-501-727-5417
E-mail: forestry@msmail.winrock.org
Taiwan Forestry Research Institute
53 Nan-Hai Road
Taipei, Taiwan
Telephone: 886-2-381-7107
Facsimile: 886-2-314-2234
Council of Agriculture, Executive Yuan
37 Nan-Hai Road
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China
The Forest, Farm, and Community Tree Network is an international organization of 2,000 community groups, development workers, tree breeders, scientists and farmers. Through research, extension and communications activities, FACT Net provides the skills and resources necessary to introduce, improve, and manage multipurpose trees for economic and environmental benefits. FACT Net is a program of the Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, a non-profit organization in the United States of America.
Photographs on front cover (clockwise from upper left): D. J. Maqueen, M. H. Powell, M. H. Shelton, and J. M. Roshetko
Graphics by Mark H. Powell
<section>Preface</section>
The genus Calliandra contains 132 species. Most are endemic to the Americas, but a few species are endemic to the South Asian subcontinent or Africa, including Madagascar. Most species are shrubs or small trees, although a few are large trees or herbs. Native to Central America and Mexico, Calliandra calothyrsus is the most widely used species in the genus. In 1936, Indonesian foresters planted C. calothyrsus in screening trials to evaluate its potential as a shade tree for coffee plantations. Although the species proved unsuitable for this use in Indonesia, farmers on Java have planted C. calothyrsus widely for fuelwood production and land reclamation. It is also planted for green manure, animal fodder, bee forage, and pulpwood.
The successful use of C. calothyrsus in Indonesia has stimulated global interest in the genus, and trials are in progress in countries throughout the tropics to evaluate Calliandra species and their potential uses in agroforestry systems. Through its international Calliandra network, the Oxford Forestry Institute (OFI) is taking a lead role in the investigation of genetic variation within the genus. OFI has sent Calliandra seed to researchers in 120 countries for the establishment of species and provenance trials and seed-production activities.
In January 1996, Winrock International, the Indonesian Ministry of Forestry's Agency for Forestry Research and Development, and the Forestry Research Program on behalf of the Overseas Development Administration (UK) held an international workshop to discuss recent and current research and development activities focusing on the genus Calliandra. In addition to the workshop organizers, the United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tropical Forestry Program (USDA/FS/TFP), the Taiwan Forestry Research Institute and Council of Agriculture, and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund provided financial support for the workshop, in-kind support, or support for individual participants.
The workshop took place from 23 to 27 January 1996 in Bogor, Indonesia. The objectives were to:
o Report and exchange information on Calliandra production in a variety of sites and under a variety of management conditions
o Explore the potential of Calliandra species for use in small farming systems
Thirty-nine participants from 14 countries shared their research and observations. Winrock International has published selected papers presented at the workshop in a proceedings volume.
During the workshop, working groups summarized current knowledge on Calliandra botany and ecology. They also prepared summaries on seed collection and production, establishment methods, uses, and fodder-production systems, focusing on C. calothyrsus. The summaries were used to prepare this field manual on C. calothyrsus production and use. Copies of the workshop publications, the field manual and the proceedings volume, are available from Winrock International.
Winrock International's Forest, Farm, and Community Tree Network (FACT Net), which helped organize this workshop, was formerly known as the Nitrogen Fixing Tree Association (NFTA). Since 1982, NFTA/FACT Net has cosponsored 20 international workshops on important nitrogen fixing tree (NFT) species and on other agroforestry topics. These workshops have been instrumental in demonstrating the value and promoting the use of many NFT species. The Calliandra workshop was the last in a series of five funded in large part with a grant from the USDA/FS/TFP. Previous workshops in the series focused on the genus Dalbergia, NFTs for acid soils, Albizia and Paraserianthes species, and NFTs for fodder production. We believe that this series of workshops has expanded knowledge of NFT species and has provided foresters, development workers, and farmers with useful information.
Mark H. Powell and James M. Roshetho, Winrock International
<section>Acknowledgments</section>
My sincere thanks go to the institutions and individuals who made the international Calliandra workshop a success. Members of the workshop steering committee were: Ngaloken Gintings, Mohamid Rosid, Dedeh, Syamsudin, Hayati Yusuf, and Agus Sukardi of the Agency for Forestry Research and Development, Ministry of Forestry of the Republic of Indonesia; Alan Pottinger of the Oxford Forestry Institute; and Dale Evans of the University of Hawaii. A special thanks go to Dr. Gintings and his staff for their hospitality and kindness, and to Dr. Hsu-Ho Chung of the Taiwan Forestry Research Institute for arranging the printing and distribution of this field manual.
Winrock International and the Agency for Forestry Research and Development, Ministry of Forestry of the Republic of Indonesia gratefully acknowledge financial support for the workshop provided by:
o United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tropical Forestry Program (USDA/FS/TFP)
o Forestry Research Program on behalf of the Overseas Development Administration, United Kingdom
o Taiwan Forestry Research Institute and Council of Agriculture
o Rockefeller Brothers Fund
In addition to providing financial support for the workshop, the USDA/FS/TFP provided support for the publication of this field manual. The Taiwan Forestry Research Institute arranged printing and distribution, with financial support from the Taiwan Council of Agriculture.
A special thanks also go to the authors of the individual chapters in this field manual. They worked diligently both during and after the workshop to make this manual as complete and accurate as possible. In addition to the authors listed at the beginning of each chapter, Steve Krecik, Junus Kartasubrata, Brian Palmer, Duncan Macqueen, Joanne Chamberlain, and Bahiru Duguma provided valuable comments on Chapter 3.
Sidney B. Westley edited the text, and Jim Roshetko provided technical assistance. Doris Cook keyed in text. Diane Michels proofread the final draft. Again, my sincere thanks to all these individuals and institutions.
Mark H. Powell, Editor
<section>1. Botany and Ecology</section>
Duncan Macqueen
The genus Calliandra belongs to the family Leguminosae, subfamily Mimosoideae and tribe Ingae. Calliandra is a large genus with about 132 species from North and South America, 9 species from Madagascar, 2 species from Africa and 2 species from the Indian subcontinent. The center of diversity of the genus is in the state of Bahia, Brazil. There is a secondary center of diversity in southern Mexico and Guatemala. Many of these species are mostly shrubs or small trees, although occasionally they are herbs or larger trees (for example the species C. stipulaceae grows to 25 m). Most of the species do not have spines, although there are rare exceptions such as C. umbrosa from India.
Many species of Calliandra are found in humid lowland forest, often along river banks or in the forest understory. Some species, however, are found in montane vegetation (for example C. hirsuta), while others are found in arid scrub (for example C. californica).
Despite the broad range of localities and habitats in which Calliandra species occur, there are a number of features which make the genus easy to identify. The leaves of all species have a main axis from which secondary axes branch in pairs opposite one another. Pairs of leaflets are arranged along the secondary axes. On the leaves of some species there are only two secondary axes with a single pair of leaflets on each. On the leaves of other species there are numerous pairs of secondary axes and numerous pairs of leaflets. Uniquely, in a single Calliandra species, C. hymenaeodes leaflets branch off one central axis.
The flowers of all Calliandra species occur in clusters or semispherical heads. In some species these clusters are arranged in staggered groups towards the end of a flowering axis. The latter type of arrangement is called a raceme. The flowers themselves are almost always cup-shaped with five small petals arranged regularly. Many long white or red filaments extend beyond the floral cup. They are always joined into a tube at the base and are at least twice as long as the flower itself. Sometimes within the group of flowers in a head only the central few produce nectar and are functional. In these cases the outer flowers simple help to attract pollinators. In some species a small percentage of the flowers only have the male pollen producing parts, and these flowers are interspersed with bisexual flowers.
Calliandra flowers open at night and are usually pollinated by bats or moths which drink the nectar produced in the base of the floral cup. In the single species C. schultzei the flower petals are arranged irregularly and the principle pollinator is a species of hummingbird.
The fruit of all Calliandra species are straight (or slightly curved), flattened pods with raised margins. The pods split explosively from the tip to release seed. This particular mechanism of seed dispersal is found in only a few other genera, and in those genera it is always associated with very different floral structures. Appendix D gives morphological and seedling keys to the identification of some Calliandra species.
Calliandra calothyrsus
Distribution
The species C. calothyrsus is unique within the genus in terms of its wide international use as an agroforestry multipurpose tree. It occurs naturally in Mexico and Central America from the state of Colima. Mexico. down to the north coast of central
Panama. In 1936 seed was sent from south Guatemala to Java in Indonesia. This seed was most probably collected from the Guatemalan provenance 'Santa Maria de Jesus'. By 1974, village based trials had been set up to assess the species suitability for the reforestation of eroded land around villages. C. calothyrsus proved well suited to a range of agroforestry systems and was promoted by the Indonesian state forestry sector for widespread planting. From Java it was introduced to many other Indonesian islands. Its popularity soon generated interest elsewhere and seed was sent to many countries in Africa, Asia and even back to Central America.
At the same time, in the early 1980s, the Costa Rican institute, CATIE, made a collection of seed from a limited number of provenances in Guatemala, Costa Rica and Honduras for trials in Central America.
In 1990 the Oxford Forestry Institute began a range wide collection of seed which was completed in 1993. The collection included 50 provenances from the eight countries within the species range. The seed was then sent out to 32 countries for the purpose of species and provenance evaluation. Consequently, populations of the species now exist in South America, Africa, Asia and Oceania and it can truly be said to have a pan-tropical distribution.
Botany
Calliandra calothyrsus is a small branching tree growing to a maximum height of 12 m and to a maximum basal stem diameter of 20 cm. The stems have red or pale gray bark covered in small, pale, oval lenticels. Towards the tip the stems tend to be ridged, and in trees with red-brown bark the final stem portion may be tinged with red coloring. Beneath the stem, the root system consists of several deep tap roots and a maze of finer roots which extend outwards just beneath the soil surface. In the presence of the correct rhizobia and mycorrhiza, nodules and fungal associations form. In some populations the species has been shown to develop from root suckers so that an apparent clump of bushes may in fact be one single individual.
The species has soft leaves divided into many straight leaflets. The leaves may reach 20 cm long and 15 cm wide and they fold against the stem at night. The leaf stalks are ridged with a groove on the upper surface, but they do not have glands between the pairs of secondary axes.
In the native range flowering occurs throughout the year, but it tends to peak between July and March. The inflorescence develops in a terminal position. Several clusters of flowers develop around nodes up the axis. The flowers mature from the base to the tip over a period of many months. The flowers open for a single night with showy filaments which are usually white at the very base and red at the tip (although they may exceptionally be pink). By the next day, the filaments have wilted and unfertilized flowers drop.
Pods take between two and four months to develop and when mature they may be 14 cm long and almost 2 cm wide. They are straight and mid-brown in color, and they contain 8-12 ovules which may develop into flattened oval seeds. The surface of mature seed is mottled brown and black, and it has a distinct marking in the shape of a horse shoe on both flattened surfaces. Mature seed reach 8 mm in length and are hard when pressed with a finger nail. In the native range, seed set peeks between the months of November and April. As the pods dry, tensions are created in the thickened pod margins which cause an explosive splitting from the tip. Seeds are ejected with a spinning motion and may fly up to 10 m.
The seedling develops with the two fleshy cotyledons above the ground. The first leaf has only a single axis from which leaflets develop, but subsequent leaves are divided into secondary axes.
The species has a number of common names in its local range, the most frequently used being 'cabello de angel' (meaning 'angel's hair') and 'barbe sol' (meaning 'the suns beard'). In Indonesia the species is referred to as 'Calliandra merah' (meaning 'red Calliandra').
Taxonomy
In Mexico and Central America, C. calothyrsus is one of seven naturally occurring species within a section of the genus called 'series Racemosae'. The name Racemosae indicates that these species have an elongated flowering axis (up to 40 cm long). The leaves of these seven species are also distinctive since many pairs of secondary axes branch off the primary leaf axis, and each secondary axis has many pairs of small leaflets (less than 2 cm long and 0.5 cm wide). In South America there are many similar looking species, but they either do not have such long flowering axes, or they have fewer divisions of the leaves.
Calliandra calothyrsus can be distinguished from species of similar appearance by a unique combination of features. The species almost straight leaflets do not tend to overlap and they do not have a glossy upper surface. The leaves are soft and tend to fold when a leafy branch is cut. The small stipules (found in pairs at the base of the leaf stalk) are long and thin rather than oval, with a leafy texture when green. They almost always fall off on older stems. The stems, flowers and pods are almost always without hairs. The flower petals are delicate, smooth and green or pale yellow in color (rarely being tinged with red). The petals are never thick or woody and are never covered in hairs of any length or color.
Ecology
Calliandra calothyrsus occurs naturally along river banks, but will rapidly colonize any area of disturbed vegetation (for example roadsides). It is not particularly tolerant of shade and may soon be out-competed in secondary vegetation. It inhabits a range of sites within Mexico and Central America from sea level to an altitude of 1860 m. It primarily occurs in areas with a mean annual rainfall of between 1000 and 4000 mm, although exceptional populations occur in areas with only 800 mm annual rainfall. It principally occurs in areas with 2-4 months dry season (with less than 50 mm rainfall per month). On occasions, however, specimens have been found in areas with a dry season as long as 6 months. It occupies areas with a mean annual minimum temperature of 18-22° C. It is not frost tolerant. Within its natural distribution it occurs on a variety of soils and appears to be tolerant of slightly acid soils with pH values around 4.5. It does not tolerate soils with poor
drainage which are regularly inundated.
Morphological variation
There is considerable morphological variation between different populations of C. calothyrsus. Certain geographical patterns present themselves, but the presence of numerous exceptions to these patterns has meant that no subspecies or varieties have yet been designated. Three particular trends of variation can be described.
Along the Pacific coast to the north of the isthmus of Tehuantepec in Mexico and in Central Honduras and Nicaragua there is a tendency for the species to have whiter bark, flowers with more white at the base of the filaments and sparse short hairs on slightly smaller pods. The areas in which this trend is found tend to be the drier portions of the species range.
In southern Mexico, Central Guatemala, Belize and northern Honduras there tend to be populations with red-brown bark, red flower filaments, and larger pods without any hairs. The trees in these populations tend to be taller in the native range, and occur in some of the wetter areas of the species natural distribution.
Finally, in similarly wet areas of Costa Rica and Panama populations tend to have leaves with more pairs of secondary axes.
<section>2. Seed Collection and Production</section>
Joanne R. Chamberlain, Alan J. Poffinger, and Rajesh Rajaselvam
Flowering and fruiting characteristics
In many areas, Calliandra calothyrsus can flower throughout the year, but the species usually has a peak flowering period three months before the onset of the dry season. Buds are held on a racemose inflorescence and open sequentially from the base to the apex of the inflorescence. Each flower opens at approximately 1600 furs, remains receptive for one night only, and wilts the following day. An individual inflorescence can flower for 90 to 120 days. Calliandra calothyrsus is andromonecious, which means that the plant produces both hermaphrodite (bisexual) and staminate (functionally male) flowers. The staminate flowers lack the female parts (ovary, style, and stigma) and can never produce fruits. After the flowers are fertilized, mature fruits and seeds develop in approximately 90 days. The plant always produces more flowers than fruits: fruit-to-flower ratios of 1:20 are common.
Pollination
Calliandra calothyrsus is outcrossing and has a low tolerance of selfing The species is pollinated by bats (Chiroptera) and hawkmoths (Sphingidae). The most efficient pollinators are small, nectivorous bats in the subfamilies Glossophaginae (New World fruit bats) and Macroglossinae (Old World fruit bats), although larger, primarily fruit-eating bats are also efficient pollinators of the species. Bats pollinate C. calothyrsus by hovering over the flower for a second or two. They insert their long tongues into the base of the flower and drink the nectar. Sometimes, larger fruit-eating bats land on the inflorescence, which bends under the weight of the bat allowing access to the nectar. In Honduras, a small nectivorous bat, Glossophaga sp., has a very small foraging range (less than 600 m), but other, frugivorous bats can travel much greater distances (up to 50 km) for food.
Seed production
In its native range, C. calothyrsus generally forms small scattered populations within river systems and areas of disturbance. There is a great deal of variation in seed production, both between populations and within populations, from year to year. This variation may have a genetic basis (i.e. some populations are genetically better seed producers than others), or it may result from environmental factors such as climatic conditions or pollinator type. Calliandra calothyrsus produces less seed that several other multipurpose-tree species, such as Leucaena spp. or Gliricidia sepium, and is known as a shy seed-producer both in its native range and when planted as an exotic species.
Seed collection, processing, and storage
When collecting C. calothyrsus seed in the native range or from naturalized stands, pods should be sampled from trees spaced evenly and widely across a population. To prevent selecting seed from closely related individuals, sampling more than one tree in a patch of dense C. calothyrsus should be avoided. Pods should be collected from all positions in the crown. The pods of C. calothyrsus are dark brown and dry when ready for collection, and contain an average of five to eight seeds per pod. An individual tree may possess branches with pods at all stages of maturity, hence ripe pods can be collected from the same tree over a period of four to six weeks.
The pods dehisce explosively and can scatter the mature seeds several meters from the tree. Seed can be collected by placing matting below and around trees that have mature pods and removing the dehisced seed from the matting on a daily basis. Alternatively, the mature pods can be hand-picked from the tree and left to dry in the sun under netting to extract the seed. Seed can also be extracted by hand but must be dry and hard to ensure good germination and viability. Once collected and extracted, the seed should be stored in sealed containers in a refrigerator at 4°C. Stored in this manner, C. calothyrsus seed can retain its viability for at least five years. If the seed is going to be planted soon after collection, it should be stored in sacks in a cool dry place and protected from pests such as rats or mice.
Seed orchards
To date, large quantities of Calliandra calothyrsus seed have only been collected from natural populations or naturalized stands. Seed orchards are currently being established in the native range and elsewhere in order to produce large quantities of seed with known and desirable traits, such as good wood production or forage quality. These seed orchards have not yet reached a productive stage, however.
Seed orchards should be planted in an isolated site to reduce the risk of pollination from other, unselected sources and should be managed to produce frequent, abundant, and easily harvested seed crops. Although there has been little research on the best method of establishing C. calothyrsus seed orchards, it is possible to make some suggestions:
1. The seed orchard should be located on a uniform site that is accessible and secure.
2. It should be located away from other C. calothyrsus trees to make sure that the orchard trees are not contaminated by pollen from outside.
3. One of two types of seed orchard can be established: (a) Seed is collected from individual trees and kept separate in "families." Seed or seedlings from these families are planted, and their identities are maintained. The performance of each family can be measured and ranked, and less-desirable families can be removed; (b) Seed is collected from individual trees and bulked, and seed or seedlings are planted from the bulk seedlot. The second type of seed orchard is simpler to establish and maintain than the first, and the seed crop will have a broader genetic base.
4. The seed orchard can have a number of possible designs, but the pollinators require good access to the flowers to allow abundant seed production. Possible designs might include planting at a very wide spacing, such as 3 x 3 m, or planting in widely spaced rows, such as 2 x 4 m.
5. Coppicing or pollarding can be used as a management technique to improve seed production and ease of collection.
6. Early flowering in the seed orchard will not necessarily guarantee good seed yields in the first year, but seed production can be expected to improve with time.
<section>3. Establishment</section>
James M. Roshetko, Didier Lesueur, and JeanMichel Sarrailh
Calliandra calothyrsus is adapted to a wide range of environments. When planting this species, however, it is important to use a provenance (seed source) that is known to perform well in an environment similar to that of the planting site. Additionally, the selected provenance should provide needed services or products such as control of soil erosion, overstory shade, and fuelwood, fodder, or seed production. Identifying the best provenance for a site will usually result in increased tree survival, growth, and productivity.
Propagation
Seed selection. Seed of C. calothyrsus is more delicate than seed of most other leguminous tree species. Some seedlots may germinate well during testing, yet produce weak seedlings that perform poorly in the nursery or field. To ensure high quality, only collect seed that is fully mature. Only purchase seed from reliable sources. At a minimum, sources should provide documentation on where the seed was collected, the number of trees the seed was collected from, and the date of collection. To maintain seed quality, always store seed under optimum conditions--in sealed containers in a refrigerator at 4°C.
Seed treatment. Simple seed treatment can overcome the protective function of the seed coat and encourage good germination. Cutting or scraping a small hole through the seed coat, called "nicking," is recommended for small quantities of seed. A knife, nail-cutter, or file can be used for this procedure. To avoid damaging the seed embryo, cut the seed coat opposite the micropyle or hilum. After nicking, soak seed in cool water for 12 to 24 hours before sowing. The nicking treatment is not practical for large quantities of seed. Instead, soak seed in cool water for a minimum of 24 hours. With either treatment, seed should be sown immediately.
Soaking seed in hot water for 2 to 5 minutes and then in cool water for 12 to 24 hours usually produces good results. However, soaking in very hot water may damage the seed. Test the hot-water treatment on small samples for different lengths of time before treating large quantities of seed. Mechanical scarification machines (similar to grist mills or threshers) have been used to scarify large quantities of seed quickly, but this method is inconsistent and sometimes damages the seed.
Inoculation with Rhizobium. Like many other legumes, C. calothyrsus can form a symbiotic relationship with the soil bacterium, Rhizobium spp. The trees provide the rhizobia with carbohydrates for energy, and the rhizobia convert atmospheric nitrogen from the soil into a form that the trees can use. This process, called nitrogen fixation, occurs in nodules that develop on the roots of the trees.
There are many strains of Rhizobium in different soils around the world, but only some strains form a symbiotic relationship with C. calothyrsus that leads to effective nitrogen fixation. It is easy to determine whether the rhizobial strains that occur naturally in your soil are fixing nitrogen. Simply check the roots of C. calothyrsus trees for nodulation. Nodules should be abundant, and when you cut them open they should be red or pink inside. If root nodules are green, brown, or black, they are not fixing nitrogen.
In areas where C. calothyrsus is native or has been naturalized for some time, the soil may well contain rhizobia of the appropriate strains. If C. calothyrsus is not common to the area, however, or if the site is degraded, there may not be enough of the correct rhizobia in the soil to stimulate nitrogen fixation. In such situations, it is best to treat seed or seedlings with a selected strain of rhizobia to stimulate maximum nitrogen fixation. This process is called inoculation.
For C. calothyrsus, the Nitrogen Fixation by Tropical Agricultural Legumes (NifTAL) Center in Hawaii recommends a mixture of rhizobial strains that are also compatible with Gliricidia septum and Leucaena leucocephala. If rhizobial strains are present in the soil, however, they may compete with introduced strains. Where indigenous rhizobia are present, trials should be conducted to compare tree growth in the presence of indigenous and introduced strains. The best-performing strains can then be chosen for inoculation.
The material used to inoculate seed or seedlings is produced by isolating rhizobia from the root nodules of healthy trees, growing them in a laboratory, and mixing them with peat. The peat-based inoculant, which is manufactured and distributed by several government agencies and private commercial firms, contains 1,000 times the number of rhizobia normally found in the soil. Because rhizobial inoculants are inexpensive and the potential benefits are great, inoculation is recommended under most circumstances.
Rhizobium inoculants are available from the suppliers listed in Appendix A. When ordering inoculants, you should specify the C. calothyrsus provenance you are planting and the environmental characteristics of the planting site, such as average annual rainfall, maximum and minimum temperature, elevation, soil type, and soil pH. This information will help the supplier select the best available strain.
When using or storing a rhizobial inoculant, remember that the bacteria it contains are alive. They are sensitive to heat, drying out, freezing, and exposure to direct sunlight. If not used immediately, the inoculant should be tightly sealed and stored in a moist, cool, dark place. It should not be frozen. Follow the application and storage instructions provided by the supplier.
The rhizobial inoculant should be applied directly to C. calothyrsus seeds immediately before planting. Just after soaking the seeds, cover them with a sticker solution to make sure that the inoculant adheres to them. The NifTAL Center (Keyser 1990) recommends placing seeds in a plastic bag or bucket and covering them with a solution of gum arabic, sugar, or vegetable oil. Either dissolve 40 g of gum arable in 100 ml of hot water and allow it to cool, or dissolve 1 part sugar in 9 parts water. Combine 2 ml of one of these mixtures, or 2 ml of vegetable oil, with 100 g of seeds, and shake or stir the mixture vigorously until the seeds are evenly coated. Then add 5 mg of inoculant and shake or stir again until the seeds are well coated. Allow the inoculated seeds to dry for 10 minutes to eliminate any stickiness, and sow immediately. Do not store inoculated seeds--the rhizobia will die.
Seedlings can also be inoculated in the nursery. Mix inoculant in cool water, and irrigate the seedlings with the suspension. Keep the mixture well stirred or shaken, and irrigate until all the inoculant is washed into the root zone. One 50 g bag of inoculant is enough to inoculate 10,000 seedlings.
Alternatively, seedlings can be inoculated with alginate beads. These are produced in a laboratory and contain pure cultures of select Rhizobium strains. Before application, the beads must be rehydrated for 10 hours in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer of pH 7.4. Five grams of beads require I liter of buffer. If phosphate solution is not available, rehydrate 5 g of beads for 24 hours in I liter of water. Apply the solution to seedlings at a rate of 16 g per nursery bag.
Diem and others (1989) provide detailed information on the production of alginate beads. Somasegaran and Hoben (1985) provide information on the production of peat-based inoculants. General informati