<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.3</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
Forest Energy Forum is really flying high! The critical phase is over and here we are now with the third issue. The good news is that Forest Energy Forum is also available electronically through our FEF home page [see Box below]. Thus, the number of contacts, which grew rapidly with issues 1 and 2, is increasing even more. We are happy with this small success and are starting to see that our first objectives are being accomplished. Having a forum where we can discuss with readers (from forestry, energy and environment sectors as well as different disciplines and backgrounds) the subject of wood energy for traditional use, and woodfuel as a modern energy carrier, is making FEF unique.
This issue covers many different themes - from a project using improved ovens for fish smoking in Guinea to the efforts of car manufacturers and oil companies to combat climate change. In order to contribute to a better understanding of the role of wood energy, it is important to show its multiple dimensions.
The Kyoto Protocol, agreed in November 1997, has contributed to our success, and will help especially to revamp forest energy as a modern energy carrier to combat the adverse effects of climate change. This agreement and the changes in energy policies initiated some years ago, the increasing advantage of woodfuel over other fuel options, and its largely untapped potential as a modern energy carrier, bring new opportunities for the utilization of cheap fuel sources.
The role assigned to bioenergy by the White Paper adopted by the European Union is a relevant initiative to fight greenhouse gas emissions. This document identifies a campaign for the "take-off of renewables" for large-scale penetration by 2010, assuming that bioenergy will generate 10 000 MW of real "green energy" using combined heat and power plants. Similar schemes have been adopted in other industrialized countries (e.g. Canada, Australia and New Zealand) and in some developing countries (e.g. Nicaragua and Honduras). This is really good news, not only for the energy and forestry sectors, but also for the many policy-makers, energy planners and experts who have been waiting a long time for the chance to show the immense potential of forest biomass for energy purposes.
The number of events and activities held monthly worldwide is increasing, as are the level and number of participants at those meetings - all indications of the interest in this "new-old" subject. I have participated in some extremely useful and informative events. I represented FAO at the Eighth Session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) which was held in Bonn, Germany in June. As a result of this participation, two meetings, organized by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and SBSTA, were held in Rome in September. The IPCC meeting discussed the outline of a Special Report on Land-Use Change and Forestry, and the SBSTA meeting discussed the definitions for land-use change and forestry activities included in the Kyoto Protocol [see under Special Features]. I also participated in the meeting of the International Energy Agency (IEA) Bioenergy Task 25 in Nokia, Finland [see under Events of Interest] where I was able to make
a field trip in the area of forest biomass for energy use. I was impressed by the technological development of the companies involved in the production, preparation, supply and use of woodfuels, and the level of integration of the new forest energy activities within the traditional forestry ones. This multidisciplinary integration is making wood energy an increasingly cost-effective source of energy.
FAO's Forestry Department has established a Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration which we hope will permit a better coordination of our activities with technical units both within and outside FAO [see under Special Features]. We are continuing to work on the collection of available information and data to upgrade and update our wood energy information systems and have started with Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) Africa within the framework of the EC/FAO project on Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts.
We have also begun preparations for a new Wood Energy Programme with the assistance of Prof. David Hall [see his article under Special Features] and Frank Rosillo-Calle of King's College London. I will share their ideas with you in the next issue, and look forward to your comments and views.
Finally, we have had to say goodbye to Prof. Luiz A. Horta Nogueira, who spent 11 months with us in Rome while on his sabbatical year and has now returned to his duties at the University of Itajuba in Brazil [see his contribution in Focus on ... Brazil]. Luiz has left a considerable number of technical papers as well as other material which help to make our life easier.
Miguel A. Trossero
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF WOOD ENERGY OR WOODFUEL, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
Tel.: (+39) 06 57054175
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/
forestry/energy/feforum.htm
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
Unified wood energy terminology (UWET)
At the international level, FAO collects and disseminates annual data on fuelwood and charcoal. FAO's Wood Energy Programme in conjunction with other relevant agencies has initiated action for a progressive improvement of our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS).
The existing information on biofuels in general, and woodfuels in particular, is highly aggregated and focused on the consumption of few biofuels (commodities or products) without giving due attention and recognition to other related aspects on the demand side and supply sources.
The main problems commonly encountered in the compilation and presentation of current bioenergy databases can be categorized in the following main general areas.
PROPOSED WOOD ENERGY TERMINOLOGY
supply sources
commodity
users
Direct woodfuels
Fuelwood
Woodfuels
Household
-Solid
-Liquid
-Gaseous
Indirect woodfuels
Charcoal
Commercial
Recovered woodfuels
Black liquor
Industrial
Other
Heat and power
Coverage. Currently FAOSTAT includes data and information only on fuelwood and charcoal, omitting other important kinds of fuel produced from wood. For instance, data on black liquor (the most important form of wood energy in many developed countries) are not included.
Disaggregation. Regardless of the importance of non-forest supply sources of wood energy and the large use of recycled products, the supply side is not disaggregated in FAO's wood energy database. On the other hand, although there is a clear shift in wood energy demand from traditional to modern uses, with a considerable impact on whole wood energy systems, this demand information is not presented in the current FAO database.
Definitions and units incompatibility. The absence of a comprehensive framework and clear set of definitions limits the possibility of comparison between other data sources on wood energy. Therefore, properly disaggregated biofuel data, with their respective units of measure and conversion factors clearly described and defined, are crucial for the collection, compilation and presentation of statistical data and information on bioenergy.
The proposed terms presented in the Table above follow as much as possible the existing definitions currently used in FAO Forest Products Yearbook (and available in FAO Forestry Paper No. 32, Classification and definitions of forest products), but they also include woodfuel categories and their respective terminology in line with the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities (ISIC), Revision 3, developed and widely used for all conventional fuels and forest products.
The proposed terminology is organized following the different woodfuel types (fuelwood, charcoal, black liquor and other) as major commodities/products for all the data collection, compilation and presentation, while data for woodfuel supply sources and woodfuel end users have been categorized following the multiple interrelations between commodities, supply sources and end users as shown in the scheme presented in the Figure below.
In this way, the main woodfuel supply sources can be classified into three major groups: Direct woodfuels, Indirect woodfuels and Recovered woodfuels and data on the demand side are disaggregated by main users as shown in the Table.
The full electronic version of UWET will shortly be posted on our Web page for your comments.
Forestry department task force on the role of forestry in carbon sequestration
In order to coordinate the multiple activities to be undertaken by different technical units on climate change, FAO has set up the Ad hoc Group on Climate in Relation to Agriculture and Food Security in its Sustainable Development Department. The group is composed of representatives, at the technical level, from the departments, divisions and services interested in climate, its variability and changes.
Its main functions are to:
* ensure that climate resources and their fluctuations (variability and change) are given due attention in FAO's normative work;
* provide a coordination mechanism and exchange function for climate-related data and work within FAO;
* provide a forum for assessing internal and external work, data, knowledge and information on climate and their implications;
* ensure the coordination of inputs to FAO's Programme of Work and Budget for climate-related matters;
and
* assist in the review and preparation of IPCC and other UN documents related to climate and climate change and the potential impact on agriculture, forestry and fisheries.
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
In addition, FAO's Forestry Department has created a Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration with the aim of:
* providing better coordination and visibility of FAO's work on carbon substitution and carbon sequestration and the reduction of carbon emissions;
* suggesting mechanisms for the mitigation/reduction of carbon emissions through the use of forests, trees and their derived products (woodfuels and timber); and
* assisting member countries by providing them with information on the opportunities available in the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and its related programmes.
The Task Force's main functions are to:
* exchange information and experience between the main normative activities developed by the Forestry Department in FAO headquarters at the regional and subregional levels and its field projects;
* provide an informal framework for the articulation of the activities developed by the department;
* contribute to the formulation and implementation of policies on the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions through forests, forestry activities and wood energy;
* collect, collate and compile information to assess potential contributions to greenhouse gas mitigation or reduction through wood energy, forests and forestry activities;
and
* liaise with other groups and networks within and outside FAO.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
Comparison of forestry...
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
...to curb carbon emissions in power generation
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
Biomass as an energy substitute for fossil fuels or a sink for sequestering carbon -implications for the Kyoto Protocol
At first reading the Kyoto Protocol appears only to advocate planting and conserving trees ("afforestation and reforestation") in order to create carbon sinks in the trees themselves and also in soils. Little is said about using the trees' (and other) biomass as an energy source to substitute the use of CO2-emitting fossil fuels.
However, it has been recognized for a decade that growing and using biomass on a continuous basis as a substitute for fossil fuels has clear advantages compared with using the biomass solely as a means to sequester carbon to create a carbon sink. Renewably grown biomass is a CO2-neutral fuel with a low sulphur content and can be converted into electricity, heat and liquid and gaseous fuels. The biomass is grown perennially to generate energy so that environmental benefits accrue, e.g. soil, biodiversity, in comparison with annual crops. In addition, rural communities gain jobs rather than taking land out of productive use only to sequester carbon. Thus, there are numerous environmental and social advantages to be gained from growing and producing biomass energy.
The problems with growing biomass as a carbon sink are that: i) once the trees or plants reach maturity, they start losing their stored carbon; and ii) maintenance and protection costs are incurred throughout the lifetime of the trees. However, when growing biomass with defined (short) rotations and using it as a source of fuel, income is generated continuously, thus creating local jobs and other benefits. Indeed, trying to maintain carbon sink forests for long periods may be very difficult unless rigid legal and fire protection systems are enforced. People may need to be excluded in order to prevent damage and loss of carbon sinks. This may not be feasible in many countries unless an effective long-term infrastructure exists.
Naturally, where mature forests exist they should be conserved both as carbon sinks and as deposits of biodiversity. In addition, where biomass energy plantations are grown (probably on excess arable and degraded land) they must follow ecological guidelines so as to improve above- and below-ground biodiversity and carbon sinks. Balancing the short- and long-term carbon and income benefits of these two approaches (substitution versus sequestration) on a given piece of land depends on numerous factors, such as yield and rotation, which can be modelled.
In the European Union (EU) a recent White Paper on Renewable Energy proposed that Europe could double its renewable contribution from the current 6 percent to 12 percent by 2010, which would substantially help meet Kyoto Protocol targets. It was proposed that biomass energy in total could contribute an additional 90 million tonnes oil equivalent (mtoe) per year compared with the present annual contribution of about 47 mtoe. Of this additional energy, "energy crops" (trees, woody grasses, etc.) are proposed in order to provide 45 mtoe per year, which could be grown on about 13 million ha of land (4 percent of total land at a yield of 10 tonnes/ha plus a conversion rate of 75 percent). This additional 45 mtoe per year of renewable, CO2-neutral biomass energy would reduce CO2 emissions by 50 million tonnes of carbon per year compared with the present EU total CO2 emissions of 890 million tonnes of carbon per year. The contribution of all forms of biomass (137 mtoe) to reducing
CO2 would total about 150 million tonnes of carbon by 2010, i.e. a reduction of 17 percent, which is double the EU's obligation under the Kyoto Protocol.
A clear point for policy-makers is that trees (and other forms of biomass) can act as carbon sinks but at maturity or at their optimum growth rate there must be plans to use the biomass as a source of fuel to offset fossil energies (or as very long-lived timber products). Otherwise the many years of paying to sequester and protect the carbon in trees will simply be lost as they decay and/or burn uncontrollably. Biomass has many advantages for an environmentally friendly future but, to obtain the maximum benefit, trees (other than in primary forests) must be used as an energy source at the end of their growing life. (Contributed by: Prof. D.O. Hall, King's College London, London W8 7AH, UK. E-mail: david.hall@ kcl.ac.uk)
Outcome and follow-up of the IPPCC/SBSTA meetings hosted by FAO
FAO was glad to have the opportunity of hosting the two meetings related to the Land-Use Change and Forestry (LUCF) aspects of the Kyoto Protocol from 23 to 25 September 1998, and was pleased with the outcome of the meetings. In addition to having had the possibility of meeting more than 100 specialists, together with the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) delegations from more than 20 countries, the most useful outcome was having established a good working relationship with the SBSTA secretariat and with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Considerable progress was made on the discussion of definitions used for LUCF presented in Articles 3.3 and 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol regarding afforestation, reforestation and deforestation (ARD).
Progress was also made in the preparation of the Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry, and Carbon Emissions and Sequestration. FAO will provide inputs to the report through lead authors and will act as peer reviewer.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
World energy council congress
The 17th World Energy Council (WEC) Congress took place in Houston, Texas, United States from 13 to 18 September 1998. It was attended by 35 Ministers of Energy and by more than 5 000 energy experts from nearly 100 countries. The main presentations and discussions addressed the challenges facing the energy sector in the next decades, when fossil fuels will necessarily be replaced by renewable energy sources because of both supply and environmental reasons. Particular attention was given to the operation of energy systems independent of power grids or fuel pipeline networks, based on the decentralized operation of solar energy, wind and biomass, using modern conversion technologies. FAO's paper, "Wood Energy in Developing Countries" was submitted to the WEC Developing Country Committee; it was highly commended and will be published in conjunction with a paper entitled "Energy in Rural Areas of Developing Countries". These documents will serve as a platform for WEC's future
activities in the field of rural energy. (Contributed by: Mr Gustavo Best, Senior Energy Coordinator, Environment and Natural Resources Service (SDRN), Sustainable Development Department, FAO.)
<section>3</section>
Logo NEWS AND NOTES
Telefood
In 1997, people around the world donated more than US$2 million to TeleFood. One of the first projects funded by TeleFood has enabled local cooperatives in the villages of Temenetaye and Bonfi in Guinea to build fish-smoking ovens. About 150 women in the two villages have replaced their ovens with an improved type, which conserves scarce wood and reduces smoke by concentrating the heat. The processed fish is therefore of a better quality and fetches a higher price. The new fish-smoking ovens have now been built using locally available mud bricks and stone.
The impact of the project has been significant: a reduction in production costs thanks to a more efficient use of wood for smoking; less damage to the environment as a result of the reduced consumption of fuelwood; and, most important of all, an improvement in the health of the women during the smoking process, some of whom are among the poorest in the community.
For more information, please contact:
Ms Karin-Lis Svarre, Director,
Information Division, FAO,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57056167;
http://www.fao.org/food
DONATIONS TO TELEFOOD
Just US$1 will buy five baobab saplings for planting in a West African village, thus greatly improving family nutrition.
Household energy, smoke and healt
Heat energy is the fundamental requirement for cooking and space heating. Heat energy in rural homes is obtained by the combustion of fuel in an appropriate device; in addition to heat energy, the combustion process produces smoke and gases which are major causes of health problems. Fuels range from the very basic animal waste, crop residues and wood, which are available at zero or minimal financial cost, to liquid and gaseous fuels, which can be expensive and, in addition, incur transport costs. The emission of hazardous combustion products is closely related to the grade of the fuel used.
Health hazards are associated with a range of activities, from collection of the fuel, processing to make it suitable for burning, to the combustion process itself.
Biomass fuels will continue to be the only source of heat energy for 75 percent of people in the developing countries; the adverse health effects of the products of combustion, and particularly smoke, are evident. The level of awareness must be raised and interventions made at the technical, educational and policy levels in order to improve the household environment. (Source: Boiling Point, No. 40, Spring 1998.)
Forestry, Farm and Community Tree Network (FACT Net)
Fuelwood: agroforestry production and productive use - why multiple-purpose tree species?
As land use worldwide intensifies, and the area of natural forests decreases, a higher percentage of woodfuels are taken and will continue to be taken from plantings on private and public lands. As the pressures on these resources increase, there will be a need to expand and improve tree planting and management activities.
The Forest, Farm and Community Tree Network (FACT Net) is sponsored by the Forestry and Natural Resource Management Program of Winrock International (WI). It is an international network of 2 000 partners in more than 100 countries who share an interest in the use of multiple-purpose tree species (MPTS) - that is, trees which are grown to provide more than one product or service.
Many MPTS have a primary or secondary value as fuel, and can be incorporated into community and private landholder plantings as pure stands, strips or individual trees to help meet family or local energy needs.
Through extension, communications and research FACT Net provides the skills and resources needed to introduce, manage and improve this renewable, agroforestry resource successfully. (Source: REPSource, 3(3), 1998.)
For more information, please contact:
FACT Net, Winrock International, 38
Winrock Drive, Morrilton, Arkansas
72110-9370, USA.
Fax: (+1 501) 7275417;
e-mail: forestry@winrock.org
European Agriculture and Forestry Biomass Network
In January 1995, three networks were established in different sectors of the biomass energy industry. The overall aims of the networks were to coordinate information exchange and to promote coordination and collaboration across Europe. The networks focus on: Agriculture and Forestry Biomass; Liquid Biofuels; and Industrial Waste.
* the transfer of knowledge and experience (particularly in relation to cost reduction and protection of the environment);
* the promotion of collaboration and coordination between national biomass centres and programmes and individual organizations in different countries;
* the detection and promotion of business opportunities;
and
* the assimilation of national and European strategies for the development of the industry. (Source: AFBII Final Report, December 1996.)
Smog-eating trees
Trees which absorb smog are being genetically engineered by Toyota to help fight the war against vehicle pollution. They are being reared to consume amounts of carbon dioxide far in excess of the amount that normal trees would usually take in as part of their natural cycle. Scientists at Toyota believe the special trees will help reduce the so-called "greenhouse gases" emitted by cars which are partly blamed for global warming.
A huge site near Toyota's headquarters in Japan has been planted with the smog-eating trees. The company says it is feasible for similar forests to be planted near its factories in the United Kingdom. Yasuhiko Komatsu, the project's general manager, said "We are focusing on plants' natural ability to cleanse the atmosphere. We are developing plants that have a superior ability to recycle air." (Source: The Daily Mail, 10 August 1998.)
Daimler-benz - Department of Renewable Energies
Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG is responsible for several space division activities. Its centre in Trauen is one of the three test and experiment centres of the Daimler-Benz Aerospace-Space Division (Dasa-RI) in Germany. Several environmental activities are being carried out alongside the propulsion tests for the rocket Ariane; it was in this context that the Department of Renewable Energies was founded in 1995.
This department is involved in the promotion of systems for the utilization of renewable energy sources and the development and management of projects in this field. Its main focus is on the identification, acquisition and development of sites for wind energy utilization, as well as fuel cell technology, autonomous energy supply systems and, increasingly, electricity generation from biomass. Of special interest is the perspective of realizing hybridly operating wind farms and biomass power generation plants.
A project is currently being developed for the biomass-based electricity and process steam supply of a paper factory in northern Germany. The installation of a 70-80 MW gasification system with a gas turbine is being considered for this project.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Scharaf Girges, Daimler-Benz
Aerospace, Center Trauen, 29328
Fassberg, Germany.
Fax: (+49 5055) 598 202;
e-mail: Scharaf.Girges@ri.dasa.deD
FAO´s Young Professionals Programme
The purpose of this programme is to strengthen national capacities in developing countries and countries in transition and to provide young graduates from FAO member countries with an opportunity to acquire experience in an international environment by closely associating them with the implementation of FAO priority programmes.
Candidates should normally be from the developing countries and countries in transition which are in particular need of capacity-building; however, candidates from developed countries may also join the programme provided that their assignment is funded by their government or their employer. Preference will be given to candidates who are currently employed, although candidates who have just graduated and have not yet found employment are eligible on condition that their candidature is supported by their government. While the programme is open to both male and female candidates, the candidatures of qualified women are especially encouraged. Assignments will be for a maximum of one year and will not be renewed.
Young professionals may be assigned to their own or a third country, at field projects, FAO decentralized offices or FAO headquarters. Please note that, although the educational qualification requirement is a university master's degree, preference will be given to candidates holding a Ph.D. degree.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Miguel Trossero at the address
given on the first page.
Wood Energy Textbook
Dendroenergía: fundamentos y aplicaciones
The final draft of the Wood Energy Textbook has now been fully revised and is undergoing its final editing. The main topics of the textbook are: the importance of wood energy; wood energy systems; woodfuel production; woodfuel conversion (basics, technology and examples); and economic and environmental aspects. The textbook is intended to be used by university students at forestry and engineering faculties.
The textbook has been prepared in Spanish but will eventually be translated into English and French.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
Carbonisation: méthode simple et efficace
Un moyen facile d'utiliser les déchets de bois et peut-être d'en tirer un revenu d'appoint dans les pays en développement sans mettre la forêt en péril. Un fût de 200 litres en bon état, par exemple, peut servir de four. Dans un premier temps, on découpe le fond du fût le plus près du rebord et, du côté opposé, on dévisse les deux bouchons du couvercle. Deux ouvertures de 2 cm sur 4 cm sont pratiquées à égale distance des bouchons qui joueront un rôle d'évents. Ces derniers doivent reposer sur deux tiges (tuyaux) afin de permettre une circulation d'air lors de la mise à feu.
On dépose des brindilles et menus bois au fond du fût sur 10 cm de hauteur, et, par la suite, le bois est enfourné à la verticale en deux longueurs de 30 à 40 cm. Moins il y aura de vides, meilleur sera le rendement en charbon.
Durant la carbonisation qui dure normalement de cinq à six heures, il faut remuer le fût de temps à autre pour faire descendre le charbon et y ajouter du bois. Dès l'instant où le fût est rempli de charbon, le fond est attaché à quatre endroits avec un fil de fer et on retourne le fût de haut en bas. Après échappement de la fumée, les évents sont fermés hermétiquement, et sur le pourtour, un talus de terre ou de sable est relevé. Après une période de refroidissement de 15 à 18 heures, la quantité de charbon produit est d'environ 50 kg si le bois est moyennement sec.
Pour plus d'informations, veuillez contacter:
Gaëtan Sirois, 390
D'Anjou St, Longueuil (Québec), Canada J4H 1K8.
Télécopie: (+11 450) 679 2043;
mél.: M276351@nobel.si.uqam.ca
Biomass energy and coffee processing
Coffee is one of the most important agricultural exports of Central America, and has been a key element in the shaping of the economies and societies for the different countries in the region. Central American countries produce about 10 million quintals of coffee (1 quintal = 46 kg of dry coffee). Energy requirements for drying the coffee range from 20 000 to 25 000 kcal/quintal, depending on the net efficiencies of both the dryers and the furnaces. In general, coffee-drying operations use from 18 to 25 kg of biomass to dry 1 quintal of coffee. Coffee husk, a very good biomass fuel, is capable of supplying about 50 percent of this energy requirement, which is normally supplemented by the use of traditional fuelwood. Currently, coffee drying consumes about 15 percent of the total wood supply in the region.
The coffee sector faces several challenges from the sustainable development perspective in Central America. Its processing clearly has major effects on the environment, including the fact that it consumes a large amount of biomass, creating serious pressure on the sustainability of available forest resources.
Green energy update
New terminology discussion group
The International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) Working Unit 6.03.02 is pleased to announce the formation of a new terminology discussion group on reforestation, afforestation and deforestation (RAD).
The purpose of the group is to provide a platform to discuss these key terms for forestry's part in climate change and the Kyoto Protocol in order to make people aware of terminology differences and, wherever relevant, point out the conceptual convergence behind the differences.
The discussions will focus on descriptive rather than prescriptive principles and will not be a form of negotiation. We aim to point out geographical and cultural differences rather than recommending definitions. A report found at http://home.att.net/~gklund/DEFpaper.html will serve as a starting-point for discussions.
We invite people around the world who are interested or involved in the subject to join our discussions. If you are interested in joining the RAD discussion group:
* Address an e-mail to: listproc@nrcan.gc.ac
* Leave the subject line blank
* On the message line, type: subscribe RAD-LIST [your first name] [your last name]
* Make sure nothing else follows (such as your signature block)
* Send
The discussions are expected to terminate in December 1998 when a summary report will be prepared.
Background information on WU 6.03.02 may be found at:
http://iufro.boku.ac.at/iufronet/d6/hp60302.htm; and at
http://www.wsl.ch/wsidb/datenbank/
And have you heard about ...
Renewable Energy for Development - the newsletter published by the Stockholm Environment Institute's Energy Programme with support from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency?
The Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) is an international research institute focusing on local policy as well as regional and global environmental and development issues. The scientific and administrative work of the institute is coordinated by SEI's headquarters in Stockholm, Sweden, with centres in Boston (USA), York (UK) and Tallinn (Estonia). In addition, SEI works with an international network of independent scientists and research institutes located in many parts of the world.
A substantial part of SEI's Energy Programme is conc