Acck n owledgements k n ow.
FAO expresses sincere appreciation and gratitude to all who contributed to the Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM). The contributions have been far wider than the list provided here and appreciation is extended to all these people and agencies. The support of government forest services, universities, research institutes, industry associations and ECE/FAO are also gratefully acknowledged. The governments who helped organise the regional workshops in Brazil, Ghana and Malaysia were particularly helpful. Lakehead University, University of Toronto and University of Umeå provided valuable information and assistance as did the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, the Instituto Florestal em São Paulo, the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia and the European Forest Institute. The various industry associations in Brazil, Malaysia, Ghana and Canada all contributed to the process with important inputs. The Forest Products Division in the Forestry Department and the members of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products undertook study management. The overall management team included Karl-Hermann Schmincke, Olman Serrano from FAO; David Barron, Celso Foelkel, Claes Hall; and Lise Lachapelle (chair), Mario Leonel, J.K. Lyden (vice-chair), Irene Meister, M'Hammed Mezzour, Jan Remröd, Kiyoshi Sakai, Maureen Smith, from the Steering Committee of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. Gary Bull served as Project Manager. Various supporting reports and working papers were submitted by Warren Mabee, Musyoka Ngusya, Devendra Pandey, Peter Duinker, Reino Pulkki, Robert Scharpenberg, Roberto Scoz, Klara Vichnevetskaia and Jeremy W illiams. The FAO academic programme was used to gain the insights and experiences of colleagues in the academic community. Peter Duinker, Warren Mabee, Reino Pulkki, all have made significant contributions to the various projects undertaken in this study. The following individuals served as focal points or participants in the review process: Mike Apsey, Darcie Booth, David Barron, Magnus Berg, David Boulter, David Brooks, Joseph Buongiorno, Mafa Chipeta, Ralph Colberg, Marc de Montalembert, Celso Foelkel, Claes Hall, Catrinus J. Jepma, Sulaeman Kusumanegara, Michael Martin, Benny Nasendi, Sten Nilsson, Heiner Ollmann, Harshad Pande, Tim Peck, Kit Prins, Les Reed, Antti R ytkönen. The support of colleagues in FAO who provided guidance, data and critical review is also gratefully acknowledged. Without their cooperation the development of the statistics and models would have not been possible. Michael Martin and Chris Brown provided very useful advice and Patrick Durst, Torsten Frisk and Pape Kone facilitated the regional workshops.
Global Fibre Supply Model Global.
Ms Franca Monti, deserves special mention for her superior library skills and her continual assistance in helping all the project team find the data. The core draft system development included Gary Bull, Warren Mabee and Robert Scharpenberg. Robert was involved with the project from the beginning helping to shape the initial project, build prototypes, provide data quality control and data management. Warren served as the principal computer programmer and designer of the information system. Gary Bull served as Project Manager and main author of this document. The core team for data collection included Josef Engelbertz, Andreas Kress, Patrick So, Bjorn Vikinger. Both Elisa Rubini and Liana Micotti provided outstanding help in editing, layout and formatting. Final design of the report was done by Ronald Nixon.
At the 1995 meeting of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, a need was expressed for more reliable data, information, forecasts and preliminary analysis of industrial fibre sources. As a consequence the Global Fibre Supply Model was designed and constructed to collect and compile the latest available forest inventory data, including recovered and non-wood fibre, focusing primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. The FAO Forestry Department designated Mr Karl-Hermann Schmincke, former Director of the Forest Products Division, and Mr O. Serrano, Chief, Wood and Non-wood Products Utilization Branch, to lead and guide the study. They undertook to provide strategic management advice in carrying this project to completion. The project has provided useful information for both the ongoing outlook studies and the upcoming forest resources assessment. It also serves as a prototype system to guide departmental discussions on the development of a more comprehensive information system. The success of the study is attributed to the excellent work of a strong statistical team drawn from many countries. It is also due to the willing participation of governments, industry and universities in the regional workshops. The enthusiasm of governments and industry for our work was demonstrated at the workshops held in Asia, Latin America and Africa in 1997 as well as in discussions with the United States and Canadian forest services. The sincerity shown by the participants revitalized interest and enthusiasm in statisitics. The regional workshop process did indeed help in creating, as one colleague put it, "a genuine thirst for statistics". Conducting a study of this nature and magnitude has many challenges since it addresses several audience classes with different points of view. The focus of any review of this work should therefore be on the efforts to collect and organize statistics for use in discussions of sustainable forest management. The development of simple models and the examination of possible policy factors should be considered secondary efforts which were built to show policy makers the value of having organized forestry statistics for planning and policy purposes. This work has generated a great deal of interest both internally in the FAO forestry community and certainly outside the Organization. The FAO Forestry Department hopes that with constructive comments from you, as critical readers of this document, FAO can further contribute to the ongoing international dialogue on sustainable forest management.
M. Hosny El-Lakany Assistant Director-General Forestry Department.
E xecutive Summary.
FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM) in late 1995 upon the recommendation of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. The study was intended to respond to several important policy questions: What sources of wood fibre exist today and where could we go in the future to find wood fibre to meet the growing demand for forest products? How much productive forest is needed to supply sustainably expected future fibre demand? This study does not make claims to address all the dimensions to these questions; rather, the work undertaken should be viewed as a `'first step'' in the FAO's more extensive and ongoing efforts to address these issues particularly through regional and global outlook studies. This first step is certainly an important one and can be viewed as a significant contribution to progress in the development of supply and demand forecasting models. In general terms the study contributes to forest policy development by highlighting and underscoring the pressing need for reliable data, information and analysis on industrial fibre sources and their utilization. The study includes a compilation of the recent forest inventory statistics along with recovered and non-wood fibre data. The focus is primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. A simple model was constructed and linked to the statistics to begin to reveal some of the issues affecting future developments in fibre supply. This modelling provides a first look at some of the major factors affecting supply for important producer countries in Asia/Oceania, Latin America and Africa. It is worth emphasizing that the model does not provide sufficient information to analyse supply and demand balances and users must be very cautious in interpreting the outcome in order to avoid drawing inappropriate conclusions. The resource statistics were reviewed and received close scrutiny in a series of workshops in Africa, Asia and Latin America regions to verify the statistics and estimates developed by FAO. "Ground-truthing" will ensure that important data sources have not been missed for any country and that all points of view have been considered. This is particularly critical for estimating future industrial fibre supply. It is important to note that these regions have traditionally been the greatest challenge from a statistical point of view and so they were a major focus of the work completed in the study. The lessons learned from the GFSM work include:.
t The statistical structure developed in the GFSM can be improved.
over time and can also be modified for use by the countries themselves for forest statistical reporting. t Emphasis could be placed on the development of national inventory systems within most countries and on a more cooperative process for statistical reporting.
t FAO should consider allocating more resources to the further t.
development of an information system for reporting on various aspects of forest resources and forest related products. More information could be collected on log prices and harvesting and manufacturing costs in cooperation with the multistakeholder processes in countries. This information will improve our analysis of global and regional trends. Further attention could be paid to develop methodologies for additional forest resources, such as trees outside of forests, for the purpose of collecting statistical information. Since plantation resources are playing an increasing role in fibre supply, more attention could be paid to forest plantations statistics and models. Additional emphasis could be placed on cost-effective capacity building which will provide a better foundation for country participation in the data collection and standardization process.
1 INTRODUCTION Overview Report objectives Uniqueness FAO approach Report structure METHODOLO GY Study design Definitions Classification of fibre resources Describing the current situation Constructing alternative futures Tool for accessing and displaying the current situation and forecasts Scope and validation Major assumptions Base data F orecasting Data and statistical issues Data quality and resolution Statistical inconsistencies BACKGROUND Introduction Recent global fibre studies Industrial fibre production trends Asia-Pacific Africa Latin America & Caribbean North America Europe Russia Production Trend Analysis CURRENT FIBRE SUPPLY SITUAT I O N SUPPLY SITUA Classifying Fibre Sources Selected Summary of Regional Statistics Selected Summary of a Country Statistic 1 1 2 2 3 4 5 5 7 7 9 9 11 16 16 17 19 23 23 23 25 25 25 25 29 30 30 31 32 32 33 35 35 35 39.
I M PACT OF MAJOR SUPPLY FA C T O R S SUPPLY FACTORS Identifying some of the major factors Sustainable forest management on natural forest Land use change­Deforestation Land use change­Protected area Industrial Plantations­Afforestation rate Industrial Plantations­Development gains Non-wood and recovered fibre SUPPLY A LT E R N ATIVE FUTURES FOR FIBRE SUPPLY Defining the future Asia/Oceania South America Africa Russia Europe North and Central America Comparative analysis (selected regions) CONCLUSIONS D I S C U S SION AND CONCLU S I O N S Statistics ­ Land and Forest Statistics ­ Non-wood and recovered fibres Forecast model Prices, costs and technology Policy direction for sustaining or increasing future fibre supply REFERENCES.
41 41 42 45 45 47 47 50 53 53 54 54 55 57 58 58 60 63 63 65 65 66 67 61 AI AII.
STA ANNEX I STATISTICAL SUMMARY ANNEX II MAJOR DEFINITIONS.
LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 Figure 6 Figure 7 Figure 8 Figure 9 Figure 10 Figure 11 Figure 12 Figure 13 Figure 14 Figure 15 Figure 16 Figure 17 Figure 18 Figure 19 Figure 20 Figure 21 Figure 22 Figure 23 Figure 24 Forestry statistics and outlook studies processes Land classification for the Global Fibre Supply Model Forest volume and growth classification Formulae for calculating fibre supply futures Front page of global fibre supply database and model Global industrial roundwood production 1970-1995 Global industrial roundwood production by product group 1970-1995 Global industrial roundwood production by region 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Asia 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Oceania 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Africa 1970-1995 by region Industrial roundwood production in Latin America and Caribbean 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in North America 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Europe 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in former USSR 1970-1990 Cumulative growth of the world's protected Non-cumulative growth of the world's protected areas Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Asia Future 1 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Oceania Future 1 (million m3). Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for South America Future 1 (million m3). Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Africa Future 1 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Africa Future 2 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996­2050 for Africa Future 3 (million m3) Potential fibre availability by source 1996-2050­ North and Central America - Future 1 (million m3). 3 8 8 9 11 27 27 28 29 29 30 31 31 32 33 46 46 54 54 54 56 56 56 58.
TABLES LIST OF TA B L E S Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8 Table 9 Table 10 Table 11 Table 12 Table 13 Table 14 Table 15 Table 16 Table 17 Table 18 Table 19 List of countries included in the GFSM assessment Summary of recent fibre supply analyses by thematic area Natural forest area ('000 ha) by region­ global summary Average standardized forest volume by region (m3/ha)­summary Total standardized volume by region ('000 000 m3)­summary Total potential growth and harvest intensity by region ('000 000 m3)­summary Industrial plantation area and growth by region (1995)­global summary Alternative fibre­recovered and non-wood fibre by region­global summary Summary of major country statistics for Republic of Congo, an example Selected major factors to influence fibre supply Summary of cost and volume impacts of implementing SFM by region Contrast of sustained yield and sustainable forest management for temperate forests Average annual change of forest area by region as reported in 1995 Afforestation rate by country (1995) Potential increases from development (genetic & silvicultural) gains Non-wood pulping capacities by region Wastepaper recovery levels by region Selected major factors to influence fibre supply in Africa Estimated long-term sustainable economic industrial wood supply respectively commercial wood supply (industrial wood + fuelwood). in million m3 per year. European forecast of removals, residues & recovered fibre net of fuelwood consumption in million m3 per year US Projections of roundwood harvest on forestland in the United States 2000-2040, by species group in million m3 Canadian industrial roundwood production, actual and projected, and estimates of allowable annual cut (AACs) in million m3 Total potential fibre availability (all sources) by region reporting 1996, 2010, 2050 in '000 000 m3 6 26 36 36 37 38 38 39 40 41 43 44 44 47 48 50 51 55.
Introduction.
O V E R VI E W.
In late 1995, on the recommendation of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, the FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre1 Supply2 Model (GFSM). The study was intended to respond to several important policy questions: What sources of wood fibre exist today and where could we go in the future to find wood fibre to meet the growing demand for forest products? How much productive forest is needed to supply sustainably expected future fibre demand? These challenging questions have important biological, economic, social, cultural and political aspects. This study does not make claims to address all these dimensions; rather, the work undertaken should be viewed as a `'first step'' in the FAO's more extensive and ongoing efforts to address these issues particularly through regional and global outlook studies. This first step is certainly an important one and is intended to make a significant contribution to progress in the development of supply and demand forecasting models3 . In general terms the study contributes to forest policy development by highlighting and underscoring the pressing need for reliable data, information and analysis on industrial fibre sources and their utilization. The study includes a compilation of the recent forest inventory statistics along with recovered and non-wood fibre data. The focus is primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries.
Fibre is defined broadly as fibrous wood and non-wood raw material for primary industries producing sawn timber, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper products. While the majority of this fibre is harvested from forests and plantations, other kinds of fibre considered in this report include recovered paper, and non-wood fibres. 2 Economists define supply in terms of a price-quantity relationship. Foresters also use the word supply to describe the physical capability of the forest to produce wood coupled with recognition of some constraints on availability imposed due to physical barriers, transport distance and legislation. Supply in this report means the wood production capacity of the forest adjusted for current and reasonable future limitations on availability. 3 Binkley (1987) said: `'The quality of extant data severely constrains further empirical work on timber supply models. A unit of effort spent on improving the data series available for timber supply analysis will have a greater return than the same unit of effort spent on estimation techniques or the inclusion of additional explanatory variables.'' Brooks (1987) said `'The most serious difficulty encountered in assembling a model of forest resource dynamics is not, however, the choice of an appropriate methodology, but the lack of consistent, comparable data for many regions.".
Global Fibre Supply Model.
A simple model was constructed and linked to the statistics to begin to reveal some of the issues affecting future developments in fibre supply. This modelling provides a first look at some of the major factors affecting supply for important producer countries in Asia/Oceania, Latin America and Africa.
R E P O R T OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this report are to:.
q Present current statistics useful in analysing fibre supply by region.
and a sample of what is available by country from the statistical database. q Describe a simple model that could identify some of the potential sources of fibre supply and illustrates many of the major factors which have an impact on supply as we look to the future. q Display some preliminary forecasts for Africa, Asia-Oceania and Latin America. These forecasts are offered to both invite further discussions on methodology and promote a discussion of the key factors influencing fibre availability. q Summarize some lessons learned in the GFSM exercise and give direction for future development of the work. This report summarizes a larger body of work completed in the GFSM efforts. Complementing this work is a series of working papers, a special edition of Unasylva, and a user-friendly database and computer model.
The GFSM builds a bridge between two existing priority programmes in the FAO Forestry Department ­ the Outlook Studies and the Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (see Figure 1). It does this by focussing on statistics currently weak or missing such as the collection and compilation of commercial forest volume inventory, forest growth and potential removal data for the developing regions ­ Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean. It will strengthen FAO's Outlook Studies in these rapidly developing regions by improving our statistics on wood fibre potential and complement existing econometric modelling of demand for forest products. The GFSM is being monitored by representatives from the forest products industry, governments and research institutes. A special Steering Committee is providing guidance on the scope of the project and feedback on the information generated. Participation is encouraged through regional workshops, four of which have already been held. The study was deliberately designed to avoid duplication of effort with other agencies working in the area of fibre supply. Therefore, to meet the terms of reference and for the sake of completeness, it incorporates statistics and forecasts from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (Russia), the Economic Commission for Europe and FAO Geneva (Europe), and the Canadian and United States Forest Services (North America).
F A O APPROACH.
FAO has adopted a multiple-pronged approach in preparing outlook studies. The Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) provides foundation data on forest area and key characteristics of the forest resource. A Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM) is providing a simulation model to forecast fibre supply potentials under different scenarios. Likely developments in the consumption, production and trade of forest products are provided through a Global Forest Products Model (GFPM). These three components provide the analytical foundation necessary to support a set of scenarios to be presented as the FAO global Outlook for Forests and Forest Products. The scenarios developed will describe the adjustments required in forest management, wood products production, Figure 1 consumption and trade in Forestry statistics and outlook studies processes order to achieve certain desired future conditions for the forestry sector. Current Forest Policy Environment The global Outlook for Forests and Forest FRA Products will be developed after consultation with GFPM GFSM governments, industry Resources availability Econometric modeling 1997 and non-governmental 1998 organizations. The implications for policy will be summarized in the Outlook scenarios 1998 State of the World's Forests 1999 (FAO's SOFO biennial review). The approach described above is an iterative process, which will be carried out on a periodic basis, with FRA2000 being the beginning of the cycle once again. Through it, the FAO Forestry Department hopes to contribute more effectively to the global forest policy debate on issues such as sustainable forest management, biological diversity and climatic change. In addition, it will assist in addressing questions such as: How will we meet the growing demand for wood products? Will technological advances offset changes in wood availability? What role can recycling and non-wood fibres play?.
Policy implications 1999.
R E P O R T STRUCTURE.
The report is organized as follows: Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5 Section 6 Section 7 Annex 1 Description of methodology Background for the study Current fibre supply situation Impact of major supply factors Alternative futures Discussion and conclusions Statistical summary of forest area, growth, volume, harvesting intensity (potential removals) and alternative fibres and plantations plus summary of possible futures for some regions Major definitions and classification.
Methodology.
S T U D Y DESIGN.
The initial task was to construct an appropriate database for data compilation and information management. A pre-test was conducted, definitions were developed, and input tables for data compilation were completed. A team of experts worked on a country-by-country basis through the latest available inventory reports to extract the data necessary to complete the country profiles in terms of forest area, growing stock volume, growth and removals, for the major industrial roundwood producers in Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The analysts used Microsoft Access as the relational database management programme and Visual Basic as the programming language for supply forecasting. (Another forecast model was developed in FORTRAN, later converted to VBASIC, and it is described in more detail in GFSM Working Paper No. 5.) In order to forecast to the year 2050, it is necessary to place the fibre supply projections into an appropriate policy context. Based on a thorough review of the policy issues addressed in previous supply studies, the major policy factors identified for consideration at this time are:.
sustainable forest management; land-use change ­ deforestation; land-use change ­ protected area; plantation afforestation rate; plantation development gains; non-wood and recovered fibre; and material efficiency and technological change.
The implications of these factors are described in more detail in Section.
The study team recognizes that prices and costs are also important determinants in defining the economic supply but, due to the limited financial resources available for the project, these factors were not explicitly included. In particular, the definitions and classification were chosen to match those of the Forest Resources Assessment 2000. This will help the reader to follow upcoming FAO reports, assist the FRA and Outlook Studies teams with some of their information requirements and also improve the linkage of the GFSM study to some important current forest policy issues.
Table 1 List of countries included in the GFSM assessment Africa (26) Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Rep. Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Rep. Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe South America (13) Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela O ce ani a (6) Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu U S SR, former area (1) Russian Federation Central America (9) Belize Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America (3) Canada Mexico United States of America A s i a (22) Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China India Indonesia Iran Japan Korea,DPR Korea, Rep. of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Guyana Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Eur ope (28).
Definitions.
In conducting a study of this nature it is critical to have a clear set of terms for forest resources. The definitions must have at least the following characteristics to be useful for both consistency of the various statistical reports and for outlook work: The definitions must be in general agreement with new terminology negotiated in international forums. For example, the definitions used must be compatible with the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 2000. Where definitions did not exist the terms used draw heavily on the forestry literature for description. The terms must be flexible enough to utilize old data sets. For example, the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 1980 contains very important data on forest volume utilized in building a country profile. The major terms must be able to accommodate the country level data collected. For example, each country has its own unique way of classifying forest area and volumes and the standard definitions must be able to accommodate these differences. The terms must be readily understandable to a wide audience of users. This ensures greater transparency in the presentation of data. It is imperative for any long-term planning to establish standards that can be applied to a wide variety of circumstances. Annex 2 contains a complete list of definitions used in the study.
Classification of fibre resources.
To t a l L a n d.
F o re s t a n d O t h e r W o o d e d Lan d.
O th e r L a n d *.
O th e r W o o d e d L an d *.
Pl an tati o n s.
N a t u ra l F o re s t.
P ri v a t e.
P u b li c *.
D is t u rb e d.
U n d is t u r b e d *.
C o n i fe r o u s.
N o n - C on if . *.
A v a i la b le f o r W o o d Su p p l y *.
N o t A v a i la b l e fo r W o o d Su p p l y *.
D i s tu r b e d.
P r iv a t e P u b li c *.
U n d i s t u rb e d *.
D is t u r b e d *.
I n a c c e s s ib le *.
L e g a ll y P ro t e c t e d.
C o n if e r o u s.
No n C o n if e r o u s *.
I [P h ys i c a l ].
II [ T r a n s p o r t].
I II [ O t h e r].
W o od Fibre f r om Forest Ava ila b l for W oo d Supp l e y.
G r o w in g Sto c k m 3/h a.
Comm er cial Species G ro w in g Sto ck m 3 /h a.
H a rv e stin g I nte n si ty m 3/ ha.
Cu t t ing C y c le ye ar s.
f o r: Di s tu r b e d F or e st.
f o r: Un d i s t u r b e d F or est.
f o r: Di s tu rb ed Fo re s t.
f or : Un di st u rb e d Fo re s t.
f or : Di s tu rb ed Fo re s t.
f o r: U nd i s t u rb ed Fo re s t.
Gro s s Annu al I nc re me nt m 3/h a /y.
G ross Annual In cre m e nt m 3 /h a/ y.
Describing the current situation.
The statistics chosen for collection are important because they serve as a basis for examining both the current and future conditions of the forests. The creation of possible futures requires the manipulation of critical variables in a set of equations that forecast changes in fibre sources over time. The critical statistics in the case of the GFSM are:.
q area ­ i.e. current forest area available for wood supply; q area ­ area change for natural and plantation forest; q volume ­ both growing stock and commercial species growing.
stock; q growth ­ gross annual increment and mortality; q fellings/removals ­ harvesting intensity and cutting cycle; q recovered and non-wood fibre ­ production capacity.
Constructing alternative futures.
Modelling the future in today's forest policy context also requires the use of equations to manipulate the statistics or variables just described and which have at least some ability to express the sustainability of supply. Figure 4 Figure 4 is a summary of the formulae Formulae for calculating fibre supply futures considered for use in the analysis of natural forests. Currently equations Gud I: + (i  Ad ) III and IV are being used in the c modelling efforts and once better conversion factors are developed Gud equations I, II and V will also be II: + (0.5  i  Ad ) included to improve our analytical c abilities.
Hi  Aud + (i  Ad ) c Hi  Aud + (0.5  i  Ad ) c 2.
(Gud + Gd ).
Explanation Commercial Species Growing Stock ­ Forest undisturbed by man Commercial Species Growing Stock ­ Forest disturbed by man.
There are a wide range of equations used to calculate area of forest undisturbed by man and forest disturbed by man. Based on an extensive review of the literature on yield regulations, particularly as applied to tropical forest conditions4, the GFSM identified five equations as useful. Equations I and II rely on the growing stock statistics of.
Symbol Gud Gd Aud Ad Hi i c r.
Area available for wood supply ­ Forest undisturbed by man Area available for wood supply ­ Forest disturbed by man Harvest intensity Increment Cutting cycle Rotation period.
Since the yield regulation formulae were originally developed in temperate and boreal forest conditions, a modification of the formulae presented can make them applicable to these forests as well. For example, in some forests the cutting cycle would be replaced with a rotation age and the harvest intensity replaced with merchantable volume.
commercial species in the forest undisturbed by man and allow for the gradual transition over time from an undisturbed forest to a disturbed forest. Equation II allows for the application of a reduction factor to the increment statistics. Since in many countries the increment statistics are very difficult to obtain, the ability to reduce increment because of uncertainty, mortality, bark and other factors is very important. The primary disadvantage of the use of these formulae relates directly to the inadequacy of forest inventory data which only report volumes for large-diameter trees, usually above 50 cm diameter at breast height (dbh). In calculating future potential supply this is simply not appropriate since all trees, and certainly all those above 10 c