<title>Indian experience on household food and nutrition security</title>
<section>1</section>
1. The concept of household food & nutrition security
1. The concept of household food & nutrition security
Access to adequate food, which is one of the fore-most basic needs of life should be the birthright of every single human being on this earth. On its part, mother nature has provided this unique planet of ours with such abundant resources and human beings with such intelligence that the global production can easily feed the present and future population of this entire world. Yet, the way human society has got organised, one fifth of the population of the developing countries i.e. about 800 million people suffer from chronic under nutrition (FAO 1992). Many of them are at the threshold of starvation, one or two poor harvests can push them into the jaws of death. These chronically undernourished millions are trapped in a vicious cycle - not getting adequate food regularly and therefore, not being able to lead a healthy and active life and without such a life, not being able to either produce or procure required food. Many more millions are mildly or moderately undernourished.
In lay man's language all these millions can be said to be food insecure and others can be said to be enjoying food security.
The specific term "food security" is of recent origin, although in some form or other, adequate availability of food must have been one of the most primary concerns of the human beings since time immemorial. In recent years, most of the experts like to define food security as access by all people at all times to enough food for a healthy life. It was FAO Committee on World Food Security which, in a way, formalised the definition in 1983 and incorporated following three specific goals for food security:
i) ensuring adequacy of food supplies;
ii) maximising stability of supplies; and
iii) securing access to available supplies to all who need them.
The World Bank Position Paper on Poverty and Hunger (19.86) added an "activity level" concept to these goals, stating that "food security must assure access by all people at all times to enough food for an active and healthy life." In turn, food insecurity was defined as the lack of access to enough food for a healthy, active life style. It is now being increasingly appreciated that food security is primarily a matter of ensuring effective demand rather than a problem relating to food supply. With such realisation, inter-relationship between poverty, hunger and food security is gaining international recognition and serious attempts are being made to define and identify people at risk. It is, therefore, important that every household should either have capacity to produce adequate food for all the members or have purchasing power to acquire it. It has to be appreciated that a country may be food surplus but all its citizens may not be enjoying food security as some may have
no purchasing power. On the other hand, a country may be food deficit but every person may be enjoying food security, with that country being able to import the required quantity of food and each person having either direct access (through the family's income) or indirect access (provided by the welfare State) to required food. In its turn, the lack of adequate access is a function of either production fluctuation or price fluctuation or a combination of both. "These two fluctuation lead directly to a fluctuation in real income within the community. These fluctuations in real income, both direct & indirect, affect the farmer, the agricultural labourer, as well as other member of the society, will ultimately have an impact on household food consumption, that of the poorer households being particularly sensitive." (Alberto Valde's, 1981) It is therefore, necessary to combat such fluctuation in order to ensure and maintain food security, for which the country must hold highly
liquid assets, either in the shape of food stocks or monetary instruments. Attaining food security is therefore, a costly affair and this is why we find rich countries being food secure at any cost & poor ones food-insecure.
Household Food Security
It will be clear from the above that although national food security is important as providing a foundation, in the ultimate analysis what is more important is food security for each and every household and within it to every member of the family. Put differently, "at the household level, food security is defined as access to food that is adequate in terms of quality, quantity, safety and cultural acceptability for all household members." (Gillespie, and Mason, 1991). Reference can, at this stage, be also drawn to the concept of household food security adopted recently at the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) held at Rome during December 1992, at which the author happened to have represented the country. "Food security is defined in its most basic form as an access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy life". Achieving food security has thus three dimensions. "It is necessary to ensure a safe and nutritionally adequate food supply both at the
national level and at the household level. It is necessary to have a reasonable degree of stability in the supply of food, both from one year to the other and during the year. And most critical, is the need to ensure that each household has physical, social and economic access to enough food to meet its needs" (ICN Pub, 1992). This means that each household must have the knowledge and the ability to produce or resources to procure the food that it needs on a sustainable basis. The Conference went one step forward and recognised the importance of intake of balanced diets and also cautioned against over consumption or waste of nutrition as sometimes seen in developed countries. It reiterated that assuring food security should be the fundamental objective of the development strategy of countries and the extent of the attainment of this goal should be a major indicator of the success or failure of the developmental process. The Conference went on to suggest that in countries
where food insecurity is quite prevalent a multi-sectoral and multi-organisational approach has to be adopted which should, inter-alia, include adoption of such appropriate developmental strategies which will encourage economic growth with a specific focus on removal of poverty. The emerging phenomenon of what is being described as "jobless growth" has also to be taken care of, especially in developing countries like India, where labour saving technologies may be inducing national growth and incomes but rate of employment generation may not, in reality, be increasing. It will, therefore, be necessary to make substantial investments in human development so as to improve the health, as also the educational and technological skills of the work force enabling them to participate gainfully in the expanding economy and earn increasingly higher incomes. If this does not happen, the poor will be crushed between unemployment on one hand and rising food price on the other. It has to
be appreciated and acknowledged that investment for ensuring food security is investment in development and Food' is really a 'development input'.
The strategy should also consciously reduce the fall-outs on account of structural adjustment programmes to a minimum and where such fall-outs become inevitable, provide for appropriate measures to alleviate the hardships for the poor. The families at risk would also need to be identified and such risk reduced by stimulating employment generation, increasing the skills of both men and women, providing improved and appropriate production technologies etc. In the rural areas, access to land and other resources would need to be improved, marketing infrastructure expanded, agriculture diversified to high value products and agro-industries promoted. It will also be necessary to stabilise food supplies and smoothen year to year and seasonal variations in food availability by maintaining required buffer stocks. Further, if, as a part of globalisation of economy, domestic cereal prices are allowed to rise and domestic market is integrated with the international market, it will have
to be seen whether incomes of the poor are also moving towards international levels. Even if this positive development is taking place, short term measures like public distribution of foodgrains, food coupons etc. will have to be continued because Indian consumer with one three hundredth per capita income compared to that of the developed countries cannot be expected to pay the same price for food-grains as those in the developed countries.
International Recognition and Action
Organised international concern and concrete action in the field of food security has been of a fairly recent origin. It was at the World Food Conference, organised by the FAO at Rome in 1974, that pointed attention of the world leaders was drawn to the need for devising ways and means for ensuring food security to the millions of poor of the world who could not afford even one square meal a day. The Conference was organised against the background of a sharp decline in the world food production in the sixties and early seventies, threatening a famine at the global level. The Conference adopted a solemn declaration stating that "no child, woman or man should go to bed hungry and no human being's physical and mental capabilities should be stunted by malnutrition". A special agency under the aegis of the U.N., named the World Food Council, was also set up to coordinate production and distribution of food at the global level to realise the goal set by the Conference. It was the
good luck of the millions living in the threatened countries that the global famine did not occur and the apprehended sharp decline in world food production did not take place. On the other hand, countries including India, were able to get out of the rut of stagnating food production and achieve rapid growth through adoption of a technological package, commonly called the green revolution. This silver lining apart, the declarations adopted at the World Food Conference could not really be attained in the subsequent years; may be the world community became complacent once the threatened global famine did not materialise. It is disappointing that the U.N. is presently examining the possibility of either abolishing the WFC or transferring its functions to some other U.N. agency due to resources crunch. Not that the world has become free of famines but localised famines probably do not stir the conscience of world community to that extent any more. The other side of the picture
is that it is now well accepted that the specter of hunger will not vanish even if the world as a whole is able to produce every year the quantity of food required arithmetically i.e. population multiplied by per capita nutritional norms. This is also true at country level in the developing world. It is now fully realised that what is more important is to provide purchasing power to households at risk; the production and availability of food will automatically go up. This, however, is a highly elusive goal; with no immediate scope to get stable gainful employment, families cannot have any food security.
It is, therefore, no wonder that as recently as in 1990 the FAO report on the State of Food and Agriculture concedes that "no contemporary problem compared in gravity to the human devastation caused by persisting hunger and malnutrition". Recognising the grave situation at the joint FAD/WHO sponsored International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) at Rome in 1992, all the participating countries pledged, amongst other things, to eliminate, before the end of the decade (i.e. by 2000 AD), famine and famine related deaths and reduce starvation and widespread chronic hunger substantially within the same decade. The concern highlighted at these two Conferences in 1974 and 1992 has at least succeeded in putting into sharp focus the great challenge before the policy makers in ensuring food security to all in their countries and the need for concerted action at the global level. ICN-92 has, in fact, extended the concept of food security to one of nutrition security, without which an
active and healthy life for all will not be possible. The unfortunate thing is that that challenge appears too big for many countries to handle, notwithstanding the efforts being made by them and such efforts being supplemented by FAO to increase food production and by World Food Programme and UNICEF to reach the food and nutrition to the needy. Much greater efforts will be required both by the concerned countries as also by the UN agencies, to achieve at least food security to all the people on this earth in foreseeable future and simultaneously work for the total nutrition security for all, though it may be achieveable only over a longer period of time.
Availability of Food at the Global Level
At the global level, there is adequate food available for every human being and enough food can be produced for the world's growing population. However, the World is characterised by a limited number of surplus food producers with the potential to export food and a very large number of food deficit countries, which cannot afford to import the required quantities of food, are developing countries with serious balance of payments problems. Such countries, even those facing chronic food shortages, cannot depend on food aid and when it is made available it can sometimes carry its own hidden price. "The distribution of food aid, predominantly itself a result of domestic need to dispose off surplus production in ways which do not depress the world food prices has often been political" (Tarrant, 1980). To make matters even more difficult for underfed, the aid is often tied to specific projects with a part of the aid, sometimes substantial, getting back to the donor countries in the
shape of purchase of machines and payments to experts. At the other end of the spectrum, there are situations when "aid is used by elites in the receiving countries to entrench themselves and continue with their exploitation of poor in other own countries." (Jon Bennet, 1987). If only the food aid could be delinked from all extraneous politico-rnilitary consideration, there would be no need for millions to go hungry to bed and breed more numbers in the false hope of fighting off poverty and hunger. It is unfortunate that such a situation prevails notwithstanding mountains of accumulated foodgrains with a few countries. If fact, some of these countries have to make incentive payments to their farmers to keep their fields fallow so that food prices are maintained at high levels. In the most recent past, while people in the starvation hit sub-Saharan countries could be saved by sending a few million tons of food there, the developed countries carried a closing stock of
something like 273 million tones of foodgrains at the end of 1992-93 (International Wheat Council Report No. 214, London, 1994). The global production and consumption pattern for foodgrains is itself very skewed. It is estimated that the developing countries having 70% of the world's population, produce only 45% of the foodgrains. While a substantial part of the grains produced in the developed countries is fed to the animals, it is estimated that "as compared to an average requirement of 2250 calories, about 5000 calories are used on per capita basis in the developed countries. (Bapna, 1990). A paper distributed at the PrepCom meeting for the International Conference on Population & Dev. in Cairo (Robert Sessone, 1994) also echoed similar sentiments and tried to explode the myth that the problem of developing countries are their own creation due to burgeoning population they have. It observed that "the 20 countries having the worst food situation are low population
countries and 18 of the 20 have low population densities; that since 1961, the percentage of people living in developing countries with a diet averaging less than 2000 calories per day has decreased from 74 to 6%; that since 1961, the percentage of people living in developing countries with a diet averaging more than 2600 calories per day, has increased from 2 to 50%; that since 1947, food production per person has increased by more than 40% in developing countries; that more of earth is covered by forest than is used for farming and that most of the earth's potential farming land is not used for farming." The situation is compounded by the fact that most of the developing countries neither have the financial resources to purchase the required foodgrains from the international market nor have been able to get out of the rut of shortage of food from their own indigoes production due to a number of factors - historical as well as the inequalities imposed by the modern market
economy. In her introduction to the book "The Hunger Machine", Susan George says "This book, because it is about hunger, is primarily about inequalities. Sometimes these inequalities are quite straightforward, like the obvious disparity between the rich nations and the poor. Sometimes they are hidden one inside another, like Russian dolls. But always everywhere they are reasons for deep seated, persistent hunger, simply another name of injustice." (Jon Bennet, 1987). Distortion in aid policies continues even today. "Donors send only one third of development assistance to the 10 most populous countries, which have two thirds of the world's poor. The richer developing countries of W.Asia get US$ 21 per capita against US$ 6 per capita for the poorer countries of South Asia" (UNDP, 1994 Edn). The availability of food in different countries, therefore, varies greatly. Such availability can be assessed on the basis of dietary energy supply (DES), which generally measures
availability in terms of calories per capita per day. DES for some selected developing and developed countries is given in Table I below (FAO Annual Reprot, 1992)
Table 1 PER CAPITAL DIETARY ENERGY SUPPLIES
CALORIES SUPPLIES PER CAPITA
COUNTRY
India
Pakistan
China
Bangladesh
Brazil
Egypt
Mexico
Belgium
France
Australia
Germany
DES in 1986-88 was thus as low as 1925 calories in Bangladesh and as high as 3901 in Belgium. It is certainly a huge disparity, even after discounting the varying calorie requirements of people in different climatic regions. The disparity is substantial even within the developing world, the DES to an average Chinese was almost 25% more than to an average Indian. Another point to be noted is that while DES for the developed countries has been continuously rising since 1972-74, and has also been increasing for some developing countries like China, Brazil, Egypt and Mexico; for many poor countries, it has been more or less stagnating at prevailing levels, showing even negative growth once in a while. This clearly brings out the inter play between food security and poverty in many of the developing countries. It is, therefore, no wonder that in the FAO Report, 1990 Mr. Edward Saouma, Director General of FAO stated "I must express once again my deep concern that one out of five
persons of the population of nearly 100 developing countries remain under-nourished. Also, we cannot be oblivious of, nor indifferent to, the fate of the millions of people who are threatened by starvation as soon as a season of insufficient rainfall or any other natural or man made event, disrupts the normal supply of food or hinders their access to it", it also has to be appreciated that no less than 30% and up to 75% of total calorie supply in developing countries is cereal based. Therefore, as the first step toward food security, the availability of cereals itself is the major problem for millions of poor people in these countries. The problem is most serious in some of the African and South Asian countries. However, availability of cereals is only the first and in fact, preliminary step. Such availability may only prevent the human being from dying of hunger. Human beings, unlike animals, cannot just live at survival threshold. The human mind goads him to indulge in
physical and mental activities that will make human life easier and richer. For this, one must have a healthy body and mind. In order to reach such a stage of healthy body and mind and maintain oneself at that stage, intake of not only cereals but other food items like milk, fruits. vegetables, pulses, fish, egg etc. is required so that the human body can get various nutrients (including micronutrients) that will make the body active and healthy both physically and mentally. The availability of all these has to be, therefore, looked into. In other words, the entire food and nutrition security is what that must interest us. In the next Chapter, we will examine the requirements of various foodstuffs and nutrients that experts recommend for consumption in India.
<section>2</section>
2. Nutritional requirements in India
2. Nutritional requirements in India
In the present endeavour to. find the status of food and nutrition security in India, it is necessary to first examine the 'standards' against which such security is to be judged. At the conceptual plane, it can, be stated that a country can be said to have achieved complete food and nutrition security if each and every person in that country is able to consume a minimum quantum and quality of various ingredients of what I would like to call 'an adequate and balanced diet' on a regular basis. Availability and affordability of such diet, backed by health and educational services in an environmentally sustainable scenario will then enable each member of the society to live a 'good' life; each individual personality getting an opportunity to flower to one's full potential. However, it is a matter of intense international debate as to what should be considered an adequate and balanced diet for different groups of individuals in a society, "The World Bank (1986) used FAD/WHO
norms for reference individuals for 'moderate' activity for specific countries/regions. A large variation in defining 'adequate' food exists, ranging between 1400 and 2800 calories and therefore, is subject to value judgment. (Maxwell et.al., 1992). "The poor in rural areas who do heavy physical work in the field need much higher calorie intake than for moderate activity which can swell the number of food insecure substantially." (Bapna, 1993).
It is actually not easy for experts to exactly lay down nutrient requirements and quantities of various ingredients separately for various population and activity groups. Requirements of special categories like infants, mothers etc. have to be separately looked into. In any case, standards setting for any human activity is indeed a very difficult task. Diversity in agro-climatic conditions; food habits; life styles and spiritual/philosophical inclinations condition the nutritional intakes, apart from the 'measurable physiological needs' of the human body. To go on to determine the averages, experts have to depend on sample surveys which suffer from their inherent limitations. At the same time, an average balanced diet made up of various food items has to be prescribed so that a country could plan to produce or procure these.
In India, it is the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) that sets up Nutrition Advisory Committees or Expert Groups and recommend the "Dietary Allowances" in respect of energy (Calories), proteins, fats, minerals, iron, vitamins etc. for various age groups within the population including special groups like infants, pregnant/nursing mothers, children etc. and at the same time recommend dietary allowance by activity groupings also. These Committees/Expert Group also recommend weighted average per capita requirements for the population of the country as a whole, to enable the policy-makers plan for production or procurement of the required quantities of various foodstuffs. The first Nutrition Advisory Committee of ICMR had made its recommendations way back in 1944. The recommendations have been reviewed, up-dated and amended ever since, generally at intervals of ten years. Such reviews and revised recommendations have been made in 1958, 1968, 1978, 1984 and 1990. The
1984 Recommendations had specially observed that "RDA (Recommended Dietary Allowance) for Indians are being revised and updated at intervals of about 10 years in view of the changes in our concept of human requirements of several nutrients as a result of studies carried out during the previous decade" (ICMR pub. 1984).
The most recent recommendations available are those made by the Expert Group of ICMR in 1990. The concerned publication (ICMR pub. 1990) can be seen for details but the recommendation made in respect of the two important nutrition requirements i.e. energy and protein are given below:
Table 2 ENERGY ALLOWANCE FOR ADULTS
Category
Reference body
Weight Kg.
Activity
Energy Allowance
K.Cal
Man
Sedentary
Moderate
Heavy
Woman
Sedantary
Moderate
Heavy
Table 3 PROTEIN ALLOWANCES FOR ADULTS
Category
Body Weight
Protein requirement in g.
Kg.
Per Kg.
Per day
Man
Woman
The energy and protein requirements are given separately for various age groups like adults, infants, children and special categories like pregnant and nursing mothers. Although the ICMR Expert Group also recommends dietary allowances for other nutrients like fat, iron, calcium, vitamins etc. and we will have an occasion to refer to these later on, we may discuss only energy and protein recommendations in details here since these are the most important nutrients which need to be tackled first. Height, body-weight and physical activity are three important determinants of energy requirement. It may also be mentioned that the 1990 report of the Expert Group recommended an upward revision in the 'reference body weight of adult man and woman in order to harmonise the body weights of adults with those of well-to-do and normally growing children and also taking into consideration the expanded weights for their heights. This was important since "the national goal of any country
would be to provide adequate nutrition and health to its population so that they attain their full genetic potential in growth and development". (ICMR, 1990).
Recommendations on energy requirements are vital because they have a direct bearing on the status of poverty, which in India, is defined by per capita incomes that will enable a person to achieve daily intake of 2400 K.Cal in rural areas and 2100 K Cal in urban areas. While proportion of people living below the poverty 'line' can be adjudged against these standards, we need to have a weighted average of energy requirement for the entire population so that nation can plan for production and availability of at least that much energy giving foodstuffs. The ICMR Expert Group (1990) has concluded that on the basis of the present recommended dietary allowance (RDA), it ought to be 2200 Kcal per capita per day.
As regards recommendation on the weighted average protein requirement, the Expert Group (1990) has suggested 50 gins/capita/day. This again, just like weighted average energy requirement, is based on recommended dietary protein allowance of different groups, which constitutes the absolute safe levels. Thus, while many individuals with intakes below RDA are not necessarily at risk, those with intakes of RDA norms or higher are certainly not at risk. The Expert Group also recommended that a PE percentage between 8 and 12 would meet the protein requirements of any group, provided its energy needs are fulfilled.
We will have an occasion to discuss in details the requirement and availability picture of energy and protein as brought out by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) of the National Institute of Nutrition through their surveys during 1975-79 and repeat surveys during 198890, as also by the Working Group set by the Ministry of Agriculture (April 1994) based on production and availability of various foodstuffs. At this stage, it can be mentioned that while NNMB has used per consumption unit requirement of 2400 Kcal of energy and 60 gms of protein, the Working Group in Agriculture has used the weighted average per capita requirement of 2200 Kcal energy & 50 gms of proteins.
Balanced Diets
Composition of balanced diet is the end result of the RDAs. The balanced diet is, in a way, the practical prescription for consumption of a basket of food items, which is likely to provide all the required nutrients to the human body. It was the Advisory Committee of the ICMR (1984) that had reviewed the matter in detail and formulated a new set of recommendations with regard to balanced diets for Indians based on the concept of 'least cost'. As compared to the previous recommendations on balanced diets, lower quantities of pulses and green leafy vegetables have been recommended without of course, sacrificing the nutrients contents to make the recommended diet more practical and acceptable. The report has given details of balanced diets for adult man, adult woman, children, boys and girls separately & activity wise but those for adult man and woman are given below:
Table 4 RECOMMENDED BALANCED DIETS
Adult Man
Adult Woman
Bood Items
Sedentary
Moderate
at work
Heavy
work
Sedentary
Moderate
work
Heavy
work
Cereals
Pulses
Leafy Vegetables
Other-do-
Roots & Tubers
Milk
Oils & fats
Sugar & Jaggery
The 1984 report, recognising that the average per capita requirement of foodstuffs is one of the important considerations from the practical point of view in estimating national food supplies, gave this per capita requirement as under:
Table 5 PER CAPITA REQUIREMENT OF FOOD (gins/day) AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Foodstuff
Physiological
Retail
Production
Cereals
Pulses
Leafy Vegetables
Other-do-
Roots & tubers
Milk
Fats & Oils
Sugar/Jaggery
It is against the above recommended requirement of food items that we have to judge the food and nutrition security of India. However, any narrow value judgments might not be easy to pronounce because of the great diversity inherent in all aspects of life in this highly populous subcontinent type of country. The climatic variations ranging from tropical climate to snow bound areas on one hand and from desert to hot-humid sub-tropical climate on the other, the country presents a bewildering diversity making the task of prescribing an average standard that much difficult. However, the scientific methods of surveys and studies undertaken by the experts on a continuous basis can make the above mentioned averages quite useful guide for the nutritional surveillance and planning.
An extremely important consideration in India is of course, the prevailing poverty. This country's richness till 16th century or so which had earned it the title of the "golden bird", also became its undoing. It attracted invaders repeatedly, culminating in a long spell of British rule. Along with industrial revolution of Britain, India turned into a backyard, a supplier of raw material with sharp decline in workforce engaged in manufacturing. These centuries saw growing poverty and frequent famines, many taking tolls in millions. The last famine before independence in 1943 is known to have resulted in death of around 3.5 million people. With such a background, when even two square meals were not available to millions of households, the availability of basic cereals itself became an important goal to be achieved when the country became independent. It is, therefore, very important to first examine the status of availability and consumption of cereals, which in any case
account for 75 to 80 percent of the dietary energy. Then comes the availability and consumption of pulses which are the main source of proteins in a country where the population is predominantly vegetarian. Finally, the availability of fats and oils, milk, vegetable, sugar, vitamins etc.
It is, therefore, proposed to examine the production, availability and consumption of cereals in India in quite a detailed manner. The role of the price policy and public procurement in increasing the agricultural production will also be examined. The fluctuations in foodgrains production will, inter alia, be examined as it seriously affect the food security. The Public Distribution System (PDS), which is one of the most important instruments in providing food security, will also be discussed in some detail to examine its evolution, its shortcomings and reforms needed to make it a sharper instrument in providing food security to poor households. Since poverty is the root cause of undernouri