<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This document contains guidelines for planners in inland and small water body fisheries on the type of information they need to ensure that gender issues are taken note of in fisheries planning. How to obtain this information is also indicated.
Draft guidelines on the subject were prepared by ALCOM in 1992 on the basis of a review of available materials and documented experiences, mainly in Eastern and Southern Africa. These guidelines were reviewed and refined at a workshop held in Zimbabwe in January 1993, which was attended by specialists from the SADC region, ALCOM staff and consultants. The guidelines contained in this book represent the consensus of participants at the workshop.
The guidelines will be useful in the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region, and elsewhere, for sectoral planning, project formulation, evaluation and monitoring concerning gender issues in fisheries. Comments and feedback are invited.
The document has been made possible by collaboration between ALCOM and a project funded by Japan: "Enhancement of the role of women in inland fisheries and aquaculture development" (GCP/RAF/273/JPN).
ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme) is a regional aquaculture and fisheries programme of the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, it covers the member countries of SADC -- Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
ALCOM is funded by Sweden and Belgium. Its preparatory phase began in October 1986, and its first implementation phase in October 1990.
ALCOM Address:
Mail:
P.O. Box 3730, Harare, Zimbabwe
Telex:
260 40 FAO ZW
Tel.:
Fax:
E-mail:
ALCOMC@mango.apc.org
<title>Meeting information needs on gender issues in inland and small water body fisheries</title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Abstract
What kind of information do planners in inland and small water body fisheries need to ensure that gender issues are taken care of in their planning? How can such information be collected? This document contains guidelines concerning both questions. The guidelines cover four areas: information needed for sector planning and project formulation at the macro-level; information required at the micro-level (which will be helpful for development interventions in local communities); monitoring and evaluation; and incorporation of gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
These guidelines are contained in four chapters. A more comprehensive set of information needs is found in tabular form in the two Appendices. These detail sources and methods of collecting the needed information, and the uses to which this information can be put.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Draft guidelines were prepared and then discussed and elaborated upon by participants at a regional meeting of experts held in Zimbabwe during 19-22 January 1993. Besides the authors, the following people attended the meeting:
Mr Arne Andreasson, Programme Director, ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Hope Chigudu, Vice Chairperson, Zimbabwe Women's Resources Centre, Harare, Zimbabwe; Mr Steve Donda, Fisheries Economist, Salima, Malawi; Ms Elin Ersdal, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Elizabeth Harrison, Research Fellow Anthropology, University of Sussex, U.K.; Ms Tilleke Kiewied, Advisor Gender Planning Section, Mansa, Zambia; Mr Kees Leendertse, Fisheries Planning Analyst (APO), FAO, Rome, Italy; Ms Rita O. J. Maly, Aquaculturist, Kunduchi Fisheries Institute, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Burton A. S. Mwamoto, Fisheries-economist (Local Consultant), FAO, Bukoba, Tanzania; Mr Saidi Swedi Mwikongi, Programme Officer, TFNC, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Henrik Nilsson, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Synve Fosse Opsahl, Nutritionist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms J. van der Mheen-Sluijer, Consultant Socio-economist, ALCOM; Mr Uwe Tietze, Fishery Industry Officer, FAO,
Rome, Italy.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
Discussion of gender issues in inland and small water body fisheries has led to little change in sectoral planning on the subject or in the formulation of projects or strategies to tackle the issues. This is mainly because little information is available on gender issues; further planners are not certain where or how to obtain such information. The guidelines given in this report address these needs; they discuss the information which is required and the methods to acquire it in order to incorporate gender issues into mainstream inland fisheries development planning and project formulation. 'Rough based primarily on experiences in Eastern and Southern Africa, they are intended for wider application in Africa.
The guidelines are meant for use by inland fisheries planners. As gender is a cross-disciplinary issue, these guidelines encompass many general aspects of inland fisheries and small water body development. For those already involved in the sector, many of the issues raised may seem obvious. The purpose of the guidelines is therefore to present these issues from a gender perspective and ensure that information or data collected does not ignore these important considerations. They therefore assume that the user has a basic understanding of the inland fisheries sector. For fisheries planning, they should complement the FAO "Women in Fisheries" guidelines published in 1989.
The main text of the guidelines is divided into the following four sections:
(1) Information required at the macro-level. This section identifies and details key questions on gender issues which should be answered during sectoral planning and project formulation (macro-level).
(2) Information required for inland and small water bodies fisheries at the micro-level. This section identifies and elaborates on key questions which should be answered for development interventions in specific areas or communities.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation.
(4) Suggestions for incorporating gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
The main text (Chapters 2 to 5) focuses on key information needs related to gender in inland fisheries. Users should consider selecting those issues which are most relevant to their needs. Appendices 1 and 2 contain more detailed lists of all the information required at the macro and micro level and ways in which this information can be collected and used in planning and project formulation.
The guidelines are structured in such a way that they introduce key issues concerning gender in inland fisheries to those less familiar with such issues. Having read these chapters, the user should then proceed to the Appendices for more detailed information.
For those familiar with gender issues, the user can proceed directly to the Appendices and only refer to the main text if a particular topic requires some clarification.
Broadly speaking, macro-level guidelines are intended for sectoral planners and as a first step in project formulation. Micro-level guidelines are intended for project formulation, monitoring and evaluation. However, users should refer to both levels when carrying out a specific task, because many issues manifest themselves at both levels.
Users interested in setting up monitoring and evaluation systems may read Chapter 5 and then refer to the matrices presented in Appendices I and 2 for ideas on useful indicators.
The guidelines assume that users have some basic training in the application of socio-economic methodologies. Users interested in the application of such methodologies to collect gender-specific information are referred to Chapter 5. It presents general information on how to overcome problems associated with official statistics and field work and how to aggregate information once it has been collected.
<section>4</section>
2. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Development policies and programmes/projects for fisheries/aquaculture on gender issues
Institutional capacities
Sectoral characteristics
Demographic characteristics
Health and nutrition characteristics
Legal status of women
Credit availability
Extension services structure and training
Biological and technical research
2. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Although the need for socio-economic information for inland fisheries planning and project formulation has gained recognition in the recent past, these data have not been included in conventional information collection systems in the fisheries administration of many countries. Neither has there been much consideration for developing operational and systematic approaches or strategies to consider gender concerns. For integration of gender issues into fisheries planning, the starting point is better awareness of gender issues. Such awareness has to come through data.
This section highlights key issues which provide an entry point for planners in analyzing and incorporating gender-related socio-economic issues at the macro-level, including information for sectoral planning and project formulation.
There are several actions that a government department of fisheries or a project could undertake to address gender issues. The areas of action vary from the structure of their own organization, their policies and working methods, to staff training. The effects of actions which do not take gender aspects into account as well as recommendations for courses of action to remedy this situation are discussed in more detail below.
Development policies and programmes/projects for fisheries/aquaculture on gender issues
Key questions: What are the existing national/donor policies and objectives in support of gender issues in inland fisheries? What strategies and programmes in support of gender issues have been undertaken? What are their achievements and constraints which need to be addressed?
Knowing existing government and donor policies and objectives on inland fisheries and on gender issues is the first step in sectoral planning. This provides the basis for future development interventions. Past activities and current programmes in support of gender issues should be reviewed to establish the actions taken to meet national and donor objectives and the level of commitment to meeting these objectives.
Another area of consideration is budgetary allocation to gender issues by the national government and by donors. Special budget allocations for gender issues show a general commitment to implement policies. However, one must be aware that money allocated to gender issues does not necessarily represent actual activities implemented at the practical level on gender issues, unless specified.
Institutional capacities
Key questions: What gender expertise is available within institutions? Which institutions are suitable for cooperation/collaboration on gender issues? Do the relevant institutions require assistance in gender skills?
Gender awareness, and competency in gender analysis in existing institutions, provide the starting point for the development and implementation of gender-sensitive programmes. In some countries, activities related to gender issues arc administered by other ministries (Ministry of Women Affairs, Ministry of Community Development and Social Welfare etc.) with which fisheries staff rarely have contact. Consequently, fisheries officers often have limited access to general socio-economic information and gender-specific information in particular; moreover, when available they find it difficult to incorporate this information in sector and project planning.
One approach is to identify and collaborate with relevant institutions competent in collation, collection and analysis of gender-related information during sector planning and project formulation and for monitoring and evaluation. Where competency in gender analysis is weak or non-existent, another approach would be to strengthen skills in gender analysis by training.
Sectoral characteristics
Key questions: Who and how many men and women are engaged in the fisheries sub-sectors (harvesting, processing, marketing, ancillary activities)? How do men and women benefit from these activities? What changes in the sector are likely to affect men and women, and in what way?
The resource base in capture fisheries is not visible and therefore difficult to quantify. In addition, there are complex variables affecting fish stocks: mobility, seasonality, water quality, currents, weather changes, downstream impact of farming, tourism, industry etc. Thus fisheries activities often involve risks and uncertainties which are beyond the control of those directly involved in the sector.
The fishery system is a dynamic system. It is composed of the catching, processing, marketing and ancillary sub-sectors which inter-relate with each other. It includes men and women engaged in catching, processing, marketing and supporting activities (e.g. catering food and services for fishermen and traders, boat builders, gear suppliers). The motivations and aspirations, knowledge and experiences of these people may differ by age, gender, ethnicity, religion and marital status.
Changes in the inter-relationships between catching, processing, marketing and ancillary subsectors inevitably produce a gender impact. This should be taken into account when management strategic.% or development plans are formulated. Motorization of fishing vessels can increase the quantity of fish caught; large-scale processors, often men, are likely to benefit more from the higher catches since they have access to larger amounts of working capital, and enjoy economics of scale. Changes in species composition and sizes of fish may benefit or disadvantage certain types of processors and traders. Alternatively, the number of small-scale processors might increase, depending on the structure of the catching and processing sub-sectors. The introduction of selective fishing gears may reduce the landings of smaller-sized fish which arc preferred by small-scale women processors and small-scale women traders.
^1 Institutions include governments, research, training and educational institutions, universities and NGOs.
Demographic characteristics
Key questions: How does population growth and density affect resources and its users? How do demographic characteristics affect male and female labour availability in fisheries? What is the dependency ratio for rural and urban areas?
Population growth and density will affect pressure on existing resources and the distribution of limited resources amongst existing and potential users.
In addition, population movements into and out of an area change household composition and the type of households in the area. For example, an increase in the number of female-headed households may mean this group needs special development intervention. The occurrence of female-headed households might also affect gender relationships in decision making and division of labour. However, care should be taken in assuming that female-headed households are a homogeneous group and are all resource-poor.
Health and nutrition characteristics
Key questions: Which areas have a relatively low nutritional and health status? What are the main problems? Who is affected? Will fish help improve the nutritional status of an area?
Improving the nutritional well-being of the population is often an important objective of fisheries development. If the nutritional status of the rural population is generally low, and particularly if there is a shortage of animal protein, an increase in fish supply for local consumption should be considered. Women should be involved in the planning and implementation of projects aimed at improvement of health and nutritional status since they are usually primarily responsible for the nutritional welfare of the family.
Anthropometric measurements such as weight for height and weight for age are general indicators of the symptoms of malnutrition. These require to be analyzed in combination with other related socioeconomic indicators, in order to identify the causes of malnutrition. 'Me gender-disaggregated measurement can be used, whenever available, to identify the relative well-being of men and women. During pregnancy and lactation, women need to eat well. In fish eating areas where the birth weight is low and infant mortality rate is increasing or higher than in other areas, special attention may be needed to augment fish consumption by women. Toward this end, special investigations will be required which clarify the types of fish preferred and allowed to be eaten by women and the intrahousehold distribution of fish.
Legal status of women
Key questions: Can men and women own AND/OR inherit productive resources?
Inheritance law and property ownership rights have gender implications. For example, if women lose their smoking kiln upon the death of their husband because they cannot own property, they may not be encouraged to invest time and/or money in these developments.
Credit availability
Key questions: Do men and women enjoy equal de facto access to institutional credit? Are credit programmes and lending procedures suitable for both men and women? Are there sources of credit which are more suited to either men or women? How can banks and other financial institutions be assisted to cater better to credit requirements of men and women?
Fisheries credit institutions often finance the introduction of new technologies, such as outboard engines, boats and gears. Institutional loans are seldom available for processors and traders or for the introduction of improved processing equipment. Banker-, are rarely convinced by either the needs or the creditworthiness of women in fisheries.
Experiences in field projects show the potential for integrating a specific credit package for women into the banks' lending policies. For example, women entrepreneurs in Kigoma, Tanzania, who received credit for fish processing activities, demonstrated a high economic return on their activities. The scheme was successful because lending policies and repayment schedules were tailored to women's seasonal work schedules and earning capacities. Credit facilities were combined with the production of seedlings for planting of trees, training on energy-saving processing techniques and other community development activities.
There are also a number of other inhibiting factors which prevent women from obtaining credit such as low literacy levels, lack of collateral, and lack of guarantee of a regular salary. As a result, although conditions may be equal for both men and women, women find it more difficult to meet these conditions.
Extension services structure and training
Key questions: What is the number of persons working in the extension service, by position and by sex? Is the extension staff competent and motivated to integrate gender issues into extension work? Are they developing and implementing extension methodologies which are gender sensitive? Are there barriers to the entry of "men in vocational training and higher education? Do the curricula of training institutions incorporate gender issues?
There are few female extension personnel at any level in most extension services. It is male personnel who are the decision makers and arc in a position to affect programmes and policies. The few female extensionists that do exist (3% in Africa) are usually found in the junior ranks because of their lower educational level.
Education is not the only constraint to incorporating women in the extension service. It has been difficult to motivate women to take up field jobs because they might conflict with their household duties.
One remedial approach is to utilize more women trainers in on-going training programmes. They can serve as an example and attract other women to the extension service. At the same time, the ongoing training programmes should be evaluated to determine their accessibility to women (e.g. whether there are structures which cater for both men and women, child care facilities, etc).
Once appointed, women should be given equal opportunities as men to carry out extension and to go on study tours, thus receiving informal on-the-job training. If female extension agents arc marginalized, they will become less professionally competent than their male colleagues so that it becomes increasingly difficult for them to contribute to the extension service, and a vicious circle will operate.
Since there are usually few vacancies within extension services, the recruitment of additional female field workers is not always possible. Nor is it a guarantee that gender issues will be considered. Therefore, another and perhaps more practical approach is to utilize existing male extension agents as much as possible. Although conventional belief is that women prefer advice from female extension agents, experience in agriculture and aquaculture extension has shown that the sex of the extension agent is not necessarily a critical issue in reaching women. Good communication skills and sound technical knowledge are more important.
In some countries, fishery extension focuses primarily on enforcing fisheries regulations and collecting taxes and levies from processors and traders. In other countries, fisheries officers concentrate on the collecting of catch and landing statistics. Thus in many cases extensionists play dual and contradictory roles as both controllers and advisors. This has led to a negligence of the advisory functions of the extension staff and the overlooking of socio-economic inter-relationships between production chains.
The training of fisheries officers and extension agents mainly concentrates on technical and biological aspects. Therefore, extension agents should be trained in extension methods which can effectively reach men and women.
Biological and technical research
Key questions: How relevant is existing research and development (R & D) to the needs of men and women in inland fisheries? How do men and women benefit from the research results? Are there disadvantages? If so, who are affected?
Fisheries research has tended to concentrate on biology (the resource base) and technology (harvesting and processing, for example). More attention must be paid to ensuring that new innovations arc useful to both men and women. Experiences show that when attention is given to the specific needs of men and women, the introduction of improved technology becomes more effective. For example, when the Ivory Coast fish smoking kiln was introduced in Malawi, the design was modified to enable easy reconstruction so that women processors could move their processing sites to accompany fishermen. This made the technology feasible for women fish processors and adoption was therefore easier.
<section>5</section>
3. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation - the micro level
Introduction
Catching
Processing
Marketing
Ancillary activities
Migration
Activity profile
Access to and control over fisheries-related resources
Socio-cultural factors affecting adoption of new technologies
Community organizations
Conflicts
Access to and quality of extension services
Household decision-making
3. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation - the micro level
Introduction
At the micro-Ievel, the inland fisheries sectors can be arranged into community and household levels. When formulating plans and/or projects for specific areas, information is needed for both levels. The key issues regarding gender which need to be taken into account at this stage, arc examined in the following sections.
There are many factors at the community level which influence men's and women's activities and their access to and control over resources: the general economic conditions, the nature of government bureaucracies, socio-cultural factors, familial norms and religious beliefs, legal parameters, training and education. Most factors will not he amenable to change by a project. Therefore, an assessment should be, made on whether and how these factors will affect or can be affected by a project.
Generally speaking, activities should focus on the community as a whole, with equal importance accorded to addressing the differing needs of men and women. Special women's projects should be the exception rather than the rule, in order to avoid the isolation and marginalisation of women. Equally important is to tackle the weaknesses in gender-sensitivity within existing institutions and services. Only in cases where a high degree of sexual segregation and separation of productive roles exists or there is a clear case of positive discrimination in a local community, will such components he necessary.
A community is made up of different types of households. However, a "household" is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with a production and consumption function, i.e. with shared and equal access to resources for production and benefits from it. In many cases, individual household members may have different production priorities.
The relative bargaining power of the two sexes within the household will influence the allocation of productive resources as much as purely economic considerations do.
The inland fisheries sector is divided into a number of sub-sectors. These include fishing, processing and trading, plus ancillary activities such as net mending, crew accommodation, fuelwood collection etc. Often, these activities are not mutually exclusive and a certain amount of vertical integration exists. Although both men and women take part in most fisheries-related activities, some patterns do emerge in inland fisheries in southern and eastern Africa. Men tend to be harvesters, processors for particular high-value species and traders to distant or cross border markets. In permanent settlements, women tend to be processors and small-scale traders serving local markets.
Women are also more likely to be involved in ancillary activities. However, the smaller and less specialised the fishery, the less likelihood there is of any significant ancillary activities. This differentiation of roles between men and women has emerged largely because of the reproductive activities of women, which by necessity keep them close to their homes. In some areas (e.g. Lake Mweru) there is a socio-cultural stigma attached to women travelling long distances by themselves, This, combined with their lack of access to sufficient working capital to run a large scale operation also strengthen differentiation of roles. There are obviously exceptions to the rule. Women can be large-scale processors and traders. They can own and control fishing units. The planner has to be aware that the common sexual division of labour between the catching, processing and trading subsectors may not necessarily apply in a particular fishery; and that changes in one fisheries sub-sector
will inevitably influence the others.
Catching
Key issues: What are the socio-economic characteristics of craft and gear owners and fisherfolk (by types of craft gear and targeted species)? Are there any conflicts between different groups of participants in the fishery? Are these gender-related? Are there differences between men and women who invest in fishing?
Numbers and types of fishing units (boats, traps, hook and line) provide a general picture of the local fishery. This is essential information for fishery management purposes and care must be taken not to exclude units that would appear to have little impact - such as hook and line or traps. In small water bodies, especially, these units might have a significant impact on fish stocks.
Associated with the type of unit are the socio-economic characteristics of owners and operators. In smaller fisheries, owners also tend to be operators, while in larger, more commercial fisheries, these two roles may be distinct. There may be a number of owners within one catching unit - a boat owner, a net owner and an engine owner. Each of these owners would have some right to the catch in predetermined proportions. Care should be taken to understand the socio-economic characteristics of owners, to differentiate between male and female owners in order to determine the conditions under which a woman or a man is able to become an owner.
While women are usually not allowed to fish from boats because that is supposed to bring bad luck, they can and do become boat/net/engine owners if they have the resources. In some lucrative fisheries, women function as absentee owners -- and their socio-economic characteristics should be known, particularly in situations where women are targeted as a homogeneous group. This is because the differences between women who own assets and those who do not may be substantive. This may have its impact on the processing and trading sub-sectors where access to fish is significantly different for men and women.
Likewise, understanding the socio-economic characteristics of fisherfolk other than boatowners (e.g. crew members, net users, owners of equipment) is important too, in order to understand the implications of changes in catch on the reciprocal arrangements that may exist between husbands and wives, or men and women, and to identify areas of potential conflict. Other such areas of conflict are between different gear users and different types of units targeting the same fish species.
Whether the catching unit is motivated primarily by cash or consumption is an important consideration. Often, units that are interested only in consumption are owned or controlled by women and may be less 'visible'. For instance, hook and line fishing in small water bodies is geographically dispersed and difficult to keep track of, so that they are often ignored by planners.
Processing
Key questions: Are the different types of processing (technology, species, scale, etc.) dominated by men or women? What are the socio-economic characteristics of processors (men/women, age, experiences, residence status)? Are there any reciprocal arrangements (supply of fish/credit) with fish catchers which are gender related? Does labour mobility affect male and female processors differently? Are there situations in which women or men are not remunerated for their labour inputs? Who are most affected by fuelwood shortages?
Types of processing are often gender-differentiated and often related to such factors as access to fish, new technologies, and credit. In a fishery characterised by migrant fishing units, harvesting, processing and trading activities are likely to be integrated; women are less likely to be involved in the processing and marketing of fish, as their reproductive and agriculture activities make it difficult for them to accompany migrant fishermen.
The development of a high-value fishery also has different implications on men and women processors because of gender differences in labour mobility. When fish processing resulting in a highvalue product becomes an economically important activity at a certain location, it often attracts men from other economic activities, as they are more mobile and can more easily switch from one economic activity to the other. For example, when salt-dried Nile perch became popular in areas close to Lake Victoria, many fishermen switched to Nile perch processing. As salt drying needed higher capital costs (for salt, brining tanks, drying racks and storage) and demanded more physical strength, women processors could not take to the new activities as quickly as men. Moreover, the Nile perch fishery led to reduced landings of other fish species traditionally processed by women in some areas, such as tilapia and Haplochromis spp
Reciprocal supply arrangements between harvesters and processors are common, but the assumption that a woman processor will he supplied by her husband (if he catches fish) is not necessarily correct. Often, reciprocal arrangements exist with outsiders; consequently a wife may not have any access to her husband's fish and has to develop her own arrangements.
In some fisheries, cleaning and gutting of fish are considered to be part of woman's household duties, and she does not get paid for this work. In this case, development interventions which increase catches on a local scale may have a negative effect on women.
Fuelwood shortages also affect domestic fuelwood use; they can raise prices and increase the distances women and children have to go to fetch fuelwood.
Marketing
Key questions: What are the socio-economic characteristics of traders? Is there any differentiation between male an