<section>e</section>
The women in development service
The women in development service
The Women in Development Service (SDWW) is located in the Women and Population Division of the Sustainable Development Department. The work of this Department focuses on key dimensions of sustainability: research and technology, extension and training, natural resources monitoring and management, agrarian transformation, mainstreaming of women in development (WID) and people's participation. It promotes sustainability concepts, strategies and methods in each of these areas, and helps integrate them in the development programmer of FAO member countries and FAO's own technical units. The priority areas of the service are highlighted below.
Promoting Gender in Policies, Legislation and Civil Institutions
With reference to the Beijing Platform for Action adopted in 1995 and the Plan of Action of the WFS in 1996, FAO assists Member Nations to design and implement policies and programmes for rural women that reduce or eliminate legislative, administrative, socioeconomic, and behavioral obstacles to rural women's access to productive resources and services. It also increases women's skills, capacities and opportunities to participate in decision-making processes affecting their productive capacities and their socio-economic and political status. Technical and policy guidance is also provided by SDWW to FAO's Technical Divisions for the implementation of their WID Programmes of Action.
Training and National Capacity Building in Gender, Participation and Food Security.
To enhance the productive capacities of rural women and men and to increase food security, SDWW continues to develop and disseminate through training the materials, tools and methods needed to undertake participatory socio-economic and gender analysis. Special attention will focus on the Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme, which is being implemented in collaboration with UN and other international agencies, and which has training targets that include staff in key ministries, extension services, research and academic institutions, and NGOs. Capacity building in WID also targets FAO's Technical Divisions in order to strengthen normative and operational activities.
Livelihood Strategies and Resource Management in Rural Households
This priority promotes effective service delivery systems to small farm households and helps to diversify communication systems in the communities. Emphasis is placed on the development and provision of environmentally-sound technologies, home economics training and extension services, and on the expansion of rural employment opportunities for women, including agro-industries, micro enterprises, financial management, and marketing services in the formal and informal sectors. The specific activities take account of the increasing feminization of agriculture and of poverty, food security issues, equitable participation, and sustainability concerns. The living environment, housing and sanitation issues and concerns are also addressed.
Constituency Building in Support of Gender and Food Security
Partnerships and alliances with institutions, INGOs and NGOs that address the concerns of rural women and food security issues are strengthened through normative and technical assistance, through joint, collaborative activities in such areas as training in leadership and management skills, and through rural women's associations and networking. SDWW also participates in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of international policies and strategies for the advancement of women through the existing inter-agency coordinating mechanisms. A special focus is on bringing the issues of rural women to the forefront of the agenda of international fore.
Inter-Disciplinary Approaches to Gender, Environment and Sustainable Development
With reference to Agenda 21 of UNCED, especially Chapter 24: "Global Action for Women Towards Sustainable and Equitable Development", action-oriented research focuses on analyzing the links between women and environmental sustainability. Of particular concern are the impacts of environmental degradation, rural-urban migration, food insecurity, and population policies and practices on the livelihoods of rural women and their families. Concerning food security, attention is drawn to rural women's roles in maintenance and conservation of genetic resources and sustainable resource use in such areas as integrated plant nutrition systems, irrigation and watershed management, integrated pest management, fishery conservation and aquaculture development, and forestry use and conservation.
Information Collection and Dissemination in Support of Gender and Food Security
SDWW supports the collection, compilation, analysis, and diffusion of time and task allocation data and statistics disaggregated by gender and the development of indicators on women's participation in agriculture and related fields in order to make more accurate and detailed development policies and programmer. It highlights the relationship between rural women's status and demographic dynamics, as well as the constraints to the participatory involvement of rural women in development activities. It also emphasizes the roles and contributions of rural women in achieving poverty reduction, building food security, and attaining sustainable development. This priority also promotes the use of information technologies to reach and motivate rural women.
Through it's focus on the above key areas. SDWW aims to:
(a) present a more complete depiction of rural women, so that their conditions and contributions to the economy and to society are valued, recognized and integrated into planning mechanisms
(b) contribute to rural women's empowerment through capacity building activities and training
(c) increase the awareness by governments and policy makers to gender-based equality and accelerate the process of moving from words to deeds in the inclusion of gender issues in macroeconomic policies
(d) address the vital role that women play in food production and food security and affirm the need for the full participation of women at all levels in order to achieve sustainable development.
Women in Development Service
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla - 00100 Rome
Tel.: 39-6-52252251. Fax 39-6- 52252004
<title>Women: The key to food security</title>
<section>1</section>
The population programme service
The population programme service
The Population Programme Service (SDWP) was established in 1995 and is located in the Women and Population Division of the Sustainable Development Department. The work of this Department focuses on key dimensions of sustainability which concern natural and human processes, their interrelations and their impact over time: research and technology, agricultural extension and training, natural resources monitoring and management, agrarian transformation, mainstreaming of women in development, people's participation and population factors.
"Population" is to be understood in a broad manner, as in the Cairo Programme of Action: substantively, activities of the Service focus on the interrelations between population factors, the big-physical environment and socioeconomic and cultural factors as seen from a sustainable development perspective.
- Population Programme Service
Examples of relevant interactions can be given:
· Population <=> big-physical environment: population and water resources; land degradation; deforestation.
· Population <=> socio-economic and cultural factors: population and gender issues in relation to land tenure or farming systems;
· Interrelations between all three dimensions of the triangle: fishers and fisheries; food requirements and population growth.
Further to the identification and analysis of population-rural development interrelations and of their policy and programme implications, the Service applies communication techniques to these issues in order to develop and implement communication strategies into rural development and extension activities.
The Service provides on request relevant information and advice to countries and to FAO's governing bodies and promotes the implementation of those aspects of the 1994 Cairo Programme of Action which correspond to FAO's mandate, in particular those which address population and sustainable development. This means first encouraging in-house integration and mainstreaming of population considerations to all relevant technical areas of FAO; this is done by sensitizing agriculture, fisheries and forestry experts to the importance and relevance of population issues on their activities (e.g. socio-demographic structures and spatial distribution, population changes and growth through time and space as relevant to food security, agriculture, fisheries and forestry).
The Service also synthesizes the experience of FAO and other institutions in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries relevant for population related activities and brings it to the attention of policy makers, programme designers and other users concerned with population, food security and rural development issues.
The Service participates actively in the Technical Support System (TSS) set up by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and specialized UN agencies: its staff provides technical assistance to the formulation and implementation of UNFPA-funded field projects, thus contributing to build national capacities for population activities; it also provides UNFPA Country Support Teams with methodological and information support. Finally, the Service co-ordinates the implementation of FAO/UNFPA inter-country projects, which currently focus on the integration of population concerns into education programmes for rural youth, community forestry programmes, and fishery policy planning.
More information on the Service activities and outputs can be found in the electronic newsletter of the Sustainable Development Department:
SD Dimensions, <http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/sustdev/welcome_.htm> or through the United Nations POPIN system: <http://www.undp.org/popin/fao/faohome.htm>
Population Programme Service
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla - 00100 Rome
Tel: 39-6-52253816; Fax: 39-6-52255490
e-mail: jacques.duguerny@fao.org
(29 October 1996)
<section>2</section>
Women and sustainable food security
Women and sustainable food security
THE GENDER DIVISION OF LABOR
The major constraint to the effective recognition of women's actual roles and responsibilities in agriculture is the scarcity of gender desegregated data available to technicians, planners, and policy-makers
Therefore, the first step towards women's empowerment and full participation in rural development and food security strategies is the collection and analysis of gender desegregated data to understand role differences in food and cash crop production as well as men's and women's differential managerial and financial control over production, storage and marketing of agricultural products.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, micro-level studies have shown that women play a crucial role in many aspects of crop production. While men are often responsible for land clearing, burning and polishing, women specialise in weeding, transplanting, post-harvest work and, in some areas, land preparation and both take part in seeding and harvesting.
Moreover, Sub-Saharan and near Eastern women play a major role in household animal-production enterprises, where they tend to have the primary responsibility for the husbandry of small animals and ruminants, but also take care of large-animal systems, herding, providing water and feed, cleaning stalls and milking. In all types of animal-production systems, women have a predominant role in processing, particularly milk products and are commonly responsible for their marketing.
In many countries women are also responsible for fishing in shallow waters and in coastal lagoons, producing secondary crops, gathering food and firewood, processing, storing and preparing family food and for fetching water for the family.
FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
The number of female-headed households is increasing significantly in rural areas in many developing countries as rural men migrate due to the lack of employment and other income-generating opportunities. In Sub-Saharan Africa, 31 per cent of rural households are headed by women, while in Latin America and the Caribbean and Asia, women head 17 per cent, and 14 per cent, respectively. While there are different types of female-headed households, in almost all countries. female-headed households are concentrated among the poorer strata of society and often have lower income than male-headed households.
The problems of female-headed households in rural areas vary according to their degree of access to productive resources. The FAO has identified. for example, the potential consequences of the absence of male labour both in terms of declining yields and outputs or shifts in production toward less nutritious crops requiring less labour and in terms of increased reliance on child labour which, in turn, has further implications for the family and for the human capital of the country. Therefore in these cases, women's access to labour-saving technology is of particular importance.
Women produce between 60 and 80 per cent of the food in most developing countries and are responsible for half of the world's food production, yet their key role as food producers and providers and their critical contribution to household food security is only recently becoming recognised.
FAO studies confirm that while women are the mainstay of small-scale agriculture, farm labour force and day-to-day family subsistence, they have more difficulties than men in gaining access to resources such as land and credit and productivity enhancing inputs and services.
Food security' in fact, has been defined by the FAO not only in terms of access to, and availability of food, but also in terms of resource distribution to produce food and purchasing power to buy food where it is not produced. Given women's crucial role in food production and provision, any set of strategies for sustainable food security must address their limited access to productive resources security must address their limited access to productive resources.
Women's limited access to resources and their insufficient purchasing power are products of a series of interrelated social, economic and cultural factors that force them into a subordinate role, to the detriment of their own development and that of society as a whole.
The international initiatives and efforts developed especially since the 1975 World Conference on Women in Mexico have contributed to a greater recognition of women's key participation in rural and other domains of development, however, much remains to be done.
ACCESS TO RESOURCES
Despite their role as the backbone of food production and provision for family consumption in developing countries, women remain limited in their access to critical resources and services. While in most developing countries. both men and women farmers do not have access to adequate resources, women's access is even more limited due to cultural. traditional and sociological factors. Accurate information about men's and women's relative access to. and control over, resources is crucial in the development of food security strategies.
· Access to land. Not even 2 percent of land is owned by women. while the e proportion of women heads of household continues to grow. Land reform programmes together with the break-up of communal land holdings have led to the transfer of exclusive land rights to males as heads of households which ignores both the existence of female-headed households and the rights of married women to a joint share.
· Access to credit. For the countries where information is available. only 10 per women produce between 60 and 80 per cent of the food in cent of credit allowances is extended to women, mainly because national legislation and customary law do not allow them to share land property rights along with their husbands, or because women heads of household are excluded from land entitlement schemes and consequently cannot provide the collateral required by lending institutions.
· Access to agricultural inputs. Women's access to technological inputs such as improved seeds, fertilisers and pesticides is limited as they are frequently not reached by extension services and are rarely members of cooperatives, which often distribute government subsidised inputs to small farmers. In addition, they often lack the cash income needed to purchase inputs even when they are subsidised
· Access to education, training and extension services. Two thirds of the one billion illiterate in the world are women and girls. Available figures show that only 5 per cent of extension services has been addressed to rural women, while no more than 15 per cent of the world's extension agents are women. In addition, most of the extension services are focused on cash crops rather than food and subsistence crops, which are the primary concern of women farmers and the key to food security.
NATURE OF WOMEN'S WORK
In most rural areas, the two most time-consuming activities of women are fetching water and firewood. Widespread deforestation and desertification mean that these tasks are becoming more burdensome and are preventing rural women from devoting more time to their productive and income-generating tasks. In some cases, women also pass part of the burden of these activities to their children, usually female children. Relieving women from such drudgery as fetching water and firewood and food processing would allow them to have more time for productive work and would enable their children to attend school. Thus development interventions to reduce women's drudgery can significantly enhance their contribution to household food security. The provision of water supplies; the introduction of light transport facilities for the carrying of firewood, farm produce and other loads; the introduction of labour saving agricultural tools, the introduction of grinding mills and other crop
processing equipment are crucial means of freeing Women's time. Such technologies not only create possibilities for women to enter into more income-generating activities, but also help in reducing their stress and in improving the health and nutrition of women and children.
FAO Women in Agricultural Development, Gender Issues in Rural Food Security in Developing Countries, Rome. 1990.
· Access to decision-making. Given the traditionally limited role of women in decision-making processes at the household, village and national levels in most cultures, their needs, interests and constraints are often not reflected in policymaking processes and laws which are important for poverty reduction, food security and environmental sustainability. The causes of women's exclusion from decision-making processes are closely linked to their additional reproductive roles and their household workload, which account for an important share of their time.
· Access to research and appropriate technology. Women have little access to the benefits of research and innovation, especially in the domain of food crops, which in spite of ensuring food security at the household and community level, have a low priority in crop improvement research. In addition, women farmers' roles and needs are often ignored when devising technology which may cause labour displacement or increased workload.
WOMEN'S NEED FOR INCOME
Research in Africa, Asia and Latin America has found that improvements in household food security and nutrition are associated with women's access to income and their role in household decisions on expenditure as women tend to spend a significantly higher proportion of their income than men on food for the family.
Women's wage income from farm and non-farm employment and from other income-generating opportunities is of particular importance for landless and near-landless rural households. Women's purchasing power may not only be used to buy food and other basic assets for themselves and their families, but also to pay for the inputs used in food production. Since food crops are consumed, the inputs for these have to be provided from income earned in other agricultural enterprises or non-farm income generating activities. Thus, to improve food production for the household, greater priority has to be given to increasing women's participation in market production as well as other income-generating ventures.
SUSTAINABLE FOOD SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW ERA
The understanding of food security has evolved over the years through increasingly integrated attention to the social, gender, environmental. technical and economic dimensions of the problem. The challenge for the future will be to pursue a concrete attainment of equity in access to resources by women to produce food, and purchasing power to buy food where it is not produced there enhancing their potential to generate food security Specific policy measures are required to address the constraints facing women farmers and special consideration given en to the needs of female heads of households. The FAO has recommended that such measures aim to:
· ensure that women have equal opportunities with men to own land;
· facilitate women's access to agricultural services tailoring such services to their needs;
· encourage the productions of food crops through the use of incentives;
· promote the adoption of appropriate inputs and technology to free up Women's time for income-producing activities;
· improve the nutritional status of women and children;
· provide better employment and income earning opportunities;
· promote women's organizations;
· review and re-orient government policies to ensure that the problems that constrain the role of women in food security are addressed.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telephone 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS Via dei Giubbonari 34, 00186 Roma, Italy
<section>3</section>
Women-users, preservers and managers of agrao-biodiversity
Women-users, preservers and managers of agrao-biodiversity
On the eve of the 21 st century rural women in developing We countries hold the key to the future of the Earth's agricultural systems and to food and livelihood security through their roles in the selection of seed, the management of small livestock and the conservation and sustainable use of plant and animal diversity
Rural women's key role as food providers and food producers links them directly to the management of genetic resources for food and agriculture and has given them a unique knowledge and decision making role about local species, ecosystems and use acquired over centuries of practical experience.
The poorest farming communities are those that live in marginal and heterogeneous environments that have benefited least from modern high yielding plant varieties. Up to 90% of the planting material of such farmers may be derived from seeds and germplasm produced, selected and saved by themselves. germplasm produced, selected and saved by themselves.
Such subsistence farmers cannot afford external inputs such as fertilisers and pesticides, veterinary products, high quality feeds and fuel for cooking and heating. They rely on maintaining a wide diversity of crops and wild plants and animal breeds and strains that are adapted to the local environment in order to protect against crop failure and animal disease or death, to provide a continuous and varied food supply and to ward against hunger and malnutrition. In many areas, the majority of small-holder farmers are women.
100 YEARS OF AGRICULTURAL CHANGE SOME TRENDS & FIGURES RELATING TO AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
· Some 75% of plant genetic diversify has been lost since the I 1900's as farmers worldwide have left their multiple local varieties and "landraces" for genetically uniform, high yielding varieties.
· 30% of livestock breeds are at the risk of extinction; 6 breeds are lost each month.
· Today, 75% of the world's food is generated from just 12 plants and 5 animal species.
· Of the 4% of the 250,000 - 300,000 known plant species that are edible, only 150-200 are used by humans and only 3 - rice' maize and wheat contribute nearly 60% of calories and proteins obtained by humans from plants.
· Animals provide some 30% of human requirements for food and agriculture and 12% of the population live almost entirely on products from ruminants.
GENDER RESPONSIVE POLICIES. AGREEMENTS AND SUPPORT
Important international policies and legal agreements acknowledge the key role that women play, especially in the developing world, in the management and use of biological resources. Despite this increased recognition at international levels, little has yet been done to clarify the nature of the relationship between agro-biological diversity and the activities, responsibilities and rights of men and women. In fact, women's key roles, responsibilities and management practices for the conservation and improvement of animal and plant genetic resources and their intimate knowledge of plants and animals remain invisible" to the agricultural, forestry, and environmental technicians as well as the planners and policy makers. The lack of recognition at technical and institutional levels means that their interests and demands are given inadequate attention. Moreover, women's involvement in formalised efforts to conserve bio-diversity remain low because of women's poor representation
at policy and decision making levels.
Modern research and development and centralised plant breeding have ignored and undermined the capacities of local farming communities in innovating and improving plant varieties. In those areas where women have traditionally held control, because of modern technologies and perceptions. women have lost substantial influence and control over production and access to resources to men who benefit from extension services and have the ability to buy seeds, fertilisers and the required technologies. In this way women lose also their status and self determination and are not compensated in any we>.
WOMEN AS USERS. PRESERVERS OF AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
As farmers, rural women are responsible for growing and collecting food and for the integrated management and use of diverse natural resources to fulfil daily household needs (crops and wild plants, tree products, wild and domesticated animals) An understanding of gender issues in plant and animal bio-diversity requires a look at men and women's different roles and relations as part of their overall livelihood systems that comprise farms and gardens, common property resources. such as pastures and forested lands, as well as protected areas. In addition to staple food production in the fields, homegardens often provide a wide variety of vegetables. relishes and condiments. These homegarciens are also experimental plots where women try out and adapt diverse wild plants and indigenous species. Research on Go homegardens in Thailand revealed 230 different rent species, many of which had been rescued from a neighboring forest before it was cleared.
The different live hood strategies and interests, land tenure arrangements and organisational structures of different user groups (by gender. age. class. ethnicity and occupation) as well as uneven power relations in access to. use and control over land, animal and plant resources directly influence their capacities and incentives to conserve agro-biodiversity
DIFFERENTIATED KNOWLEDGE OF MEN AND WOMEN
Through their different activities and resources management practices. men and women have developed different expertise and knowledge regarding the local environment, the plant and animal species and their products and uses. These gender differentiate-d local knowledge systems play a decisive role in the conservation in-situ (in their natural habitat/ecosystem), management and improvement of, genetic resources for food and agriculture because the decision of what to conserve depends on the know-how and perception of what is most useful to the household and local community.
The local knowledge is highly sophisticated and is traditionally shared and handed down between generations. Through experience, innovation and experimentation, sustainable practices are developed to protect soil, water and natural vegetation, including biological diversity.
Women's specialised knowledge of the value and diverse use of domesticated crop species and varieties extends to wild plants that are used as food in times of need (leaves, fruits, berries, nuts, seeds, edible roots and tubers) or as medicines and sources of income. This has important implications for the conservation of plant genetic resources.
WOMEN AS "SCIENTISTS" AND DECISION MAKERS IN THE SELECTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF BlODlVERSITY
In smallholder agriculture, women farmers have been largely responsible for the selection, improvement and adaptation of plant varieties. The selection of certain varieties is a complex, multivariate process that depends on choosing certain desirable characteristics (for instance resistance to pests and diseases; soil and agro-climatic adaptability; nutritional, taste and cooking qualities; food processing and storage properties.
In many regions, women are also responsible for the management, including reproduction, of small livestock. As for plants, the choice of preferred traits in the breeding of animals includes adaptations to the local conditions such as available feeds, resistance to disease.
The fact that plants and animals are often produced for a number of purposes adds further complexity to the selection process as multiple traits are sought. For example, sorghum may be grown for the grain and the stalk, sweet potatoes for the leaves as well as the root, and sheep may provide milk, wool and meat. Moreover, to create a favorable microenvironment and better manage space and time, several plant species that complement each other are frequently inter-cropped and mixed farming is often practiced (crop, livestock and agro-forestry).
Recognition of this sophisticated decision making process is gradually leading breeders and researchers to realise that the adoption and selection by a community of improved and new seeds of food crops and animal breeds depends on their being tested and approved by men and women farmers.
WOMEN'S RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS AND THE CONCEPT OF FARMERS' RIGHTS
Through their daily activities, experience and knowledge women have a major stake in protecting biological diversity. However, at national and local levels rural women today are still hampered by restricted rights to the resources they rely on to meet their needs. In general their rights of access and control over local resources and national policies do
Growing awareness of genetic erosion and the pressing need to develop mechanisms to encourage farming communities to nurture and conserve and the utilise and improve plant genetic resources has led the international community to recognise the concept of Farmers' Rights. As stated in resolution sifting' adopted by the 25th Session of the FAO Conference, these are the "rights arising from the past' present and future contribution farmers in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic resources, particularly those in the centers of origin/diversity". The purpose of these rights is stated to be-ensuring full benefits to farmers and supporting the continuation of their contributions". Key questions remain on how to implement Farmers' Rights in a way that respects the contributions of the venous actors. not match their increasing responsibilities for food production and management of natural resources.
HOW TO ADDRESS GENDER AND AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
The promotion of a long term strategy of conservation, utilisation, improvement and management of genetic resources diversity for food and agriculture requires:
· Recognition and consideration of the gender differentiated roles, responsibilities and contributions of different socioeconomic groups.
· Recognition and valuing of men and women farmers' knowledge, skills and practices and Farmers' Rights.
· Sound