<title>National sectoral report for the Philippines - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for the </title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms and abbreviations
Acronyms and abbreviations
ACPC
Agricultural Credit and Policy Council
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AIDAB
Australian International Development Assistance Bureau
AIDoS
Italian Association for Women in Development
APDC
Asian and Pacific Development Bank
APEC
Asia-Pacific Development Center
ARC
Agrarian Reform Community
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
ATI
Agricultural Training Institute
AWCF
ASEAN Women in Cooperative Forum
BWYW
Bureau of Women and Young Worker
CARD
Center for Agriculture and Rural Development
CARL
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CARP
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CES
Career Executive Service
CESB
Career Executive Service Board
CIDA
Canadian International Development Authority
CLOA
Certificate of Land ownership Award
CLT
Certificate of Land Transfer
CSC
Certificate of Stewardship Contract
DA
Department of Agriculture
DANIDA
Danish International Development Agency
DAP
Development Academy of the Philippines
DAR
Department of Agrarian Reform
DARLA
DAR Ladies' Association
DECS
Department of Education, Culture and Sports
DENR
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DILG
Department of Interior and Local Government
DOF
Department of Finance
DOLE
Department of Labor and Employment
DOST
Department of Science and Technology
DOTC
Department of Transportation and Communication
DSWD
Department of Social Welfare and Development
DTI
Department of Trade and Industry
EO
Executive Order
EP
Emancipation Patent
EWIC
Enhancement of Women in Cooperatives
FAITH
Food Always in the Home
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FPA
Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority
GAD
Gender and Development
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GO
Government Organization
GTZ
Deutsch Gesellshaft fur Technuische Zwammenarheit
HOPE
Homework's Program for Empowerment
IGP
Income-generating Project
ILO
International Labour Organization
IPC
Institute of Philippine Culture
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute
ISSI
Institute of Small-Scale Industries
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
KaBaPa
Katipunan ng Bagong Filipina
LACWO
Local Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations
LGU
Local Government Unit
LPDF
Landless People's Development Fund
LWUA
Local Water Utilities Administration
NACWO
National Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
NATCCO
National Confederation of Cooperatives
NCRFW
National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women
NEA
National Electrification Administration
NEDA
National Economic and Development Authority
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NIC
Newly Industrializing Country
NSO
National Statistics Office
ODA
Official Development Assistance
PARC
Presidential Agrarian Reform Council
PATAMABA
Pambansang Tagapag-ugnay ng mga Manggagawa sa Bahay
PDAP
Philippine Development Assistance Programme
PDP-W
Philippine Development Plan for Women
PhilRice
Philippine Rice Research Institute
PLOW
Partnership of Landowners and Workers
PO
People's Organization
PPAEP
Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project
PPGD
Philippine Plan for Gender-Responsive Development
RA
Republic Act
RIC
Rural Improvement Club
SURP
School of Urban and Regional Planning
TCT
Transfer Certificate of Title
TLRC
Technology Outreach and Community Help
TSARRD
Technical Support for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
UN
United Nations
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFPA
United Nations Fund for Population Activities
UNICEF
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
UNIFEM
United Nations Fund for Women
UP
University of the Philippines
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WID
Women in Development
WINT
Women in Non-traditional Trades
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
In early February 1994, the Italian Association for Women in Development (AIDoS) contracted the Institute of Philippine Culture (IPC) of the Ateneo de Manila University, to assess the situation of women in agriculture in the Philippines. In a separate contract, AIDoS hired a statistics consultant to provide IPC with the available statistics, particularly published and unpublished data from the National Statistics Office (NSO), needed for the preparation of the country report. Funds for the activity were provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
The preparation of the country report served two needs. It formed part of FAO's Programme of Assistance in Support of Rural Women in Preparation for the Fourth World Conference on Women and, from the Philippines standpoint, the report, by focusing on women in agriculture and in rural areas, complemented the national situation report on Filipino women (NCRFW 1994), which was consider "too urban-biased".
To prepare the country report, the IPC research team coordinated with the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, incorporated the data supplied by the statistics consultant, and consulted the documents submitted by the agriculture committee that was formed in connection with the preparation of the national situation report. As important as these activities were, the interviews conducted by IPC with groups of rural women in various parts of Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao in March 1994, as well as the provincial and the Manila consultative workshops, provided even deeper insights into the situation of rural women in the country. These consultations involved rural development agencies, rural women's organizations, academic institutions, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working with rural women. For instance, during the Manila meeting, the government agencies represented were the Departments of Agrarian Reform, Agriculture, Environment and Natural Resources,
and Labour (Bureau of Rural Workers); the NCRFW; and the NSO. The University of the Philippines, Ateneo de Manila University, and the ASEAN Women in Cooperative Forum (AWCF), constituted the academic/NGO sector, while the International Rice Research Institute, United Nations Fund for Population Activities, and the FAO (through its Technical Support for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development - TSARRD program) composed the international/multilateral organizations. The peasant women's coalitions (KaBaPa and AMIHAN), and the women's organizations (PATAMABA and LAKAMBINI), were unable to come to the meeting, but the rural women's groups were amply represented in the two provincial consultations held in March 1994.
The group interviews and provincial consultations aimed at ensuring that the voice and concerns of rural women would be reflected in the report. The choice of the research sites was based on our desire to examine the situation of rural women in different agroecosystems. For Luzon, two systems were chosen: monocropping irrigated ricefarming (Camarines, Sur), and coconut-based rainfed farming (Laguna). In the Visayas, two systems were also selected: sugarcane plantation (Negros Occidental) and fishing-farming (Negros Oriental). In Mindanao, an upland, cassava-growing village and a rainfed rice-growing area were chosen. In all, eight groups, involving a total of 111 women, were interviewed in various parts of the country. The majority of women were married, aged 20 to 60 years of age, and had low educational attainment. Except in Negros Occidental, where the contact person invited women from different barangays to a meeting in the city hall, the IPC research team met with
groups of rural women in their own community.
The group interviews covered the following broad topics: changes (in terms of politics, peace and order, technology, employment and wages, and government or NGO programs) in their community between the early 1980s and 1994; strategies used by women, including livelihood activities, resistance, and mobilization; and analyses of current problems and future plans of action. The research coordinator and an assistant posed the questions and facilitated the discussions that ensued. In most instances, a consensus was reached regarding changes, analysis, or proposed action. In rare cases when the women rendered different readings of events, the group generally agreed to leave the reply to a question in the form of an array of possible interpretations or range of experiences.
The IPC team secured the women's permission to tape the interviews. In addition to taping the interviews and to help focus the discussion, the research coordinator wrote the topic and the major points raised on a manila paper that was conspicuously posted for all participants to see. The interviews lasted from two to four hours.
Apart from the group interviews, the IPC research team also held provincial consultations in Visayas and Mindanao and a consultative workshop in Manila. The meeting in Mindanao was convened by a local partner NGO, the Technology Outreach and Community Help (TOUCH) Foundation in Cagayan de Oro; while that in the Visayas was organized by a local academic institution, the Silliman University in Dumaguete. The Manila consultative workshop, in turn, was jointly convened by IPC and NCRFW.
During the consultative meetings, the results of the group interviews were presented by the IPC team for comments and validation. The participants were also asked to provide a wider reading of the situation in the province, particularly in connection with developments in the agricultural sector; to enhance the analysis of women's situation in the province (or, in the case of the Manila meeting, the national situation of rural women) from the mid-1980s to 1994; and to expand the plan of action and strategies that had been elicited during the group interviews. Outside the consultative meetings, the IPC research team interviewed representatives of government agencies to clarify points or elicit data on certain programs or projects, and to address the data gaps that remained after the consultations as well as the information that was not covered by the set provided to IPC by the statistics consultant.
Because of the research methods and processes used, the preparation of the present report involved countless groups and individuals who contributed time, insights, data, and moral support. The statistics consultant (Nelia R. Marquez), the IPC research assistants (Yasmin Lee G. Arpon, Yasmin S. Gatal, and Joannah G. Perez) and support staff (Dhea S. Santos, Raymund C. Lazarito, and Lyzel S. Elias), the women who came to the interviews, our colleagues who facilitated the holding of the consultative meetings, and government agencies and NGOs which supplied the team with data - all played important roles in shaping this report. To them, as well as to NCRFW, AIDoS, and FAO, we say, maraming salamat.
Jeanne Frances I. Illo
23 June 1994
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The land and its people
Agroecological systems
Shifts and upheavals
Introduction
The land and its people
Lying at the western margin of the Pacific Ocean, the Philippines forms a string of 7,107 islands and islets, which are traditionally clustered into three island groups: Luzon, Visayas? and Mindanao. It is largely a mountainous mass extending from north to south (FAPE 1975). It covers a total land and water area of about 1,800,000 sq. km., with the land area measuring only 300,000 million sq. km.
Its tropical and maritime climate is marked by relatively high temperature, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. Rainfall distribution varies from one region to another, depending upon the direction of the moisture-bearing winds and the location of the mountain system. Despite these differences, the Philippine climate can be divided into three seasons: rainy, which extends from June to November; cool dry, which occurs from December to February; and hot dry, which falls from March to May.
The Philippines is vulnerable to typhoons, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. While typhoons devastate different parts of the country every year, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions have been less frequent. In the early 1990s, however, an earthquake destroyed parts of Central and Northern Luzon, while volcanic eruptions (Mount Pinatubo in 1991 and Mayon Volcano in 1993) disrupted lives in other parts of Luzon.
In 1990, about 60.6 million people inhabited the Philippine Islands (Table 1). Of these, 31.1 million (or 51 percent) resided in rural areas. Less than half (49 percent) of the rural population were female. Roughly 63 percent of the total rural population were potential workers (that is, 15 years old or older). About 85 percent of the male workers was deemed labour force members; among the women, only 48 percent was similarly classified (NCRFW 1994:77). In 1991, the primary sector (agriculture, fisheries, and forestry) was the biggest employer of male workers (53 percent). It likewise competed with trade and community, social, and personal services as an employer of female labour (NCSB 1991).
Agroecological systems
Outside urban areas, the major systems are coastal fishing, lowland irrigated farming, rainfed farming, and upland. Yet another system covers riverine and lake fishing systems, which usually combine fishery capture or fish farming with cultivation of crops. This contrasts sharply with coastal areas that lie between the sea and hill/mountain. There, crop farming is rarely practiced as the trek up the hill or the mountain can be time-intensive. In both systems, households generally raise a brood of chicken, ducks and/or geese, and one or two pigs. In crop farming systems, cow and/or carabao (water buffalo) are among the other animals households keep.
Irrigated farming systems mainly grow rice and sugarcane, while coconut, corn, and cassava are the major crops raised in rainfed areas. In both systems, females and males play distinct, but not necessarily rigid, roles. This holds in small or big farms, family-operated plots or plantations. Specific roles and responsibilities often vary by crop or by activity. In areas growing cash crops, like coconut and sugarcane, planting and weeding is done by women, while harvesting and processing (milling or copra production) is usually assigned to men (Illo and Veneracion 1988; IPC 1993a, 1993b). In cassava-producing areas, harvesting and post-harvest activities (including peeling, cutting the cassava into flakes, and drying) involve females and males, adult and children (IPC 1993c, GI/M 1994). With the exception of land preparation, fertilizer application, chemical spraying, mechanized threshing, and rice and corn production, harvest and post-harvest tasks heavily involve female
labour.
The substitutability between male and female labour in farming primarily depends upon the technology employed and/or availability of funds for hiring workers. Thus, land clearing and preparation are generally the responsibility of adult males, although women usually undertake land preparation when minimum tillage is required. Planting and weeding is done by women and children, although male members of farming families sometimes help with the tasks to minimize hired labour cost.
In fishing communities, fishery capture is a predominantly male activity, but women have been known to join their spouse so as to save on cost or to get the entire catch (Illo and Polo 1990). Repair of nets and boats is also a male task. As in other systems, processing and selling of the produce is the women's domain. Hauling, however, is mainly done by male family members or by hired male labour. Nonetheless, improved transport facilities to upland areas has shifted the responsibility of selling the produce to the women (Rives, Uy, and Borlagdan 1991).
To feed their families, women engage principally in the cultivation of kitchen gardens and subsistence crops, especially rootcrops. They also take responsibility for growing vegetables, although the men often take over the enterprise once vegetable production has become the household's major cash crop (GI/M 1994).
Shifts and upheavals
Over the past ten years, life in rural Philippines has been affected by several local and international changes. Of the events that included peace-making efforts in the Middle East and South Africa, the breakdown of communism in Eastern Europe, and the continuing armed conflicts in Kuwait, Somalia, Rwanda, and Yugoslavia, the Gulf War has had the most direct impact on hundreds of thousands of Filipino families. During that time, more than 300,000 workers were in Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries. About 70,000 of these workers were women, many of whom were employed as domestic helpers (NSO/NCRFW 1992:101-102). Stories of rape reached the country, and families worried over their relatives' safety. Dollar remittances, which supported many a household, were disrupted, and oil prices tripled during the period of conflict.
The economic crisis of the early 1980s - marked by a huge foreign debt, fiscal and trade deficits, and balance of payments imbalances - continued to haunt the Philippines (NSO 1992). Prolonged recession in industrialized countries, among which were the Philippines' major trading partners, made matters worse. The structural adjustment programs prescribed to correct distortions in prices, taxation, land ownership, and production priorities took its toll on the rural population. The servicing of the country's debt, which in 1987 reached as much as 45 percent of the national budget (Illo 1992), siphoned resources away from social services, physical infrastructure, and investment.
Life in rural Philippines worsened owing to the occurrence of droughts, floods caused by overlooking in many areas, particularly strong typhoons that devastated property, crops and livestock, and the sporadic volcanic activities of Mount Pinatubo. In upland areas, environmental degradation reportedly caused water sources to dry up. In some places, women claimed that they had to walk longer distances to get drinking water, or even water supply for their domestic needs (GI/L 1994; GI/M 1994).
Faced with economic and natural disasters, women and men were pushed to work longer, but with women continuing to bear a double burden of market and home work (Illo 1992). To beat rising prices of basic goods and their rapidly declining profit from their agricultural products, women's food crops, generally small scale and low valued, gained greater importance. Moreover, women's sideline occupations, such as trading or home-based manufacturing, became the household's mainline livelihood (IPC 1993a, GI/L 1994, GI/M 1994). As job opportunities became scarce and real wages continued to fall (NSO 1992), an increasing number of women also left to work as domestic servants. And as community health programs were initiated to fill the gap left by public health agencies, rural women tended to be recruited to serve as unpaid health volunteers (Uy 1991, GI/V 1994).
While the Philippines struggled to regain its economic footing after the end of the Marcos regime in 1986, neighbouring Asian economies soared and grew into "newly industrializing countries" (NIC). To attain "NIC-hood", the Philippine government has been developing industrial estates or "industrial corridors". The schemes have been viewed as threatening not only the livelihood of local communities as rice land gives way to factories, but also endangering the environment as industries befoul the air and pollute nearby waterways (IPC 1993c, PC/M 1994).
Not all the changes have dire effects or prospects. Many of the democratic institutions and processes have been re-established. Inflation is being slowly checked. Peace has returned to many areas GI/L 1994, GI/M 1994). And however flawed, an agrarian reform program is in place.
<section>4</section>
Review and appraisal: The situation in the early eighties
Review and appraisal: The situation in the early eighties
In 1985, the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW) described the condition of, and issues faced by, women in rural Philippines as follows (NCRFW 1985):
1. Philippine agriculture was generally male-oriented, but it nonetheless absorbed 55 percent of all rural female workers. Women, however, comprised only 30 percent of all agricultural workers.
2. Adoption of new technologies has effected a shift from unpaid to paid labour. This was shown by the increased weeding requirements of the high-yielding, early-maturing rice varieties. However, mechanization of such operations as threshing has reduced the share of landless women in the rice harvest.
3. With the exception of home management and other "feminine" inputs, agricultural programs rarely considered women as target clients. This was true for the government-sponsored cooperative program, extension, or credit. This bias against women was attributed to the general assumption that the men were the full-time farmers, while the women were "merely housekeepers".
4. Among the technicians of the Department of Agriculture, only the Home Management Technicians worked with women, although women technicians comprised 58 percent of all technicians (Unnevehr and Stanford 1985:15).
5. Women seemed to prefer combining their economic role with supervising or attending to their home responsibilities. This partly explained the survival of subcontracting schemes which, although generally susceptible to exploitative practices, thrived in rural areas because they do not take women away from their homes.
A more critical reading of the decade was offered by an alternative report on rural women (Pineda-Ofreneo 1985). While the report alluded to the issues raised in the official report, it also traced the roots of rural women's oppression to the imperialist forces that controlled Philippine society; their membership in the more disadvantaged class consisting of peasants, agricultural workers, and other marginalized sectors; and their gender, which placed them at a greater disadvantaged position than the male members of their class. These underlay such specific issues confronting rural women as invisibility of much of their work in labour force surveys, resulting in low labour force participation estimates for women; low wages which, in the case of seasonal plantation workers, were allegedly below the legislated minimum wage; growing landlessness among the rural masses as land got concentrated in the hands of corporations and the rural elite; disastrously low demand for major
export crops, including sugar, in the world market; labour-displacing and environment-unfriendly technologies; conversion of riceland to subdivisions; and intensive exploitation attending rural piecework. Moreover, rural women suffered from double or multiple work burdens as well as from illiteracy and lack of training. All these, Pineda-Ofreneo argues, were reinforced by prevailing notions that the home was still the rightful place for women and that the "economic and cultural subjugation of Filipinas in the countryside generally prevents them from having a concrete awareness of their own reality" (1985:22).
Of greater import to changing rural women's condition lies not in economic and welfare projects for women, but in organizing and educating the women. The 18,000-strong Katipunan ng Bagong Pilipina (Alliance of New Filipinas), or KaBaPa, distinguished themselves on this score as they combined involvement in community projects and services with study meetings, and literacy and other mass campaigns with political content.
To redress the inequalities besetting rural women, the 1981 Conference on Equality, National Independence, and Peace passed a resolution on rural women, which included the following: broadening of consciousness raising so that rural women could understand the goals of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; promotion of literacy and training programs; sharing of household work with men, which would free women to participate in affairs outside the home; urging women to involve themselves in organizations, cooperatives, community work, economic and political activities to broaden their perspectives and cultivate their potentials; implementation of land reform; creation of remunerative employment opportunities for poor women in rural areas, of increasing regularity, and of equal pay; and effective measures, laws, and controls to protect women workers in homebased industries from exploitation.
Part of the thrusts and objectives raised in the Conference were echoed in the official report's forward-looking strategies, as follows (NCRFW 1985:72):
1. Involving women in agricultural technology and management training, which could help overcome traditional barriers thus enabling them to view themselves as equal partners of men and not merely as their auxiliaries in agriculture.
2. A closer monitoring of subcontractors to eliminate oppressive terms of employment, as well as a reexamination of industrial policies toward the establishment/dispersal of industries to rural areas to provide the women alternatives to subcontracting arrangements.
3. Increasing women's access to effort/time saving technology to help them in the discharge of their double responsibilities and to afford them time for leisure activities.
In addition, the NCRFW report sought the recognition of the value of house-work, stipulating that "the working conditions of domestic helpers . . . should be improved by legislation, assigning higher wages, social benefits, tenure and perhaps professionalization" (1985:72). This proposed action promised relief to young women who migrate from the countryside to the cities and end up as domestic helpers.
<section>5</section>
The post-Nairobi years: Review and appraisal
Too few, too little: Sharing power and decision-making
Institutions and mechanisms to promote women's concerns
Awareness of and commitment to women's rights
The increasing burden of poverty on women
Access to and participation in the productive process
Access to employment, education, and health
Violence against women, war, and armed conflict.
The post-Nairobi years: Review and appraisal
The years after the 1985 Nairobi Conference saw a spate of activities within both the women's movement and the NCRFW. The two streams came together with the coming to power of Corazon C. Aquino in 1986. Together with the government's planning body and different government line agencies, the NCRFW, various women's groups and NGOs, drafted the Philippine Development Plan for Women, 1989-92. It was to serve as a primary touchstone for government agencies, including the rural development departments of agriculture, agrarian reform, and the environment and natural resources, as they attempted to make their programs and services more gender-responsive, to minimize or eradicate discriminatory policies, procedures, and processes, and to strengthen women's claims to development resources.
For the 1995 Beijing Conference, the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women listed the following as major critical areas of concern:
1. Inequality between women and men in the sharing of power and decision-making at all levels;
2. Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of women;
3. Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's human rights;
4. The persistent and growing burden of poverty on women;
5. Inequality in women's access to, and participation in, the definition of economic structures and policies and the productive process itself;
6. Inequality in access to education, health, employment and other means of maximizing the use of women's capacities;
7. Violence against women; and
8. Effects of continuing national and international armed or other kinds of conflict on women.
These concerns inform the review of the post-Nairobi experiences of women in agricultural and other primary sectors.
Too few, too little: Sharing power and decision-making
The election of Corazon C. Aquino as Philippine president appeared to foster women's active role in politics. There had always been women politicians, but between the elections of 1987/88 and 1992, not only did more women run for office, relatively more women were also voted into office, a pattern that held for both national and local executive and legislative positions (Table 2). The greater visibility of women in Congress seemed to have heightened legislators' interests in women's concerns. It is interesting to note that many of the pro-women bills presented were authored by male legislators.
Women's claims to the highest appointive positions in central government has been shakier. In 1986, President Aquino appointed three women to the Cabinet, namely: the first ever female planning secretary, concurrently the Director General of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), the Secretary of the Department of Culture and Sports (DECS), and the secretary of the Department of Social Work and Development (DSWD), which had always been headed by a woman. During the last two years of the Aquino Administration, however, only one woman remained in the Cabinet. The number had since increased to two, with the naming of a woman to head the Department of Labour and Employment (DOLE).
Despite gains in both elective and appointive political offices, men continue to hold sway, although there are no legal impediments to women's holding power in the public realm. The same could be said of the top decision-makers in the Philippine government bureaucracy. In 1993, only 27 of all career executives in the government were female, an increase from 16 percent in 1984. The figures for rural development departments in 1993 are as follows: environment and natural resources, 5 percent; agrarian reform, 10 percent; and agriculture, 16 percent (Table 3). In contrast, the trade and industry department had women in 50 percent of its executive positions, while 88 percent of the career executives in social welfare and development were women. While women decision-makers may be attuned to the needs and concerns of rural women, their low participation in bureaucracies that plan for and oversee rural and agricultural development programs does not improve the chances that rural
women would get substantial and effective assistance from government.
Even at the barangay (village) level, office bearers in rural organizations are predominantly male. This applies to the barangay (village) council, to rural cooperatives, and to farmers' groups organized by government technicians (Table 4). In community-type cooperatives, which are open to community members interested to join, women constitute the majority of the membership. However, leadership positions are held by men (Illo and Uy 1992). Women's opportunities to exercise leadership continue to lie in women's organizations.
Within the home, as outside it, power and authority tend to rest on men, but the women have their own areas of authority (Tables 5 and 6). Women decide on how their children will be raised and educated, how earnings will be allocated, when and how much of their crop harvest will be sold, and what to feed their families. In contrast, men have greater say in such matters as investment, loans, and even the choice of contraceptive method (Uy 1991). But in some lowland Christian communities, women claim that even investments and loans are decided jointly by them and their spouses. Among rural households, however, women's decision-making power is almost nonexistent as there is very little chance for the children to stay in school, or very little earnings to be budgeted. Among some cultural groups in the Philippines, not even the children or the budget are considered as women's domain (Table 6). Indeed, for women of these groups, there are too few opportunities for sharing power
and too little decisions to be made. Information from group interviews conducted by the author in March 1994 suggests that part of the problem is women's ignorance about their legal rights, a concern overshadowed by the day-to-day anxieties of basic survival.
Institutions and mechanisms to promote women's concerns
Since 1985, the government has introduced legislation, mechanisms, and processes for the advancement of women and for the eradication of discriminatory forces in the field of employment, training, access to resources, and the like. Outside the government, women's organizations have flourished and NGOs, have experimented with ways of operationalizing and institutionalizing its commitment to gender and development. Among these organizations was AMIHAN