<section>e</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
This report provides an analytical summary of both quantitative and qualitative data and information on women in agriculture, supplied by seventeen country coordinators (focal points) in the Near East region. The data clearly demonstrates that rural women play a significant role in agricultural and food production and in household food security, both as paid and unpaid labour. In countries such as Egypt, Morocco, Somalia and Turkey, women constitute over 50% of the total labour engaged in agriculture; while in Pakistan, Cyprus, Sudan, Tunisia, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq, at least one-third of the labour required to sustain agricultural production is provided by women.
Although the majority of rural households in the Near East are headed by men, the number of women-headed households is increasing as a result of, inter alia, male migration, widowhood and divorce. The percentage of female-headed households is highest in Pakistan and Sudan (25% and 23.8% respectively). Data provided on household consumption and expenditure shows that female-headed households are poorer than male-headed ones, as the latter are able to earn higher wages and thus capable of saving and consuming more.
Women in the region spend long hours every day in crop and livestock production. In crop production, they are involved in almost all aspects, with the exception of land preparation and other mechanized and capital-intensive activities. The tasks women perform are often non-mechanized and labour-intensive. Thus, women broadcast seeds and fertilizers by hand, hand weed and harvest, pick fruits and vegetables and carry produce on their back. Women also spend many hours in post-harvest activities such as threshing, cleaning, sorting and grading.
Further analysis of the available information shows that women's role in livestock production is even greater, as they are often responsible for all aspects of animal husbandry, with the exception of herding and marketing. Hence, they feed and water, gather fodder, care for small ruminants, rabbits and poultry, clean stables, collect dung for fertilizers and fuel, care for the sick, pregnant and lactating animals, milk, make butter, cheese and ghee, and breed and select animals.
Compared to their critical roles in crop and livestock production, women's contribution to fisheries and agroforestry is less substantial. This is partly due to the limited role these subsectors play as a source of employment in many countries of the Near East region.
Rural women spend much time every day on agricultural and domestic tasks, with little time for rest or recreation. As paid and/or unpaid labour, women may spend up to 19 hours/day performing essential chores such as sowing, weeding, harvesting, animal husbandry, cleaning, fetching water and firewood, baking, cooking, sewing, child rearing, etc., to ensure the livelihood of the farming household. Nevertheless, data from the country papers indicates that women are not usually remunerated for their work, with clear disparities in wages between men and women in most countries of the region. In many countries women are often paid two-thirds or even half of the wages earned by men for the same task.
In spite of the labour and income contributions of women to the farming household, men appear to have predominant control over decision-making. However, more in-depth studies are needed to determine the precise roles and powers each gender has in household decision-making processes, as some studies have indicated that decisions are often made jointly between men and women. Due to cultural norms, women may wield more indirect power in several important matters such as family and household matters. Women also have a greater say in the aspects of production in which they are heavily engaged, such as poultry, dairy products and handicrafts. Unlike other pursuits in which men are involved, women are generally left alone to make their decisions regarding these enterprises, such as when to sell, how much to sell for, and what to do with the earnings. However, women are rarely consulted on issue such as loan and credit applications and management, or in other financial matters.
Women's access to, and control over, productive resources (especially land, labour, inputs and labour-saving technology) and support services (credit, extension, training and markets) is limited. Very few credit-lending arrangements have been set up especially for women farmers, and only a small number apply for credit. This is mainly attributed to weak institutional structures, traditional beliefs and cultural practices, a high degree of illiteracy, poor education, as well as women's lack of collateral. A number of encouraging initiatives have been taken by some countries to remedy this situation. For example, in Egypt, the recent establishment of a strong Policy and Coordination Unit for Women in Agriculture, in the Ministry of Agriculture, has begun to address some of these constraints.
Although information on land ownership patterns by gender is scarce in the region, what little is available affirms that only a small proportion of arable land is owned by women. Women landowners often prefer to have their land managed by male relatives or transfer land titles to them in return for a portion of the land's remittances or other considerations. Women rarely purchase land and those who own land do so mainly through inheritance.
Extension services especially designed to target women farmers are also limited. In fact, the large majority of extension officers are male, who deal almost exclusively with male farmers since tradition often constrains interaction between women and outsiders. The few existing qualified female extension workers usually provide women with training in traditional home-based activities such as child-care and home management, with little or no training in the more entrepreneurial income-generating activities, such as crop and livestock production, agro-industries, protected agriculture, etc.
Data from the country papers emphatically asserts the need for energy and burden-saving technologies to reduce the heavy workload and time women spend on agricultural and domestic tasks. So far, techniques that have been developed to increase efficiency and productivity have often been taken over by men, leaving women to perform the more difficult and labour-intensive functions, at a time when new technologies are making old practices obsolete.
Female illiteracy in the Near East region, especially in the rural areas, is exceptionally high (reaching in some areas 90%) in spite of major wide-scale campaigns to address this serious issue. Furthermore, although primary school education is compulsory for both boys and girls in most countries, the data indicates that rural girls are at a disadvantage compared to rural boys and to their urban counterparts. In addition to the scarcity of schools at the village level, girls are discouraged to attend because of tradition, and are often pulled out of school to marry early or to contribute to the much-needed labour on the household farm.
Although the number of women seeking higher agricultural education in the region is on the rise, women's enrollment rates are lower than those of men. Women tend to specialize in selected subjects such as nutrition and agricultural economics, while men often specialize in agricultural engineering, and crop and animal science.
Women are also underrepresented in power structures throughout the region. In ministries of agriculture, only a few women hold high-ranking policy-making positions (8.7%, 6%, and 4.8% in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Turkey and Egypt, respectively). A few women are likewise office-bearers, employees or members of agricultural organizations such as cooperatives and rural credit associations.
Most countries have recently established WID units or other machineries to empower women at various levels, including in their ministries of agriculture and related ministries with activities in rural areas. However, the number and scope of these units varies from country to country. With the exception of a few, the majority appear to be poorly funded and supported, often lacking clear-cut objectives and sufficient human and technical resources.
NGO support to rural women is minimal in the region. Most NGOs operating in rural areas are typically welfare-type institutions, with objectives geared to education, health, and family planning. A few have been active in promoting small-scale income-generating activities for women. However, these initiatives tend to benefit only a very small number of women and are limited to traditional activities such as sewing, embroidery, carpet-making and small-scale animal husbandry projects.
Most countries in the region have passed legislation stipulating equal pay for equal work, as well as gender equality in access to education, employment, ownership, social security benefits and legal rights. However, only three countries out of twenty-seven have ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) without reservations. A few have implemented specific legal actions to secure women's rights and facilitate their access to land, livestock, credit, employment and membership in rural organizations. In addition, measures to increase public awareness of women's rights and responsibilities have been limited to one-time affairs, such as national workshops, seminars, publications, and a World Food Day dedicated to rural women.
The majority of the programmes and projects in support of rural women tend to be isolated and dispersed, and target only a small number of women beneficiaries. In general, these endeavours have not been innovative per se, but are rather first-time initiatives in, for example, training women, or in the creation of income-generating activities using mostly traditional female skills, such as sewing, weaving, cheese-making and poultry-rearing. Few projects have aimed at providing women with credit and up-to-date technology (e.g., biogas technology, mechanization, entrepreneurial and managerial skills, etc.) to increase their economic gains and improve the efficiency of their work. Moreover, none of the projects or initiatives appear to aim at 'mainstreaming' gender-sensitive considerations throughout agricultural and rural development approaches. As a result, attempts to improve the conditions of rural women in the Near East often remain small-scale, localized and isolated.
International support to rural women in the region is insufficient. Internationally sponsored projects either target women directly in women's projects or indirectly by including a WID component to the projects which they support. In general, most endeavours have been limited to the elimination of illiteracy, and the improvement of education, health and family planning services, as well as training and funding of traditional small-scale income-generating activities.
An assessment of the future strategic goals and objectives provided by the seventeen participating countries indicates many commonalities in their vision for future action. All expressed the need for a broad-based action-oriented framework, with corresponding financial commitments, and for the empowerment of women in agriculture and the implementation of priority programmes and activities. This approach is expected to enhance regional cooperation and networking to redress gender gaps, and thus increase sustainable agricultural production and balanced human growth.
The thrust of the FAO/RNE WID programme of activities is in response to the above. It is geared to the development of a Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East (1996-2000), or RPAWANE 2000, through a participatory people-centred approach. RPAWANE 2000's main elements are based on substantive information collected and analyzed from the seventeen country papers, and as such, conform with the demands, needs and commitments of the Near East countries. These have been grouped in four priority areas of concern: collection, analysis and dissemination of gender-disaggregated statistical data; institutional support and capacity building; women in agriculture and sustainable development (with emphasis on gender, environment and population); and networking and people's participation.
RPAWANE 2000 is presently being prepared in close collaboration with FAO Headquarters (SDWW). It will conform with the overall objectives and structure of the Organization-Wide Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001), and will be adapted to suit the realities of women in the Near East. It is expected to be discussed, enriched and adopted by the countries of the region in a consultation that will be held for this purpose in Ankara, Turkey, from 4 to 6 October 1995, drawing on the same interactive and transparent approach.
<title>A synthesis report of the Near East Region - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: a synthesis report of the Near East </title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
ABS
Agricultural Bank of the Sudan
AFMET
Agricultural Farm Management Extension Training (Somalia)
CAPMAS
Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (Egypt)
CEDAW
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CNCA
Caisse National de Credit Agricole (Morocco)
DGWC
Directorate General for Women's and Children's Affairs (Oman)
DGWSP
Directorate General for Women's Status and Problems (Turkey)
DSRC
Development Studies Research Centre (Sudan)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FAO/RNE
FAO Regional Office for the Near East
FHH
Female Headed Households
GFIW
General Federation for Iraqi Women
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft Fuer Technische Zusammenarbeit
IAA
Institut Agronomique (Tunisia)
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
ILO
International Labour Organization of the United Nations
MAWR
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (Yemen)
MOALR
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (Egypt)
NFTW
Foundation for the Advancement of Recognition of Turkish women
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NUMW
National Union of Moroccan Women
PBDAC
Principal Bank for Agricultural Development and Credit (Egypt)
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PCWA
Policy and Coordination Unit for Women in Agriculture (Egypt)
PVO
Private Volunteer Organization
RPAWANE
Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East
RRA
Rapid Rural Appraisal
SDW
Division of Women and People's Participation in Development (FAO)
SDWW
Integration of Women in Development Service (FAO)
UAE
United Arab Emirates
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
UNIFEM
United Nations Development Fund for Women
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WADA
Women in Agriculture Development Administration (Sudan)
WID
Women in Development
WIDCU
Women in Development Coordinating Unit (Sudan)
WIACH
Women in Agriculture Consultancy House (Sudan)
WFP
World Food Programme
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Introduction
This report presents a synthesis of information on women in agriculture in seventeen countries of the Near East region.^1 The objectives of the synthesis report are to: (a) provide quantitative, qualitative and comparative data on women in agriculture in the Near East region; and (b) furnish a baseline document to assist in developing a Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East (1996-2000), or RPAWANE 2000. RPAWANE 2000's overall goal is to ensure an evolving and dynamic understanding, at different levels, of the situation of women in agriculture in order to improve their status and enhance their contribution to sustainable agriculture by defining strategies and instruments with reachable targets. Equally important is promoting the integration of women's concerns in the agendas of Member Nations and United Nations fore.
^1 Cyprus, Egypt, Iran (I.R. of), Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Yemen.
RPAWANE 2000 is a sequential and broad-based initiative that started in early 1993 in cooperation with the seventeen countries, FAO Headquarters, other UN Agencies, regional institutions and NGOs RNE/WID has at present an informal network of seventeen country coordinators who in 1994 prepared country papers on women in agriculture, through the use of participatory mechanisms and tools. The papers were based on an outline and innovative guidelines, which were enriched and finalized in an Expert Consultation held for this purpose in December 1993. The outline corresponds to the UN Secretariat's reporting requirements on the advancement of women for the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, China, 4-15 September 1995.
The Synthesis Report is a product of consolidated information as taken from the country papers, and is supplemented by additional data from other sources, as indicated. As the individual country reports reference the data provided in terms of source and year, for the purpose of this report, national source references are not repeated. A complete list of references, including the country papers, can be found in the Bibliography.
Various means were used by the country coordinators to collect the data for the country papers, such as participatory and rapid rural appraisals (PRAS and RRAS), national workshops and consultations, field trips, reviews of national statistical data and surveys and other available documents, etc.
Several methodological problems were encountered in the preparation of the Synthesis Report. Due to the lack of up-to-date gender-disaggregated statistical data in many participating countries, some information was missing or outdated. Country papers also exhibited wide variations in following the outline, and the statistical information provided made comparisons among countries difficult. In some countries, data was provided for the same variable but for different years, making comparisons over time difficult. Thus, caution was taken in interpreting the data presented.
Moreover, it is necessary to be cautious when making generalizations about the situation of rural women at the regional level as it often differs not only among countries but also within a country, depending upon the socio-economic and ethnic groups to which women belong, and to environmental and other factors characteristic of a particular area.
Despite these limitations, the Synthesis Report represents a useful contribution to assimilating information about women in agriculture in the Near East region. It also provides an analytical synopsis of their roles and responsibilities and identifies the major constraints within which they operate.
The first section of the report provides a brief overview of the Near East region, summarizing the agricultural environment and highlighting the general backdrop against which rural women conduct their activities. The second section pulls together data from the country papers to establish the extent of women's participation in agricultural work. An overall description of the division of labour in crop, livestock, fisheries and agroforestry is then provided, as is an examination of the available data on the time women spend in agricultural and domestic tasks, together with gender disparities in wage earning and decision-making. The fourth section examines gender gaps in women's access to productive resources and services and economic structures, such as credit, land, extension, labour-saving technology and higher agricultural education. The fifth section provides an analysis of the level of institutional support for rural women in the Near East, such as policy-making
positions in ministries of agriculture, WID units and NGOs The commitment of countries to internationally recognized women's rights, as well as innovative programmes, projects and international support targeting rural women in the region are then evaluated. The final section consolidates information on future strategic goals and objectives provided by each country, which set the basis for RPAWANE 2000's four priority areas of concern, as requested by the countries of the region.
<section>3</section>
Overview of the near east region
Agriculture in the near east
The situation of women in the early 1980s
Overview of the near east region
Agriculture in the near east
While countries in the region exhibit extraordinary variability in their economic, social and political structures, they nevertheless share some common environmental and agricultural features that permit them to be treated as a relatively consistent group vis-a-vis a number of important aspects of agricultural production and food security. The region is predominantly arid or semi-arid, and agriculture is primarily rainfed. Temperatures are often extreme and rainfall is both scarce and variable from one growing season to the next. As a result, agriculture is a risky enterprise, and farmers, especially those with small landholdings, often adopt production strategies, such as crop and livestock diversification, to minimize the risks associated with a variable and difficult climate.
A little over half of the region's population live in rural areas, and agriculture engages about one third to one half of its workforce (fully 1990). Population growth is very rapid, with countries such as Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Iran and Syria registering some of the highest growth rates in the world. While many countries were either self-sufficient in food production or even food exporters in the early 1960s, today, alarming quantities of foodstuffs are currently being imported into the region (about US$20 billion) to satisfy increasing demands.
A predominant proportion of the work associated with agricultural and food production is conducted by men, women and children within the context of a farming household (Glavanis and Glavanis 1983). Farm size tends to be small, with most farms constituting about 10 hectares (ha) or less, and occupying 25 % of the total arable land. Most farmers are subsistence farmers. However, large farms of 50 ha or more occupy 15 % to 45 % of the total arable land, yet constitute only a small percentage of the total number of farms (Belaid and Morris 1991). The tendency for the majority of farms in the region to be small prevents them from absorbing the available labour in large families, let alone incurring the costs of hiring labour from outside the farm. A high dependency of the farm household on the labour market for outside additional income affects the composition of farm households, with women, children and older men left behind to carry out a large bulk of the agricultural work.
Thus, because of high rural population growth rates, the lack of jobs in rural areas, low wages in agriculture, and the seasonality in the demand for agricultural labour, the region suffers from very high male temporary and permanent urban-to-rural migration as well as immigration from the poorer countries to the Arab Gulf Countries and Western Europe. Although the overwhelming majority of urban and rural households are headed by men in the Near East, women-headed households occupy a considerable percentage of total rural households and their number is increasing as a result of high migration. For example, almost a quarter of all rural households in Pakistan and the Sudan are currently headed by women. Consequently, women farmers have increasingly found themselves becoming major contributors to the agricultural labour force, the majority of whom work for very long hours all year long as unpaid family labour.
The situation of women in the early 1980s
By the early 1980s, women in most countries of the region had already been granted equal rights under their constitutions, especially with regard to education, employment, social security and welfare services, although some countries introduced such provisions later than others. Thus, women were given the right to vote and hold office in Iraq in 1980, and in Yemen in 1983. In Jordan, while women were granted the right to vote and run for parliamentary elections in 1974, their right to vote and run for municipal elections was granted only in 1982.
Although several women organizations did exist in some countries prior to the early 1980s,^2 little attention was given to rural women by policy-makers. National plans and development strategies had not yet fully recognized the contribution of women to food production and the importance of addressing their needs in the production process. However, increased awareness of policy-makers in the early eighties, primarily due to international efforts, led to the establishment of several important governmental offices. In Egypt, in 1977, a WID unit was established at the Ministry of Social Affairs, and a National Commission of Women was set up during the same year. In Jordan, a Women's Department was established at the Ministry of Social Development in 1980, and in Yemen, several WID units were set up in various ministries beginning in 1978 with international assistance. In Tunisia, a women's ministry was set up in 1983, while in Mauritania, several governmental units were already
in place to deal with the increasing recognition of the importance of rural women in agricultural production. In Cyprus, an interministerial committee was appointed to study the position of women in society, and in 1983, two Law Reform Committees were established to revise family law to eliminate discrimination against women and ensure equal rights. In Pakistan, a women's division was established in 1979, which was later upgraded to a Ministry for Women Development.
^2 The General Federation of Iraqi Women (established in 1969); The Feminist Union and the Consultative Council for Women in Mauritania (established in 1962 and 1964, respectively); Tunisia's Women's Union and very progressive Personal Status Code (1956).
In addition to the lack of institutional support for rural women, only a very small number of projects and programmes were designed to target rural women. Furthermore, most organizations and institutions dealing with rural women had no or very few women employed at the policy-making level and very few women professionals existed to promote the cause of rural women. Indicators such as illiteracy, deteriorating health conditions, and the increase of female-headed households, as well as the lack of women's access to economic structures and productive processes (credit, land, education, technology, information, training, etc.), reflect the extent to which rural women in the early eighties were neglected in the development efforts of most countries in the region.
<section>4</section>
The status and extent of women's participation in agriculture
Women economically active in agriculture
Female-headed households
The status of rural women
The status and extent of women's participation in agriculture
Women economically active in agriculture
Due to inconsistencies and poor methods in data collection and reporting, and because of narrow definitions of work and employment in national statistics, data often fails to capture the real contributions of women's work in the Near East region. As a result, there has been a widespread erroneous notion that women in the region have a marginal role in all sectors of the economy, including that of agriculture. However, more recent efforts to include disaggregated data by gender at the national level, as well as information gathered in micro-studies and special surveys, have shown that women's contribution to agricultural labour has been severely underestimated, and that in fact, women's participation rates are indeed quite significant, especially when unpaid labour is taken into account.
Table 1 provides data on women's participation in the labour force, and in agriculture in particular. The data indicates wide variations among countries in the region. For example, in Somalia, Cyprus and Turkey, women constituted 39 %, 38 % and 31 %, respectively, of the total number of persons employed in the labour force in the 1990-92 period. In Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, Mauritania and Pakistan, women constituted between 21 % and 29% of total persons actively employed, whereas in the Gulf Region, the percentages for Oman and the United Arab Emirates were as low as 8% and 6%, respectively, in 1990-92.
A significant proportion of employed women work in the agricultural sector. For example, in Mauritania, Turkey and Sudan, the percentage of employed women working in agriculture in the 1990-92 period was 84%, 83%, and 82% respectively. In Iraq, Syria, Morocco, Tunisia, Cyprus, Iran and Pakistan, the proportion ranged from 24% to 45%.
Additional data from the country papers indicates that women, as paid and unpaid labour, represent an important source of total agricultural labour in the region. In Turkey, Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, Sudan, Iraq and Mauritania, women were estimated to constitute 55.3%, 53.2%, 50.7%, 40.7%, 34.7%, 30.7% and 28% of total paid and unpaid agricultural workers respectively. In Syria, women constituted 44.4% of wage labourers and 60% of unpaid farm labour, and in Tunisia, 34.7% of the total temporary paid labour were women. In Somalia, 66% of the labour in subsistence farming was provided by women. In Cyprus, women constituted 44% of the total paid labour, while in Pakistan, women comprised 42% of the total family labour.
Data provided on rural unemployment indicates considerable variation among countries in the region, and reflects the seasonality in the demand for labour in agriculture. In cereal growing areas for example, most of the agricultural labour is needed in the fall and early winter months for cereal sowing, and again during harvesting, usually in June. This leaves approximately 5-6 months for farmers to seek employment elsewhere. However, work opportunities outside agriculture in the rural areas are limited in most countries, which contributes to increasing unemployment and underemployment of men and women alike, and to temporary and permanent migration of men to the urban areas. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, the percentage of unemployed rural women increased from 21.1% to 30.9% in the 1980-1993 period. In Iraq and Tunisia, women's unemployment appears to have increased considerably in the past decade. In Tunisia, it is estimated that 40% of women were underemployed in 1989.
In contrast, unemployment for rural women in Egypt relatively declined during the 1980's, and in Morocco, rural women's unemployment was 1.5% compared to 8.4% for men. The unemployment rate for women in Turkey was less than that of men, and decreased by more than half in the 1985-1992 period, from 5.9% to 2.5%. However, caution should be exercised in interpreting the data on rural female unemployment and underemployment in the Near East. More detailed studies should be carried out in order to examine the variables influencing the decrease or increase in rural female unemployment (e.g., migration, lower wages for women, climatic and agronomic factors affecting crop yields, etc.). In addition, differences in the definitions of "employed," "underemployed," and "unemployed" must be clearly understood in cross-national studies.
Table 1: Women's Participation in the Agricultural Labour Force
Country
% total labour force in agriculture (1990-92)
women in labour force, as % of total(1990-92)
female labour in agri. as % of female labour force (1988)
female labour in agri. as % of total labour (various years)*
Cyprus
44.0 of total paid labour (1992)
Egypt
50.7 (1988)^a paid and unpaid
Iran
Iraq
Jordan .
Lebanon
40.7 (1990)^b
Mauritania
Morocco
53.2 (86-87)^c
Oman
Pakistan
42.0 of total family workers (1980)
Somalia
66.0 of labour in subsistence farming
Sudan
Syria
44.4 wage, 60.0 unpaid (1991)
Tunisia
34.7 of total temporary paid labourers (1990)
Turkey
55.3 total (1990) 10.1 forestry 1.7 fisheries
UAE
4.4 of total paid labour (1992)
Source: Compiled from Jazairy et al. 1992 and Country Papers.
*Data for this column was compiled from the country papers.
^aAccording to a Labour Force Sample Survey (1988) where a more flexibile definition of work was used to capture unpaid labour.
^bEstimate.
^cAccording to a special survey which included women's unremunerated labour.
Female-headed households
In all countries of the region, the overwhelming majority of urban and rural households are headed by