<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Five conferences of peasant women were organised in South Asia in 1991. The first took place in India, organised by the Centre for Women's Development Studies, New Delhi, and the National Institute for Rural Development, Hyderabad. Three more followed in Pakistan, [organized by the Aurat Foundation], Nepal [Women in Development] and Bangladesh [Nari Pokkho], and the fifth and final conference which was regional, took place in Lahore; peasant women from the four national conferences, agricultural scientists and policy makers came together for a face to face dialogue.
The main financial and moral support came from UNIFEM which showed tremendous farsightedness and made efforts to involve other U.N. and bilateral aid organisations in these initiatives. FAO's Freedom From Hunger Campaign/Action for Development, New Delhi was involved in conceptualising and planning the conferences. FAO provided a consultancy to Dr. Vina Mazumdar of C.W.D.S to participate in the five conferences and to prepare a document about the background, rationale and outcome of the dialogues; Embracing the Earth: An Agenda for Partnership with Peasant Women is a result of that effort.
The conferences brought together peasant women who have been empowered over the years, with the help of NGOs and women's groups, to fight for their rights and improve their situation. They provided them with an opportunity to share their problems, aspirations and struggles; to have a dialogue with scientists, researchers and policy makers, to arrive at strategies for concerted action at the grassroot level to reverse trends which are leading to their marginalisation and ecological destruction; and to initiate processes for the practice of sustainable agriculture.
This document and the four video films that were made to record these national and regional events are testimonies to the knowledge, wisdom, experience and militancy of peasant women. They demonstrate clearly that these women are neither uneducated nor inarticulate. Rather, they are the managers and conservers of our agricultural resource base and are more than capable of understanding their problems and finding solutions for them. They possess excellent organisational and managerial skills, are courageous and commited and are capable of extraordinary militancy if nothing else works.
Subsequent to the regional conference three peasant women, Bibi Sultana from Pakistan, Chandrika from Nepal and Malati Mandi from India, went to the U. N. Conference on Environment and Development in Rio in 1992 to present the main findings and conclusions of their deliberations in South Asia. As a follow-up to the Rio conference several conferences of peasant women have been held in South Asia and several others are planned to pursue the implementation of the relevant suggestions made at Rio and to keep the dialogues going.
Driving Mazumdar, the author of this document, is a social scientist, a leading proponent of women's studies and a feminist activist who has been working with peasant women in West Bengal, India, for over a decade and has been actively engaged in influencing policies and programmes at local, national and international levels. We are grateful to Dr. Mazumdar for taking on the responsibility of writing this document.
It is our hope that this document will help the powerful voices of peasant women to be heard by policy makers in the corridors of power. It should remind us all that because peasant women mother the earth, their interests, knowledge and experience must be at the centre of development policies and programmes. Ignoring or marginalising them can only make the survival of our planet more precarious.
We hope the suggestions made by the women and the concrete areas of cooperation identified by them will guide policy makers and implementers, both in government and non-governmental organisations, at the local, national and international levels. We also hope that this document and the video films will feed into the ongoing preparations in South Asia for the Fourth World Conference on Women to be held in Beijing in 1995.
Kamla Bhasin
South Asian Programme
FAO's Freedom From Hunger Campaign
Action for Development
New Delhi
<title>Embracing the earth - An agenda for partnership with peasant women</title>
<section>1</section>
Prologue
Prologue
Perceptions of the women and natural environment connection are multiple, and have been evolving over the years. Successive studies and conferences, and debates at national, regional or sub-regional and global levels have tried to provide concrete meaning and body to this relationship, which still continues to be elusive for many policy makers.^1
Underlying the debates are questions that are not always clearly articulated in the few dialogues that have been held on policymaking, though WID researchers and advocates have struggled to pose them with some sharpness.
Are all women equally victims of the present environmental crisis as part of the entire population? Or are they specially affected and more vulnerable either because of their biological or their social roles? Although there has been some discussion on the effects of environmental pollution or degradation on women's reproductive health, the debates seeking to locate women in the 'save the environment' discussions appear to have concentrated mainly on the Poverty-Environment-Women connection. The Nairobi Forward Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women (1985) refers to 'vulnerable groups' in drought-affected areas, those 'deprived of their traditional means of livelihood', destitutes, sole supporters of families and the urban poor, as women whose condition has been adversely affected by environmental degradation.
The general preparations for the World Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 focussed more on 'examining the relationship between poverty and environmental degradation'^2 strengthening the widely prevalent view among the haves of the world that the poor are largely responsible for the present environmental crisis. Stretched to its global logic, this view incorporates a similar charge against the poor but populous countries of the world. Moreover, since centuries of biological research have not helped to eliminate the association of women only with reproduction the tendency to view women as the real population threat remains. This view considerably alters the image of women as victims of the environmental crisis by investing them with an active role in contributing to the world's population explosion.
The current emphasis on 'sustainability' in the development discourse led the Preparatory Committee for UNCED, at its third session, to ask the Secretary General of the Conference that 'women's critical economic, social and environmental contributions to sustainable development be addressed at the Conference as a distinct cross-cutting issue'. A UNICEF/UNFPA/UNCED, symposium on the impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children (May 27-30, 1991) sought to identify women's real and potential contributions to sustainable development, with a view to their incorporation in Agenda 21 and the Earth Charter. The Symposium's Report^3 is refreshing for some significantly new formulations. Only some of them are presented here as relevant to the main substance of this paper.
1. Historically and in terms of grassroot realities women are managers of natural resources, and dependent on them for their livelihood. Neglect of these roles will therefore adversely affect sustainability of any strategies for environmental development. UNCED, is a high point in a continuing effort to make leaders more accountable and to draw upon the skills, views and experiences of women. (p. 5)
2. The Report rejects the notion that poor people and women's fertility are the primary causes of environmental degradation. Instead, it argues that women's disenfranchisement - resulting in a lack of voice in policy-making - increases their vulnerability. Alternative strategies for environmental conservation or regeneration, therefore, should focus on resource users, recognise women as actors, and not view their legitimate/overriding concerns as 'problems'. (pp. 7-8)
3. Technology transfer needs to be a two-way process. Indigenous/local knowledge and practices may have potential for environmental and other developmental needs, and need to be respected. Case studies presented many examples of women (local and indigenous) who have developed their own ways of managing natural resources. Their perspectives are often multidimensional and multi-functional... Systematic denigration of indigenous knowledge means also the systematic marginalisation of the people from whom that knowledge originated. (p. 13)
These radical reformulations come from over a decade of close observation and experience of working with women at the grassroots, as well as growing disillusionment with existing shibboleths of the development discourse. They were articulated at the symposium by 'experts and resource people involved in grassroots activities and represented a broad spectrum from all geographical areas, the majority being women from developing countries'^4 (p. 3)
Somewhat broader and more sophisticated conclusions have come from the Tribunal of the Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet (November 8-12, 1991). The Tribunal was constituted with five women jurists-three from developing countries, two from developed ones. After receiving testimony from 15 witnesses on issues ranging from people's (especially women's) rights, to global economic relations, science, technology, population policies and their impact on the natural environment, the Tribunal made the following declaration:
The witnesses showed from their evidence that they and many other women have a wealth of knowledge and experiences in environmental issues. Their expertise should clearly be utilized in planning and implementing the policies necessary to overcome the problems identified.^5
But the hidden question still remains - are we talking about all women, or even all poor women? Is it being suggested that women, by their very nature, are better managers of natural resources even when their livelihood or the survival of their families are not dependent on such resources? Do all women globally, or even within the developing countries share the concerns or the views expressed by the Miami Congress? Or do they all share the special knowledge, skills and aspirations that could improve the conservation, management and regeneration of the natural environment?
A great deal of scholarship and elaborate information-gathering over the last decade by a range of researchers, has informed our general understanding of problems that beset varied ecosystems in the world. Nevertheless, many NGOs who work with poor women to improve their economic or health situation continue to assume, like most policy makers, and scientific/technical experts, that such women must be educated and made aware of environmental problems before they can make any effective contribution to the discussions. A similar assumption characterises many committed environmentalists, who believe that the knowledge they have taken years to acquire is not within the reach of poor, often illiterate women. Historical explorations that identify women as the initiators of productive activity, through their discovery of agriculture, are still known to a very small minority, even among feminists.
It is only in a few cases - where grassroots work results in a mutual understanding and respect for each other's strengths, concerns and specialised knowledge - that the connection is clarified: between poor women's occupational or functional specialisations, the empirical knowledge and skills that come from that specialisation and the markedly distinct attitudes and concerns that such women display regarding the destruction, degradation or disappearance of their forest, land and water resources.
This brings us to the last hidden question - why is there this reluctance to put a name to the particular group of women who demonstrate this collection of characteristics? Why obscure them within abstract generic terms-women, poor women, even rural women? Two decades of DID studies have made some of us alert to the kinds of invisibility that attend dominant discourses and how they hide the actual social, economic and political roles, or direct contributions made by women located at the bottom of the social, economic, power or knowledge hierarchies that characterize most nations of the world. The family, household, community, people-each a collective that is supposed to be all inclusive and gender neutral-acquire monolithic, patriarchal and abstract features in usage. WID lore is replete with the struggles that have been necessary to penetrate this invisibility, to obtain data, to make gender-wise comparisons, to identify the subtle methods through which discrimination
against women is institutionalised and their marginalisation accepted as the natural order of things.
In the stratified societies of South Asia where the social status or prestige of a family is determined to a great extent by the social invisibility or visibility of its women's labour, it is critically important to clearly define the class characteristics of the women we are seeking to project as key actors in the environmental crisis that continues to unfold. The first chapter of this presentation shares the results of four conferences (or Summits, as UNIFEM, the sponsoring agency, designated them) of peasant women- i.e. village women who are experienced and expert cultivators. They work in agriculture and allied fields (livestock rearing, tree planting, sericulture, pisciculture, etc.) They collect water, fuel, fodder and other minor forest produce for the family's consumption, and also for the market. Droughts, floods, landslides, deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, salination - words in newspapers for most of us in urban areas-spell DISASTER to these women.
Whatever the official data systems acknowledge, these women labour from 14-18 hours a day, as against their men's 8-10 hours. The Summits were designed to capture their perspectives, experiences and aspirations, and to try to remove some of the veils of invisibility that prevent policy makers and scientific experts' from seeing and listening to them.
The main purpose of these meetings was to enable women to express solidarity, to enhance the understanding of their struggles for survival and to further the legitimacy of ongoing development programmes. The philosophy of sustainable development was outlined by the women themselves after wide-ranging and in-depth discussions which culminated in the emergence of new concepts.
The initiative in fact went beyond just the philosophy and emerged with a critique of development as seen by the women themselves. It proved to be an enabling mechanism for policy makers and environment specialists for 'engendering' or adapting development to the concerns of women living in poverty.
Despite the massive participation of peasant women in the growing environmental movements and protests in the region, studies undertaken for the SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) countries on environment in the late Eighties relegate women to one line- 'Participation of Women and Children in Environment' - to be achieved through networking in regard to studies on women and environment and involving administrators, groups of NGOs and field workers, to facilitate exchange of information, joint research and policy formulation. There is no mention of why such participation is desirable or why women are clubbed along with children. Is the participation seen to be similar in nature? Or is the statement an unconscious reflection of deep-rooted ideologies that equate women's capacities or concerns only with children?
Since no official effort has been made to examine peasant women's role in environment management at the regional level, this series of conferences was path-breaking in its search for some concrete areas of cooperation, sharing and empowerment, within the countries of the region.
We must acknowledge the far-sightedness of UNIFEM in making these meetings possible. Our collective identification of peasant women 'as the largest group directly connected' with the environment-development matrix led to the necessity of putting them on the agenda of global, as well as national and regional, debates. And putting them on the agenda, required 'bringing them into our midst'.^6 It is no longer adequate to talk about empowerment in general terms, nor can the prerogative to define such empowerment be taken by any other group. Hence, the four National Summits where peasant women identified the systemic source of their problems, demonstrated their expertise and then held out their offer of a partnership.^7 At the Regional Conference in Lahore, our peasant colleagues empowered us by demonstrating that national and linguistic boundaries cannot prevent their ability to share and support each other's perspectives and aspirations, validating our initial conclusion as
well as our hopes.
Our gratitude to the Delhi office of the FAO's Freedom from Hunger Campaign for enabling us to prepare this paper, not only on the basis of documents, but through direct observation at the Summits. It gave us the opportunity to be warmed by the energy and welcome generated by our peasant sisters, and the trust they bestowed on us to communicate their voices to the world outside.
Vina Mazumdar
Centre for Women's Development Studies
New Delhi, May 15, 1992
Notes
^1 Centre for Science and Environment, The State of India's Environment, First Citizens' Report, Delhi, 1982.
Kumud Sharma, Women in Struggle: Role and Participation in the Chipko Movement in Uttarkhand Region in Uttar Pradesh, Occasional Monograph-I, Centre for Women's Development Studies, Delhi, 1987.
^2 Decision 1/25 of the first Preparatory Committee Meeting; Document on Poverty and Environmental Degradation. - A/Conf. 151/PC/15.
^3 Women and Children First-The Impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children, Geneva, May 27-30, 1991.
^4 Selected recommendations of the Symposium are given in Annexure-I.
^5 Declaration of the Tribunal of the Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet, Miami, November 12, 1991.
^6 Irene Santiago (UNIFEM), at the Regional Conference that followed the Summits, February 10-12, 1992.
^7 Ibid.
<section>2</section>
1 The summits
I. Background, context and objectives
II. Organisational mode and preparation
III. Participants, duration and format
IV. The issues
V. Solutions, suggestions, recommendations
1 The summits
I. Background, context and objectives
In many ways, the International Women's Decade precipitated the rediscovery of peasant women. They were the silent, invisible, secluded majority - steeped in superstition, ignorance, irrationality, untouched even by any desire for the change, freedom, self-expression or equality occasionally voiced by educated urban women during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Fleeting glimpses of these faceless millions were obtained during people's struggles against colonialism, oppressive land relations, changing production patterns in the rural economy; such glimpses, however, were soon 'forgotten' by lapses of memory both on the part of official agencies and the chroniclers of such movements.^1 The acknowledged heroines of the women's movement, in South Asia at least, did not include any peasant women.
Though the Constitutions of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal recognised some rights for women, these rights did not extend to control over basic productive resources for agriculture-land,, water or forests, or equal remuneration. Even their labour lacked acknowledgement.^2 The needs of agricultural development led to much scientific, technological and other research, training and extension activity in the region. But just as their training and extension programmes. did not address peasant women, so too, their scholarship did not extend to examining peasant women's actual roles in agriculture. Even less did it uncover the history of their discovery of the reproduction of food crops, especially paddy, through cultivation, the manufacture of textiles from natural fibres, and the art of pre-wheel pottery.^3
This blindness cannot be blamed entirely on lack of data. Decennial censuses for undivided India, with all their shortcomings, recorded women as outnumbering men in agricultural labour until 1931, and in high proportions in most rural occupations -livestock, fisheries, forestry, sericulture, plantations, handloom, handicrafts, agro-processing, retail distribution, etc.^4 Ester Boserup, the Danish scholar, found the same data sufficiently illuminating to write her pathbreaking book, querying administrative and academic perceptions of women's role in farming systems.^5 Four years later, the Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India was able to interpret the same data with insights provided by the Committee's dialogues with peasant women.^6 Within the next few years, a series of studies from Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka brought in substantive evidence of peasant women's roles in agriculture and allied activities.^7 Over the last decade, an explosion
of studies on women's role in various sectors of agriculture, especially food production, forced the FAO and ILO to revise their assessment of the relative roles of men and women in the agricultural labour force. FAO's estimates (1983) for Asia as a whole placed women at 45% of the total agricultural labour force;^8 ILO's revised estimates, published the same year, provided the following percentages: Nepal - 49%, India - 47%, Bangladesh - 34%, Pakistan - 31%.
According to the World Labour Report (1985), until 1980 agriculture continued to absorb more than two-thirds of the female workforce in developing countries, compared to less than 25% in centrally planned industrialised economies, and less than 10% in the 'industrialised marketing' or 'developed' economies. Surely this data needs to be examined today as an indication of the shape of things to come, in the context of accelerated globalisation and the extension of the economic growth model to the developing countries.
Prior to the International Women's Decade, development theorists regarded the involvement of women in agriculture as an indication of 'backwardness', which provided a rationale for pushing them out or ignoring and downgrading their contribution. The very few Indian scholars who examined the data until the Seventies explained the marked regional variations in women's involvement in agriculture as the result of 'cultural' or 'religious' beliefs and practices, thus locating it outside the purview of economists, planners and scientists.^9
The FAO-ILO data from 82, 91 and 124 (ILO-85) countries respectively demolish both these myths, and substantially challenge the first. Some of the fastest growing economies of Southeast and East Asia, irrespective of their religious or cultural moorings, continue to have a high involvement of women in agriculture. Most of the Islamic countries of Asia and Africa, and the Christian Caribbean also follow the same pattern. A study commissioned by the Nonaligned Summit in 1983 reviewed a large number of studies from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and concluded:
The socio-economic formations in the rural sector are the primary organisations of production in which womens's role has a pivotal importance in most parts of the developing world. In the rural areas of these countries, women work in all capacities, in growing food, post-harvest operations, marketing, animal husbandry and related activities. In several cases, they also work as wage labour on farms. The FAO has estimated that sometimes women's work could be longer than men's work by as much as 43%.^10
The scholar also argued convincingly that 'live human labour is and will continue to be the principal productive force in the rural societies of many of these countries'.^11 The Second Non-aligned Conference on the Role of Women in Development (New Delhi, 1985) concluded:
The most important obstacles in implementing strategies identified in the past to improve women's role in agricultural and rural development have been at the conceptual level, at the infrastructural and operational level and at the implementation level... The conceptual obstacle lies deep rooted in the persistent lack of understanding and knowledge about women's role as producers and providers of family subsistence.^12
The negative consequence of ignoring or neglecting women's role in food production - increased hunger and malnutrition-is gradually gaining serious notice.^13 But agriculture cannot be detached from the condition or management of the natural environment. The connection between peasant women's skills, knowledge, needs and problems and the state of the natural environment still remains unclear as far as the decision makers of the global power system are concerned.^14
The single largest group of South Asian rural women who share their livelihood and familial role characteristics-and their attitudes to the natural environment - are peasant women, i.e., women from marginal farmer or landless agricultural households, who engage directly in field agriculture and the collection of minor forest produce. Despite some broad differences in their participation rate by ecological, cultural or crop regions, they do share certain functional specialisations. They participate in agricultural production-for the family as unpaid labour, or for employers as hired labour. They also engage in the free collection of water, fuel, fodder and other minor forest produce, essential for family consumption and/or income earning activities. Many time-disposition and other micro studies have revealed the enormous value of this free collection for the survival and health of poor peasant households.^15
A few social action groups engaged in grassroot level interventions also noted certain marked differences in attitude among men and women of peasant households to issues related to water, forests and land.^16 Yet neither the reality of this gender difference, nor its reasons have been apparent to those responsible for the conservation, protection and regeneration of the environment. The environmental movement in South Asia today is led by educated 'experts', only some of whom recognise the initiatives of peasant women.
In poor peasant households women have a closer relationship with their natural environment as they depend on the ecosystem for food, fodder, fuel, water and livelihood. The environmental crisis-deforestation, depletion and siltation of water resources, land degradation and environmental pollution - have provoked many peasant women's groups to protest against existing policies of resource management. Some protests like Chipko are better known, but there are many others active in the protection and regeneration of the environment in a variety of ways.^17 Such struggles have, however, been carried out in isolation, with little knowledge of the efforts of other groups elsewhere in the country or region, and there has been little opportunity for these women to come together and share their experiences and insights.^18
Linguistic diversity, household and agricultural labour, the hazards of travelling long distances to unknown places, and apprehensions about their ability to participate meaningfully in any national or international discussions, are frequently offered as reasons by national agencies, official and non-official, for discouraging the involvement of women's groups in conferences on problems in rural development, agriculture or forestry.^19 In early 1991, however, ILO organised a successful national consultation in Delhi on Rural Women and Wasteland Development, with a mixed group of participants. Some were experts, some represented concerned departments of the Government of India, some came from non-governmental social action groups involved in wasteland development, among whom were a few peasant women themselves.^20 In December 1990, UNIFEM collaborated with the Asian Development Bank to organise an Asian Regional Workshop of official and non-official experts in Manila, on
Gender Issues in Agriculture, to which they invited six successful women farmers. The Indian participant was an illiterate peasant woman who now leads a small network of village level peasant women's groups engaged in converting wasteland to productive plantations.^21
These scattered experiments convinced the UNIFEM, ILO and FAO representatives in India and South Asia to respond positively to a suggestion made by the Centre for Women's Development Studies to organise national summits of peasant women in a few South Asian countries, with specific objectives. First, the Summits would provide the peasant women's groups, which would constitute the majority among the participants, an opportunity to share their experiences and, in the process, understand the environmental realities and changes taking place elsewhere; they would also be made aware of the struggles of other groups seeking to reclaim their local resource base. Second, the meetings might encourage the women to work together in their search for solutions. Third, a face-to-face dialogue would help to present, without any mediation, peasant women's perspectives on issues of natural resource management and the factors responsible for the present environmental crisis. It was hoped that
this direct impact by peasant women would help policymakers, planners and technical experts (in agriculture, forestry, sericulture, soil conservation, irrigation etc.) in the country or region to view peasant women as a potential resource and as allies in achieving policy objectives.
II. Organisational mode and preparation
In each country, UNIFEM identified a leading NGO concerned with WID issues, through research and/or grassroot action, to organise the National Summit. In Nepal and Bangladesh, the Summits were preceded by a series of smaller regional meetings which helped to identify the specific problems of those areas, and to select a group to participate in the National Summit. The women who came to the Summit were therefore representing their groups or regions, and felt both empowered and obliged to put across the views expressed by their colleagues. The umbrella nature of the two national NGOs in these countries - (WID, Women in Development in Nepal and ADAB, Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh) - facilitated this procedure; both combine several NGOs working in different parts of the country on a variety of development issues, requiring grassroot people's action. In Nepal, preliminary workshops were held in 13 districts in cooperation with several women's development
projects initiated by NGOs or by the government. Peasant women attending these workshops, as well as the representatives of the NGOs or government agencies working with them inevitably tended to focus their discussions on the problems they experienced in the particular projects they were involved with.
ADAB in Bangladesh conducted thirteen workshops through its local chapters, which include 65 NGOs working in 52 districts of the country. Most of these are involved in development activities at the grassroots, with a special focus on women's programmes. Each workshop had, on an average, twenty women 'beneficiaries' of the NGOs from whom eight were selected for the National Summit. Environmental issues were broadly defined beforehand, then discussed to identify the local nature of the problems in each workshop.
In India and Pakistan on the other hand, the organising was entrusted to two academic institutions, the Centre for Women's Development Studies in India and the Aurat Foundation for Information and Publication Services in Pakistan, known primarily for their research, advocacy and communication efforts on WID-related issues.
The Centre for Women's Development Studies, however, had also been involved in
action research for over a decade, organising peasant women for empowerment through employment generating activities. This experiment had forced the Centre, under pressure from the peasant women, to become increasingly more involved in some environmental policy research and had brought it into contact with several other environmental groups. It was therefore able to identify NGOs who had organised peasant women to participate in specific environment related pro