<section>e</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
ARDCs
Agriculture and Rural Development Centres
CANAMCO
Canadian-Namibian Cooperation
CBOs
Community-based Organisations
CCN
Council of Churches in Namibia
DWA
Department of Women Affairs
ECAs
Eastern Communal Areas
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FNDC
First National Development Corporation
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
ha
hectare
HFS
Household Food Security
ILO
International Labour Organization of the United Nations
LAC
Legal Assistance Centre
MAWRD
Ministry of Agriculture Water and Rural Development
MRLGH
Ministry of Regional and Local Government and Housing
NANAWO
Namibia National Women's Organisation
NAU
Namibia Agricultural Union
NDC
Namibia Development Corporation
NDT
Namibia Development Trust
NEPRU
Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit
NGO
Non-governmental Organisation
NISER
Namibia Institute for Social and Economic Research
NNFU
Namibia National Farmers Union
NPC
National Planning Commission
RISE
Rural People's Institute for Social Empowerment
SADF
South African Defense Force
SARDEP
Sustainable Animal and Range Development Programme
SCAs
Southern Communal Areas
SIDA
Swedish International Development Agency
SSD
Social Sciences Division
SWAPO
South West African People's Organisation
TCCF
Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland
UNAM
University of Namibia
UNCEDAW
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
YWCA
Young Women's Christian Association
<title>National sectoral report for Namibia - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for Namibia</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction: the national context
Farming systems
Demography and livelihood
Economic policies
Introduction: the national context
Since it gained independence in 1990, Namibia has made considerable strides towards improving the lives of its rural population. Provision of water, construction and upgrading of roads, and a revitalised health and education system have all been priorities of the national government. With the election of local and regional authorities in December 1992, many Namibians have local representation for the first time. However, in addition to service provisions, the nation faces the complex challenge of promoting viable economic development for rural people. A century of colonial practices of land dispossession, exploitation of labour, and underdevelopment has resulted in impoverished black rural areas. Both the German and South African colonizers created ethnically-based reserves and restricted movement into the settler zone in order to limit productivity of African farmers and to force rural men to provide cheap labour for mines, commercial farms, fishing enterprises and urban
businesses. The features of the labour reserve economy persist today. In some regions, the prevalence of outward migration has resulted in rural households consisting mainly of the elderly, women and young children.
Although many households rely heavily on remittances or wages of family members employed in urban areas, the responsibility for food production and preparation and the overall wellbeing of the household, continues to fall on women. The 1991 census reveals that women account for 59% of all those engaged in skilled and subsistence agricultural work. Indeed, rural females comprise the largest demographic group in Namibia (see Table 1). Yet, they remain disadvantaged by unequal access to land, labour, agricultural services and assets, natural resources and employment opportunities. Rural women are also underrepresented in decision-making and leadership positions.
Policies have yet to adequately take account of the multiple roles of Namibian women as farmers, food providers and income earners. Effective policy reforms are in part constrained by the dearth of gender-based statistics and qualitative research on gender roles and relations.^1 The United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995, provides a timely impetus to review and assess progress in integrating the problems of rural women in development policies and strategies. This report, commissioned by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, considers gender imbalances in the social and political systems and economic processes which underpin agricultural and rural development in Namibia. It further highlights activities and programmes of the government, non-governmental sector and the international community which aim to enhance the productive capacity and social welfare of rural women. The statistics and information presented in
the report have been drawn from previous studies, including socio-economic research and feasibility studies, as well as from interviews with representatives of government departments, non-governmental organisations, and international agencies which work with rural women.^2 Supporting data is compiled in the Appendix Tables. The author used feedback from a consultative workshop with regional and national NGO and extension staff to refine the analysis and to evaluate existing programs and future recommendations. The findings have been incorporated in The Namibia National Report for the Fourth World Conference on Women, which assesses the situation of women throughout the country.
Farming systems
Although sparsely populated, Namibia is home to over a dozen ethnic and language groupings, who exhibit diverse economic adaptations, socio-political structures and cultural traditions.^3 Ecological and historical factors have also shaped a range of rural settlement patterns and farming systems. The country is predominantly semi-arid, but immense variations in climate, soil and topography exist. Rainfall decreases from northeast to southwest with over 600 mm annually in Caprivi, to 200 mm in Mariental, and to as little as 15 mm along the Atlantic coast. Central Namibia consists of grass and scrub savanna plateaus, and is bounded on the west by the Namib desert. Cattle production predominates in this area, although the fertile soils and higher rainfall of the Otavi-Tsumeb-Grootfontein triangle support wheat and maize production.
Further south, vegetation becomes sparser, making the area better suited to goats and sheep. Many commercial farmers are successfully ranching game and karakul sheep, as even large farms (7,000 ha or more) do not ensure profitable cattle production. Livestock production is also the mainstay of inhabitants in the Northwest, which is characterised by desert and bush savanna. The former reserves of Damaraland and Kaokoland lie in this agro-ecological zone.
In the North, higher rainfall and seasonal rivers make crop production possible. Residents in the Owambo regions, which include bush savanna and the seasonal floodplain of the Cuvelai river, practice a mixed system of millet and sorghum production and livestock production, primarily cattle and donkeys. The Okavango region has a similar agro-pastoral system, although there is limited cultivation of maize. Forest products and inland fishing also contribute to local production. In the extensive floodplains of Caprivi, maize is the dominant crop, with cattle raising and fishing as important components. Game, birdlife and diverse flora are abundant in Western Caprivi and the grasslands just south along the Kalahari Desert. It is here that Namibia's indigenous populations, including the Ju/'hoansi, have now permanently settled.
Demography and livelihood
The country's surface area of 824,000 km^2 is home to only 1.4 million inhabitants, yielding a population density of 1.7 per km^2. However, this figure belies the immense regional variation in population density. Water availability is a major determinant of settlement patterns. Rural inhabitants are concentrated around the perennial rivers which form the country's Northern border, around seasonal rivers and floodplains, such as the Cuvelai system in the Owambo regions, and along human-made pipelines and water systems, such as the Eastern National Water Carrier which supplies residents in the otherwise dry areas in eastern and central Namibia. (Additional demographic information is provided in Tables 1-6.)
The racially-biased land policies have also skewed population distribution. Just over 4,000 farmers, primarily white, control 44% of agriculturally useable land. In contrast, 67% of the population currently reside in communal areas, comprising only 41% of agricultural land, not all of which is useable.^4 Although allocation of land within these areas remains communally-based, the regions themselves are largely colonial creations. In the North, the German and South African regimes approximated existing boundaries to confine people to the reserves. In the South and East, people were removed, by war or apartheid practices, to marginal areas.^5 These policies ensured that settlers owned the superior grazing land in the central areas. The subsequent shortage of land and labour created a dualistic agricultural system: black subsistence farming, in which women constitute the majority of producers and white commercial farming, in which black farmworkers provide the bulk of labour.
Seventy-nine percent of the total population is involved in agriculture. However, the migratory labour system is by now entrenched. There is growing urbanization as job seekers stream to the capital and other towns. Indeed, the growth of rural towns and centres, the fluidity of households with links to both environments and the system of food and cash transfers have blurred the line between urban and rural.
The availability of cash income has become the main determinant of household food security. In arid regions, such as Karas, Erongo, and Otjozondjupa regions, food security is directly related to purchasing power. Although sale of livestock is an important contributor to cash income, wage employment and pensions have become the mainstay of daily subsistence. Similarly, in other areas, households cobble together income from agricultural and nonagricultural sources in order to overcome food shortfalls due to low yields or to fill the gaps when off-farm income declines. For most households agriculture is a supplementary but essential source of income.
Pressure on the land and natural resources remains high and, ironically, this is exacerbated by the shortage of labour and assets in many households. Those who cannot afford to hire shepherds, for example, must graze stock in areas closer to the homesteads. Former systems of transhumance, which maximised grazing, have also been disrupted by the fencing off of communal areas by large-scale communal farmers. The growing work burden on women also prompts them to overutilise wood, water and other resources. Deforestation and erosion are prevalent throughout Namibia.
Economic policies
In the wake of concerns that commercial sectors would be nationalized, the new nation has instead implemented pragmatic policies to maintain private sector leadership in the economy, to encourage foreign investment and to avoid overreliance on international loans. Agriculture plays an important role in the national economy by generating revenue, by supplying food and products for domestic consumption and by providing employment. Commercial agriculture, primarily exports of beef and cattle, contributes approximately 10% of the GDP, thereby helping to diversify a national economy reliant on the country's declining mining sector. Namibia's economy is also closely linked to that of South Africa, which is Namibia's main import and export partner. Locally produced foods are often outpriced by imports from its larger neighbour. Nevertheless, an overarching economic strategy is the achievement of national food self-sufficiency as a first step towards reducing dependence on imports
from South Africa. Finally, commercial agriculture directly employs over 30,000 farmworkers, who in turn support families and households in the rural areas. An estimated 22% of economically active Namibians are unemployed, and despite poor wages and working conditions, the sector contributes to stemming the tide of unemployment.
The government is committed to redressing the inequities between the communal and commercial sectors. However, given the uncertain economic climate, it has acted with caution in its efforts to reform the commercial agriculture sector. "Affirmative action" policies in the form of subsidized agricultural support services may not be financially viable. The redistribution of land has met with resistance from commercial farmers while some economists fear it would hinder commercial agriculture and so jeopardize an important revenue base.^6
Programs for the communal sector are often designed on the basis of commercial farming models, and view productivity based solely on the production for market. Commercial farming systems are inappropriate for evaluating and improving agriculture in communal areas, where the value of agriculture and 'by products' such as draught power and milk, contributes to multi-stranded livelihood strategies. The limited reforms to date have mainly served elite farmers and further increased the growing disparities among communal farmers within and between regions and across the gender line.
<section>2</section>
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the Eighties
Agriculture: Pre independence
The mobilisation of women: Pre-independence
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the Eighties
Independence in 1990 provides an important benchmark for measuring change in Namibia. Although the 1985 Nairobi Conference increased awareness of gender issues in the liberation movement, consideration of the status of women took a back seat to the goal of national liberation and racial equity. At that time, race, not gender, was the variable for analysis. Despite their contribution to the struggle, rural women stood in the margins, both in official policy and in the public consciousness. To understand the historical context which affects women farmers at present, it is necessary to look separately at the situation of agriculture and the development of women's movements.
Agriculture: Pre independence
The apartheid policies and neglect of rural areas of the South African government impeded the social, political and economic development of communal farmers.^7 They were denied access to a range of institutions and resources which supported the commercial sector. In 1980, the government passed legislation to create separate, Second-Tier Authorities to administer each of the nine 'self-governing territories' which had been created out of the Odendaal Commission in 1964. Thus, separate agricultural support services, together with provision of health, education and rural water supply, were administered and financed for each separate ethnic group. Most farmers had little or no access to extension services outside of sales of fertilizers and seed. Differential resource allocation created great disparities not only by race but by ethnicity.^8 Women were the least served of all. In general, the least skilled and trained officers were assigned to the communal areas, and they
frequently worked on infrastructure projects, such as road construction.^9 Little research, if any, on communal crops and improved farming systems was undertaken. Marketing, inputs and access to credit services were all neglected.
In contrast, white farmers, under the Administration for Whites, enjoyed the benefits of a network of credit, marketing and supply institutions, designed to advance their interests and to subsidize the sector. AGRA, the supply and marketing cooperative, only operated centres in the commercial areas. In 1979, the Land and Agriculture Bank was formed to assist farmers in financing the purchase of land and inputs. By requiring farmers to have surveyed, freehold land as collateral, the Bank excluded communal farmers. The low interest rates served as a readily available subsidy for white farmers, and just prior to independence a 4% long term loan ensured that freehold land would remain in the hands of whites.^10
The Meat Board, Agronomic Board and Karakul Board regulated pricing and exports of meat, wheat, maize and other commercial crops and karakul pelts respectively. Until recently, millet, the main crop grown in the northern communal areas, was not in the purview of the Agronomic Board. Because the veterinary fence cuts off the densely-populated North -- and in the absence of quarantine facilities -- many communal farmers could not market cattle for export. Communal farmers, whose livestock often did meet the boards' standards, sold them through auctions run by AGRA and Meatco, or to independent buying agents, often at less than market prices. Namibian marketing boards remain closely allied to the Namibia Agricultural Union (NAU), the main body representing white farmers.
One institution which did work in the bantustans was the First National Development Corporation (FNDC), a parastatal set up in 1978.^11 Based on a vision of free market development in the reserves, the FNDC's strategy has been to channel government resources into commercial ventures in the communal areas. For example, the FNDC set up wholesale outlets to supply implements and offer short-term credit facilities. FNDC's operations, which enjoyed tax breaks and government loans, effectively precluded any competition, individual or cooperative.^12 Its agricultural projects, run primarily in the Okavango and Caprivi regions, have primarily been large mechanized and/or irrigated schemes oriented towards individual farmers with entrepreneurial potential. During the 1980s, the Corporation established farmer support programs, supplying technical assistance, inputs and credit, to farmers able to produce commercial crops such as cotton or livestock for market. Thus, the programs
targeted elite farmers and were of little benefit to women, who are engaged in small holder agriculture.
The creation of a black farming elite exacerbated the divisions -- ethnic, racial, and social -- which apartheid carved into rural communities. To weaken its opponents and further fragment rural communities, the government rewarded cooperative individuals and groups of potential supporters with subsidies and infrastructure projects. Resources were often channelled through traditional authorities, some of whom actively collaborated with the South African Defense Force (SADF) and ruling administrations.
At the same time, black farmers were inhibited from forming their own groups. The Cooperative Societies Act of 1964, currently being redrawn, imposed a complicated set of registration procedures and organizational requirements. These cumbersome restrictions precluded the establishment of small, grassroots cooperatives, seen as potential vehicles for political activity, and effectively limited the formation of cooperatives to large-scale agricultural and consumer cooperatives for whites. The absence of indigenous cooperatives helped to marginalise the participation of black groups in the mainstream economy.^13 Importantly, as Independence loomed closer, the FNDC and extension officers worked with more commercially-oriented farmers to establish farmers associations, such as the Likwama Farmers Union in Caprivi. Here again, the focus was on improved marketing, and women's participation was limited. However, these groups have become important models for emergent farmers
associations throughout the country.
The mobilisation of women: Pre-independence
Efforts to improve the status of women differed among exiles outside the country and the women and institutions that remained in Namibia. The demands of the liberation struggle forced men and women both to abandon a rigid division of labour. Women in exile often took on roles and authority not accessible to them within the country. Many fought in combat and trained military cadres.^14 Others took responsibility for running and managing camps, including setting up clinics and kindergartens. Many benefitted from improved access to education. A recent study found that female returnees were 5 times more likely to have Standard 10 levels or higher than stayers of both sexes. They also achieved higher education levels than men in exile. They gained exposure to countries with greater numbers of women in political and professional positions, and many returnees now challenge traditional gender roles and stereotypes. This has not been without high personal and social costs. The study
found that returnee women were considerably more affected by mental stress and other psychological strains caused by life in exile.^15
Although the experience in exile raised awareness of women's issues, the liberation movement did not highlight or press gender issues. Even after the formation of the SWAPO Women's Council, the liberation of women was subsumed under the struggle for national liberation. As one historian notes, "Women's mobilization for the struggle was regarded as strategically important, yet there was no idea that this might imply changes in gender relations or a transformation of the struggle itself."^16 Only as liberation became achievable did women begin to stress the equality of women as integral and part and parcel of independence. No doubt, participation in the Nairobi conference, where SWAPO participated in the government forum, also heightened the awareness of women in the movement.
Inside the country, the war irreconcilably altered the lives of rural women, particularly those in the North. Military recruitment by both sides tore families asunder. The eventual withdrawal of the South African army devastated some households, who had become reliant on the wages of soldiers. Women struggled to survive, as agriculture declined in the wake of crop destruction by the army, severe drought, and the loss of vast numbers of able-bodied young gone into exile or military service.
In the mid 1980s, community organizations began to emerge. Although spurred on by the fight against apartheid, churches and other institutions began to mobilise people around everyday concerns. Self-help groups promoting health, creches and better housing conditions began to crop up in the Windhoek townships and in the South, which was far removed from armed conflict. Some large companies undertook social responsibility programs, resulting in organizations such as the Rossing Foundation, which provided agricultural and skills training to black Namibians. Although these programs were identified with the status quo, their initiatives did enhance the access of Namibians, including women, to training.
Sensing the significance of this movement, the South African regime deployed a hearts and minds campaign, which drew on the emergence of community development schemes, to support development projects, such as clinics and schools in the former reserves and, in some areas, to provide highly subsidized agricultural services. The regime also promoted cultural organisations in an effort to foster ethnic divisions.
Ultimately, the arena of grassroots activity did not extend much beyond the efforts of churches and political party organizations; the base for community development work disappeared in a web of political tensions, suspicious motives, and identities along party lines that to a certain extent persist today.
It is important to note that within the country, calls for jobs, housing, and education were also couched in terms of race not gender. Gender issues took a back seat in efforts to raise the welfare of poor Namibians. A group formed in 1985, the Namibian Women's Voice, attempted to bring women together across party-political lines to promote awareness and action around gender issues. Under the weight of tensions within the organization and pressures from outside, the organization dissolved in 1989. White women, although enfranchised to vote, were largely absent from the liberation movement, and did not play the activist and advocacy role as many of their counterparts in South Africa. Even the election campaign, which sought to woo the female electorate, targeted urban women, stressing issues such as improved working conditions.^17 In sum, neither the exiled liberation struggle, nor the internal grassroots movements, gave priority to rural women per se.
<section>3</section>
Changes since independence
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making
Insufficient institutions and mechanisms to promote the advancement of rural women
Women's organisations
Government mechanisms
Rural institutions
Farmers associations and rural co-operatives
Churches
Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's rights
Current legal provisions
Measures to increase awareness
Poverty and the status of rural poor women
Female-headed households and other vulnerable groups
Household food security and sources of livelihood
Malnutrition
Division of labour and decision-making
Inequality in women's access to and participation in the definition of economic structures and the productive process itself
Land and assets
Shortage of labour
Ownership and access to livestock
Credit
Agricultural extension and inputs
Agricultural and rural development centres
Agricultural training and research
Technology
Forestry and natural resource management
Inequality in access to employment
Employment in agriculture
Formal sector employment
Informal sector and income generation activities
Changes since independence
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making
The prospects for women's participation in decision-making has increased considerably since independence, an important step toward ensuring that Namibian women, who comprise over half of the population, both contribute to and benefit from development. However, key leadership and policy-making positions within the government as well as in rural organisations remain the domain of men.
Prior to Independence, women were virtually excluded from participation in the ruling government structures. 18 Women are clearly more visible in leadership positions today, but the balance of power has changed little. Only 2 of the 18 ministerial posts are held by women. Women account for only 6 of the 72 members elected to the first house of parliament, the National Assembly. Although these women have used their positions to advocate for gender equity, their efforts may reinforce the lack of commitment of their male counterparts, who perceive gender concerns as women's issues to be handled by women. Efforts to promote gender equality in decision-making must therefore aim to increase the commitment of male leaders as well as to alter the balance of power between men and women.
For rural women, the election of representatives in local and regional government offers the prospect for increased access to power and decision making at the local level. Many have pinned high expectations on these representatives to work to improve conditions in the rural areas and to redress past inequities. Indeed, an exit poll of the election revealed that an average of two-thirds of voters were aware of their party or candidate's position on such issues as land policy, poverty, education and unemployment.^19
Residents in towns, municipalities and 'villages' (which are in essence, small rural towns) are represented by local authority councils. Importantly, with the active lobbying of the Minister of Regional, Local Government and Housing, one of the two women ministers, the government enacted an affirmative action provision for the first elections of local authorities. By stipulating that party lists must include a minimum number of women candidates, the provision ensured that almost 38% of candidates fielded were women. In some instances, lists with no women candidates were changed. while other lists were revised upwards of the required minimum. The provision did not, however, require that women nominees be given priority for filling seats which were won, and the final results showed a drop to 31.5% of seats filled by women. The provision clearly boosted the participation of women in the elections. However, it will not apply to future elections, which will be contested on the
basis of individual candidates rather than party lists.^20
Rural women in constituencies outside of small towns are represented through the 13 regional councils. Each council, in turn, elects two of its members to the National Council, the second house of Parliament. Although the councils do not undertake service provision, they have the mandate to undertake regional planning and development, and have responsibility for land use planning, economic development and natural resource management within the region. The National Council is intended to amplify the needs of rural constituencies onto the national level.
For these elections, no similar affirmative action provision was made and candidates contested the election as individuals. Moreover, parties attached more prestige and power to the regional councils. Interviews with party representatives revealed that many people made gender-based distinctions between the two elections. Respondents attributed political importance to serving on the regional councils. They saw local councils as involved in "non-political" issues such as social and community concerns -- more natural extensions of women's work.^21 As a result, women are extremely underrepresented in regional councils. Only 12 (6%) of the 195 candidates were women. The elections resulted in only 3 women regional councilors (3 %) of the 95 elected. Only one woman was elected to the 26 member National Council. Additional data on local and regional elections is provided in Tables 7 and 8 respectively.
In sum, following Independence, women continue to hold few policy-making positions at the ministerial level. They wield little authority over decision-making, including the development of sectoral policies. Table 9 shows the number of women in filled management positions -deputy director up to permanent secretary -- within the four Ministries most directly concerned with rural development.^22
Most noticeable is the lack of women in the management cadre of the Ministry of Agriculture itself. Constitutional provisions, together with administrative demands, meant that many Ministries retained employees of the colonial administration. The current composition of MAWRD in part reflects the legacy of the Ministry's almost exclusive focus on white, commercial agriculture.
The Ministry of Agriculture recently lost another senior woman, who became the Director of Agriculture at the restructured development parastatal, the Namibia Development Corporation. Her staff includes two departmental leaders and a six-person interdisciplinary consulting team which guides programme directions and design. The sole woman on the team is advising on horticulture.
The drafting of policy and legislation often evolves out of government-appointed committees assigned to explore complex legal and political issues. Here again, women 's participation has been limited. Two commissions of direct relevance to rural women farmers have included the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland, whose recommendations on the acquisition and reallocation of commercial farmland are expected to reach Parliament in late 1994; and the Commission of Inquiry into Traditional Leadership, whose investigation is expected to form the basis of a bill defining the role of traditional authorities in land allocation and customary law. The former boasted only one women of its nine members; the latter commission of 12 members did not include any women. After lobbying from concerned staff within the MAWRD, the National Task Force on Agricultural Policy added a woman to the six-man committee. Her involvement has prompted the Task Force, which is drafting a sectoral
White Paper, to give greater attention to the role of women farmers and to gender issues in agricultural planning.
Women also remain underrepresented in the leadership of institutions outside of government. In communal areas, traditional authorities hold responsibility for allocating land and adjudicating disputes. With the exception of a few female chiefs and "headmen", women have been and remain almost completely excluded from positions of authority under traditional systems. Only through family lines can women hope to influence the decisions of traditional authorities.^23
Although no statistics are available, discussions suggest that non-governmental organisations have made the most p