<title>My very own. Training manual micro-enterprise development for project officers and field workers</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
This Manual has been developed as a cooperative effort between FAO and China's WPD local project officers. In an attempt to develop a suitable and usable tool for training, the process of work went through three stages. The first stage was when FAO trained Core Facilitators in 1993. The output of this training was a draft Manual. Those trained used this draft Manual to train other project personnel in their respective provinces and counties. Based on the experience of Core Facilitators in the use of the first draft, FAO developed a second draft. This was used for refresher training of Core Facilitators as well as in "echo training" by these Core Facilitators for township project personnel. As a result of experience from these training activities, modifications were made and incorporated into this third and final version. This final version was then used to train project personnel from all 35 counties.
Since the training is heavily participative, this Manual in effect is the result of the modifications which the Core Facilitators and field workers have contributed as FAO finalized this version of the Manual. A note of thanks therefore goes to the Core Facilitators: Lan Xiu Hua, An Guo Dong, Bai Zhan QI, Zheng You Mei, Wu Qi Ji, Deng Yun Ping, Liang Yan Chao and Zhang Zhi Feng.
Special thanks also goes to five persons who besides the Core Facilitators and field workers drafted the original and the enhanced versions at various stages. Mr. Ramon Yedra, an FAO consultant assisted in the first and last stages of this work. Ms. Cora Bakker, United Nations Volunteer serving in FAO has been instrumental in the processing of the results of work at various stages; redrafting at various stages and the write-up of the final version of this Manual. Mr. Andrew Adzic of UNFPA helped in documenting the process and changes at the first workshop for Core Trainers. Mr. Fang Jia Wen translated the English versions to the Chinese language. Ms. Song Jing provided secretarial support.
<section>2</section>
A note on how to use this manual
A note on how to use this manual
I. Main Body of the Manual
The main body of the Manual is organized into Modules. For each of the 5 modules there are four major parts:
1. Rationale and Objectives
The description of the rationale and objectives of the Module are for the facilitator to have a clear focus on the major objectives of the Module, Topics and Activities. This will help the facilitator in preparing for the topics and to put the content in context.
2. Outline of the Workshop Sessions
This consists of the Steps and the major Pointers in facilitating the content of the topics and activities. Reference is made to the Visual Aids, Cases and Standard Tools to be used in the activity.
3. Visual Aids
The Visual Aids for the Module are put together at the end of the Outline. Facilitator should prepare these on newsprint before each session.
4. Cases
The Cases are for participants to practice what they have learned. Note that there are two parts in the Cases namely: task and outputs.
II. Standard Tools for Field Workers and Women's Groups
Manual standard tools for field workers and women's groups are to be found in the Annexes. These standard tools are the Field workers' essential tools when they assist members of women's groups. During the workshop, participants should therefore make sure that they have a good understanding of these tools and on how to use them. These standard tools are the following:
1. Work Sheets for Field Workers
These include work sheets for project viability assessment, cash record, income statement and the field workers' report of the monitoring visits.
2. Business Plan Forms
The Business Plan Forms are an important tool for field workers and group members for feasibility studies purposes.
3. Group Financial Records
This is a sample of the records women's groups need for their financial administration of their savings and loans operations.
4. Loan Application Forms and Agreements
These forms and agreements are samples to be used by project management, field workers and women's groups. They form a part of the required control system in the management of the project revolving funds.
III. Evaluation Forms
The Manual Evaluation Forms for each Module are found in the last section of the Manual. Facilitators are advised to have participants fill up these forms at the end of each Module.
IV. The Workbook
The workshop has been designed in such a way as to have few lectures but many opportunities for experience sharing, simulation and other exercises with the use of case studies and other output-oriented tasks. The workbook for participants contains all the cases, exercises and tools. Participants learn through "doing and thinking" rather than through "listening and reading". The Manual proper contains the "answers" and "important pointers" as guide for Facilitators. It is therefore important that participants are not "spoon-fed" with these "answers" and "important pointers". The Manual should therefore not be given to participants until after completion of the workshop. The workbook in the Chinese version is found in the last section of the Manual. The English version contains only a table of content of the workbook.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Introduction
A Perspective
Women's Groups play an important role within, the village economy through the micro-enterprises members engage in. Once women realize their own potentials, they are able to raise their own resources and develop the capacity to manage external resources as well. Through the Women, Population and Development Programme, rural women proved that they can manage loans from external sources, such as those provided through the project revolving fund. Women themselves are determined to address common weaknesses and constraints of their micro-enterprises. They are able to take risks and adopt innovative approaches in problem-solving. In certain instances, after two years of membership in Women's Groups, they were able to build up enough business skills and confidence to source their capital requirements from local banks.
But often times we hear remarks like "the poor will not be able to repay... they do not know how to manage their business.... they are used to hand outs... etc..."
Our experience in this Women Population and Development (WPD) Programme of China, does not validate the above remarks. On the contrary we have found that the poor can be accountable and actually repay their debts. They have good instincts about business and are realistic in gaging risks according to their estimate of their own capacity. They would rather determine and decide on resources they need rasher then outsiders determine this for them. They have a sense of pride in being able to achieve their own goals which they themselves determine.
Rural poor women engage in micro-enterprise activities which start as small household activities like vegetable gardening or raising a small number of small animals like pigs and chickens. Lack of cash for investment and the need to take care of their household tasks as well as the farm are among the major limiting factors why they are not able to expand their operation. When credit facilities are made available, they generally opt to either expand their existing micro-enterprise operation or engage in a new area of business.
As a component of the WPD programme, the development of women's own chosen micro-enterprise is an important component. Meeting subsistence needs is the most urgent preoccupation of the poor before they can entertain other options.
Engaging in micro-enterprise is not only improving the women's economic position, but it also provides the women an opportunity to improve their skills in business. "Small victories" against their reticence or lack of confidence serve as building blocks towards regaining control of their own lives.
When women realize their own strengths and potentials and when they realize that they need to operate as a group to consolidate their resources, the first risk they take is to mobilize their own resources. This risk comes in the form of savings mobilization in a disciplined process. As they lend out to one another what they have saved as a group, they are again taking a risk on one another. When women choose a micro-enterprise to engage in, they are deciding to take another risk. These decisions are the next building blocks toward regaining control of their own lives. The consequence of these decisions are solely theirs whether the result is success or failure. The development of their own policies and procedures, managing themselves as an organization, the operation of their savings and loan fund, the identification of the micro-enterprise, the planning, the management and control of their chosen micro-enterprise enhance their skills as well as their sense of confidence in
themselves. As a consequence, they achieve an increasing level of a sense of control over their own lives. In short, micro-enterprise development is Important for the empowerment process to occur.
Field workers need both the positive attitude and skills to assist groups in the various phases of development of the group and women's micro-enterprises. Field workers assist groups through training in group formation, development of their organizational policies and procedures, the operation of their savings and loan fund as well as in the process of tapping from the project revolving fund.
Women Population and Development Programme (WPD) Manuals
The Women Population and Development Programme has developed a series of Manuals. There is a separate Manual for Group Formation For Rural Women. This Manual addresses areas of value clarification and change; mechanics of organization; basic elements in the establishment of micro-enterprise, and action planning.
Micro-Enterprise Development Manual
The Manual on Micro-enterprise Development focuses more deeply on the requirements of micro-enterprise development; the use of the revolving fund and the group savings fund.
Project personnel et county and township levels need to provide three major types of assistance for Women's Groups, namely: (a) development of policies and procedures for savings and loan operations as well as the management of the group capital fund (sourced from the group savings and loan operations and their loan from the project revolving fund); (b) at the inception stage in assisting individual women in developing a feasible business plan; (c) follow through assistance during the women's micro-enterprise operation.
No previous education in micro-enterprise economics is required for participants in the training where this Manual will be used. Although primarily developed for training of county and township level personnel, with little modification the Manual can be used for training of women group members.
The training methodology used is highly participative, meaning that few lectures are utilized. Rather a problem-solving methodology is applied using case studies, exercises and group work. The Manual has five major content areas.
The first Module focuses on the role of micro-enterprise development as a mea . to achieve group goals, major among which is to improve women's status and self reliance. The following concepts are dealt with: the fundamentals of what a business is and the characteristics of micro-enterprise: the role of micro-enterprise in the WPD programme; elements which leads to success or failure of a business: the major weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs and finally identification of the major areas of needed project assistance.
The second Module deals with the required attitude, knowledge end skills for business planning. The tools, the basic information required and the financial indicators for preparation and assessment of business plans anti loan applications are discussed. What trainees would have learned are then applied. Trainees are given an opportunity to work with village women entrepreneurs to develop an actual Business Plan. It may be noted that part of the Field Workers' responsibility is to assess funding proposals from members of the women's groups.
The third Module deals with the needed attitude, knowledge and skills in performing the Field Worker's task of providing technical assistance during the operational phase of the women's micro-enterprise operations. This is what project implementors call the "follow thorough" phase. Emphasis has been placed on the preparation and interpretation of business records. since we have observed that there is an absence or poor quality of business records among micro-entrepreneurs.
The fourth Module deals with fund utilization and management both at project and women's group level. Although the Manual on Group Formation for Rural Women deals with the importance of savings mobilization and utilization for self reliance, this aspect is given further emphasis in this Module. The relationship between the savings fund and the project revolving fund is addressed; how these funds need to be managed and controlled; the preparation and processing of loan applications from the women's groups; how to monitor loan utilization; and the establishment and maintenance of the required record systems.
The fifth Module deals with a review of the Field Worker's tasks and the development of a training plan for "echo" training in their respective counties after returning to their respective duty stations.
<section>4</section>
Training orientation
Activity 1: Introduction of participants and facilitators
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Activity 3: Training design and schedule
Annex 1. Visual aids: T-1 Training design
Training orientation
Introduction
All Facilitators and participants in this workshop have been designated to serve in the Women Population and Development project in their respective counties and have the following tasks:
· assist women in setting up and running their micro-enterprises;
· assist women's groups in managing their savings and loan operations;
· assist women's groups in applying for loans funded from the project revolving fund;
· assess women's group applications for project loans;
· management of the project revolving fund.
The major objective of this training is to equip participants with the tools, knowledge, attitude and skills required to perform these tasks. Whereas some basic knowledge could be acquired through lectures, the workshop methodology primarily encourages experience sharing. The purpose of this use of methodology is not just for knowledge and skills acquisition but to provide participants the opportunity to acquire positive attitudes and values which they will need for their work with rural women.
The training orientation consists of three parts namely (a) introduction of participants; (b) expectation setting; (c) presentation of the training design and schedule.
Output Objectives
By the end of the training orientation, participants will have:
1. Learned each other's name and acquired some understanding of each person's background and specific skills applicable to workshop content areas.
2. Agreed on learning/training objectives, methodologies, content areas and schedule.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt tip pens.
Activity 1: Introduction of participants and facilitators
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator starts this session by explaining that Facilitators and participants in this workshop serve the WPD project and have shared tasks in assisting rural women, particularly through women's groups, with regard to the development of their micro-enterprises and their savings and loan operation. Participants may have varied educational background and working experience. Knowing each other's background will facilitate experience sharing and fruitful cooperation in this workshop, just as this sharing would when field workers conduct workshops among rural women. We therefore go through this exercise, not only for ourselves in this workshop, but that we would be doing the same when we assist women's groups.
2. Facilitator then asks each participant and co-facilitator to introduce themselves: name, where from, position in project and specifics on educational background and working experience with relevance to the workshop.
3. After the introductions, Facilitator thanks the participants for their cooperation.
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator writes the following two questions on the blackboard and asks participants to answer:
1.1. What do you want/need to learn in this workshop?
1.2. What other expectations do you have, e.g. regarding the Facilitator, the methodology, cooperation between Facilitator and group, logistics, etc.
2. Divide the participants into sub-groups of about 5 persons and give 10 minutes to discuss the questions and to write the answers on newsprint.
3. Each sub-group is asked to present its output.
4. Facilitator reviews participant learning objectives (output to Question I ) and informs participants whether their concerns will be covered in this training (some participant objectives may not necessarily be addressed in this workshop).
The general objectives of the training are for participants to have acquired the knowledge, skills and attitude on:
a. The role of micro-enterprise development as a means to improve the status of women;
b. The role of project officers in assisting women micro-entrepreneurs;
c. Micro-enterprise planning and assessment;
d. Micro-enterprise management;
e. Fund utilization and management (group and project level).
5. Step No. 4 is repeated for the other expectations (output to Question 2).
Activity 3: Training design and schedule
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. The Facilitator the Training Design on newsprint. Use Visual Aid Tel.
Visual Aid T-1 Training Design
2. Facilitator briefly explains the consent of each module, the output and the methodology. Since this is a skills training and all participants have at least some experience in the project and with micro-enterprise development there will be few lectures and many opportunities for experience sharing and practicing through exercises and case study analysis.
3. Facilitator asks participants for questions and comments.
4. Facilitator distributes the Workbook to each participant She explains to the participants that this contains the exercises and cases as well as the tools and forms which will be needed in this workshop. Participants will be guided by the Facilitator in the use of this Workbook as the workshop progresses.
Annex 1. Visual aids: T-1 Training design
Visual Aid Training Design
MODULE 1
MODULE 2
MODULE 3
MODULE 4
MODULE 5
Concept Building and Role Identification
Micro-Enterprise Planning and Assessment
Micro-Enterprise Management
Fund Utilization and Management
Action Planning and Evaluation
Topics
Topic 1 Concept of Micro-Enterprise
Topic 1 Financial Indicators
Topic 1: Management areas, skills, And tools
Topic 1: Fund Utilization and Management in Women's Group
Topic: Action Planning
· Defining Business
· Defining Micro-Enterprise
· Role ME in WPD Project
· Introduction to Business Planning
· Net Cash Income
· Net Profit
· Risk Analysis
· Cash Flow
· Introduction to ME Management
· Introduction to Financial Records
· Preparation and Reading of Financial Records
· Importance of Savings Mobilization and Utilization
· Group Financial Records
· Monitoring of Group Savings and Loans Operations
· Role Delineation
· Training Plan
Topic 2 Causes of Success or Failure of a ME
Topic 2 Business Plan Preparation and Assessment
Topic 2 Systematic Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
Topic 2 Project Revolving Fund Management
Topic 2 Evaluation
· Business Cycle and Aspects
· Factors affecting the Success of a Business
· Key Elements of a Business Plan
· Introduction of Tools for Business Planning
· Practicum Business Planning
· Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
· Options for the Entrepreneur
· Policies and Procedures of Revolving Fund
· Planning Disbursements of Loans to Women's Groups
· Preparation and Procedures of Loan Applications
· Evaluation
Topic 3 Role Identifications in ME Development
· Common Weaknesses and Constraints of ME
· Role of Project Officers in assisting ME
Methology
Workshop, Cases, Lecturette
Cases, Exercises, Workshop
Exercises, Cases, Workshop, Lecturette
Cases, Lecturettes, Workshop
Workshop
Outputs
Clear concept of ME, its role in project, areas of needed assistance by project officers.
Able to prepare, explain and assess
Business Plans
Able to effectively monitor ME and advise micro-entrepreneur
Understanding role of funds and elements in fund management
Defined follow through action training evaluated
Time Frame
1 day
1 day
1 day
1 day
½ day
<section>5</section>
Module 1: Concept building and role identification
Topic 1: Concept of micro-enterprise
Activity 1: Defining business
Activity: 2: Defining micro-enterprise
Activity 3: The role of micro-enterprise development in the WPD project
Topic 2: Causes of success or failure of a micro-enterprise
Activity 1 : Business cycle and aspects
Activity 2 : Case study analysis
Topic 3: Role Identification in micro-enterprise development
Activity 1: Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Activity 2: Role of project officers in assisting micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-1 Characteristics of micro-enterprise
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-2 Roots, indications and consequences of women's low status
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-3 The business cycle
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-4 Factors affecting the success or failure of business
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-5 Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-6 Type of project assistance for micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Case: 1-1 Lin's cabbage garden
Annex 2. Case: 1-2 Xie Feng Yun's tea processing project
Annex 2. Case: 1-3 Pai Lou grocery shop
Annex 2. Case: 1-4 Ms. Yuan Wang Ti's tobacco production project
Module 1: Concept building and role identification
INTRODUCTION
Module 1 addresses important basic concepts about micro-enterprises, micro-enterprise development, the place of micro-enterprise development within the broader development framework of the Women, Population end Development Project, end the role of project officers in micro-enterprise development.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of Module I, participants will be able:
1. To understand the role of micro-enterprise development within the broader context of the objectives of the WPD project.
2. To identify the characteristics of micro-enterprises and the types of enterprises.
3. To identify the causes of success/failure of micro-enterprises.
4. To identify the common weaknesses and constrains of micro-entrepreneurs.
5. To identify the proper roles of their project office in micro-enterprise development.
Topic 1: Concept of micro-enterprise
Background and Rationale
The Women, Population and Development (WPD) project aims at improving the status of women through income generating activities and social development activities. Income generating activities therefore are not an end in itself, but a means to achieve the overall goal of improved status of women. This implies that the project supports those income generating activities which contribute most to improving women's status, namely micro-enterprises.
For participants to be able to provide effective guidance for women and women's groups in identification, development and maintenance of micro-enterprises a clear understanding is needed of what a micro-enterprise is, and what the role of micro-enterprise development is in the context of the WPD project.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Define what a business is and distinguish the different types of business;
2. Analyze the characteristics of a micro-enterprise;
3. Analyze the importance of micro-enterprise development in achieving the broader development goal of improving the status of women.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt tip pens
Activity 1: Defining business
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. The facilitator asks the participants to give examples of businesses and poses the question "what is a business?"
2. The facilitator writes the examples provided by the participants on newsprint and asks "What is it that makes each of these a business?".
3. The facilitator will respond to the answers of the participants and gradually arrive at a definition by discussion, accepting or rejecting components of their definition.
4. The facilitator then asks the group to name the 4 different types of business. The examples on newsprint are categorized and the main characteristics of each type of business are discussed.
Important Points
· A business is "any venture which involves production of goods and/or services to obtain profit".
· The four types of business in rural areas are:
a. Production: producing goods for selling, e.g. tobacco growing, sheep raising
b. Processing/manufacturing: converting raw materials into finished product, e.g. processing wheat into flower
c. Trading: buying and selling of the same product(s), e.g. grocery shop, market stall
d. Services: main line of business is providing a service e.g. barber shop, transportation.
Activity: 2: Defining micro-enterprise
Time : 45 minutes
Steps :
1. Facilitator asks participants to break into sub-groups of about 5 persons to list at least 5 characteristics of a micro-enterprise
2. Groups have 20 minutes to discuss and write up responses on newsprint before presenting the findings to the whole group.
3. Facilitator discusses group outputs and explains which characteristics are correct.
Visual Aid 1-1 Characteristics of Micro Enterprise
4. Facilitator summarizes the session by presenting Visual Aid 1-1 and emphasizes the important points below.
Important Points
· Although capital requirements of a micro-enterprise may be low, to the poor it is high. Therefore, the risk of undertaking micro-enterprise is not low. For the poor it is very hard to recover from failure of the micro-enterprise.
· The main differences between micro-enterprises and other enterprises (such as township enterprises) are:
- level of capitalization
- number of people involved
- ownership: for micro-enterprises the owner is likewise the manager and worker
Activity 3: The role of micro-enterprise development in the WPD project
Time: 1.5 hours
Steps:
1. Facilitator asks the question "What is the goal of the WPD project" and participants are invited to answer.
2. Facilitator states the title of the project: "improving the Socio-economic Status of Women through Income generating and Social Development Activities". This implies that women's engagement in income generating activities is not the final goal of the project, but a means to achieve the broader project goal of improving the status of women.
3. Facilitator explains that project loans for women's groups is intended to enable women to start or to expand their own micro-enterprises. For our work as project officers it is important that we understand why we focus on micro-enterprises and not on other enterprises such as village and township enterprises.
4. Facilitator asks sub-groups to discuss what the root causes of women's low status are ( 10 minutes) and to present the findings on newsprint.
5. After discussing the group outputs, Facilitator puts Visual Aid 1-2 (Roots, Indications and Consequences of Women's low Status) on the wall next to Visual Aid 1-1 (Characteristics of Micro-enterprise) and asks participants to discuss the following Questions for 15 minutes:
"How does engaging in micro-enterprise by women contribute to improving their status? Which root causes for low status are addressed and how?"
6. Each sub-group reports the findings and the facilitator summarizes, using the important points below.
Important Points
· Traditional thinking and culture of dependence are two root causes of low status of women. Major characteristics of a micro-enterprise are that it is self-initiated and self-managed. By encouraging women to engage in micro-enterprise, we encourage initiative, risk taking, making their own decisions and earn their own income. Because all these undertakings are done through their own initiatives, women have a more direct opportunity to experience more independent thinking, they gain more self confidence and self reliance. They are able to participate in socio-economic activities in their communities.
· Limited technical, literacy and business skills are other major reasons for low status of women. Micro-enterprises undertaking requires relatively simple technology and management. When they engage in micro-enterprise women can gradually improve their skills.
· Women have a high burden and sometimes many children. Micro-enterprises usually are household based and women can choose an enterprise which they can combine with their other chores. When women engage in business their desire for more children usually diminishes. A value change occurs whereby women would rather provide better education, nutrition, etc. to fewer children than having many children.
· Employment in other enterprises (e.g. township enterprises) would not contribute as much to improving women's status, because women would be employees rather than managers. Except for technical skills and earning their own income, women are not provided the opportunity to exercise initiatives and are not generally personally accountable for the over-all success of the business. As a consequence, they are not able to experience the personal changes which have been enumerated above.
7. Facilitator then asks sub-groups to discuss why forming women's groups as a self: reliance strategy are important for the women entrepreneurs.
8. Sub-groups discuss for 10 minutes and report. Facilitator summarizes the outputs. using the important points below.
Important Points
· Lack of funds is an obstacle for women to develop micro-enterprises. As a group, women can mobilize resources through savings from which members can borrow for micro-enterprise development. Project loans to the group augment their own funds.
· Group members can study together and share experiences, e.g. on technical and financial matters, market information, etc. Through these group activities member's skills improve faster and to a higher extent.
· As a group, micro-entrepreneurs can be more organized and can use group strength in addressing constraints. For example, the group can arrange training, can buy inputs or run facilities together, can negotiate with buyers, mobilize support from village leaders, etc.
Topic 2: Causes of success or failure of a micro-enterprise
Background and Rationale
In general, the poor cannot take unnecessary risks. Their resources and condition are such that they do not have enough to be able to incur losses. If their venture fails, they lose more than their material resources. It erodes their self-confidence. Furthermore, the poor have some kind of distrust of external assistance. When they fail in projects with external assistance, this could reinforces their lack of confidence in external agents. The field worker therefore has a great obligation that sufficient safeguards are provided so that success and not failure results in women's micro-enterprise undertaking.
This topic gives the participants an opportunity to examine the factors contributing to success or failure of a micro-enterprise.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the stages in micro-enterprise development
2. Analyze case studies of typical micro-enterprises and identify the critical aspects of micro-enterprises
3. Distinguish external and internal factors affecting the success of a business
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt, tip pens
Activity 1 : Business cycle and aspects
Time: 60 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that the resources and conditions of the women who participate in the WPD project are such that they do not have enough to be able to incur losses. If their venture fails, they lose more than their material resources. It erodes their self-confidence and they will even be more dependent on others than before. The field worker therefore has to make sure that sufficient safeguards are provided so that success and not failure results. Providing capital funds alone is not enough. To be able to provide adequate assistance we need to have a thorough understanding of the factors