<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This document contains guidelines for aquaculture planners on the type of information they need to ensure that gender issues are taken note of in aquaculture planning. How to obtain this information is also indicated.
Draft guidelines on the subject were prepared by ALCOM in 1992 on the basis of a review of available materials and documented experiences, mainly in Eastern and Southern Africa. These guidelines were reviewed and refined at a workshop held in Zimbabwe in January 1993, which was attended by specialists from the SADC region, ALCOM staff and consultants. The guidelines contained in this book represent the consensus of participants at the workshop.
The guidelines may be found useful in the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region, and elsewhere, for sectoral planning, project formulation, evaluation and monitoring concerning gender issues in aquaculture. Comments and feedback are invited.
The document has been made possible by collaboration between ALCOM and a project funded by Japan: "Enhancement of the role of women in inland fisheries and aquaculture development" (GCP/RAF/273/JPN).
ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme) is a regional aquaculture and fisheries programme of the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, it coven; the member countries of SADC -- Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
ALCOM is funded by Sweden and Belgium. Its preparatory phase began in October 1986, and its first implementation phase in October 1990.
ALCOM Address:
Mail: P O Box 3730, Harare, Zimbabwe Telex: 260 40 FAO ZW Tel.: 263-4-724985 Fax: 263-4-736847 E-mail: ALCOM@mango.apc.org
<title>Meeting information needs on gender issues in aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Abstract
What kind of information do aquaculture planners need to ensure that gender issues are taken care of in their planning? How can such information be collected? This document contains guidelines concerning both questions. The guidelines cover four areas: information needed for sector planning and project formulation at the macro-level; information required at the micro-level (which will be helpful for development interventions in local communities); monitoring and evaluation; and incorporation of gender issues in socioeconomic data collection.
These guidelines are contained in four chapters. A more comprehensive set of information needs is found in tabular form in the two Appendices. These detail sources and methods of collecting the needed information, and the uses to which this information can be put.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Draft guidelines on information needs concerning gender issues were discussed and elaborated upon by participants at a regional meeting of experts held in Zimbabwe during 19-22 January 1993. Besides the authors, the following people attended the meeting:
Mr Arne Andreasson, Programme Director, ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Hope Chigodu, Vice Chairperson, Zimbabwe Women's Resources Centre, Harare, Zimbabwe; Mr Steve Donda, Fisheries Economist, Salima, Malawi; Ms Elin Ersdal, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Elizabeth Harrison, Research Fellow Anthropology, University of Sussex, U.K; Ms Tilleke Kiewied, Advisor Gender Planning Section, Mansa, Zambia; Mr Kees Leendertse, Fisheries Planning Analyst (APO), FAO, Rome, Italy; Ms Rita O. J. Maly, Aquaculturist, Kunduchi Fisheries Institute, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Burton A. S. Mwamoto, Fsheries-economist (Local Consultant), FAO, Bukoba, Tanzania; Mr Saidi Swedi Mwikongi, Programme Officer, TFNC, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Henrik Nilsson, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Synve Fosse Opsahl, Nutritionist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Erika Seki, Consultant, Socio-economist, FAO, Rome, Italy; Mr Uwe Tietze, Fisheries Industry Officer, FAO,
Rome, Italy.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
Discussion of gender issues and aquaculture has led to little change in sectoral planning on the subject or in the formulation of projects or strategies to tackle the issues. This is mainly because little information is available on gender issues; further, planners are not certain where or how to obtain such information. The guidelines given in this report address these needs; they discuss the information which is required and the methods to acquire it in order to incorporate gender issues into mainstream aquaculture development planning and project formulation. Though based primarily on experiences in Eastern and Southern Africa, they are intended for wider application in Africa.
The guidelines are meant for use by aquaculture planners. As gender is a cross-disciplinary issue, these guidelines encompass many general aspects of aquaculture development. For those already involved in the sector, many of the issues raised may seem obvious. The purpose of the guidelines is therefore to present these issues from a gender perspective and ensure that information or data collected does not ignore these important considerations. They therefore assume that the user has a basic understanding of the aquaculture sector.
The main text of the guidelines is divided into the following four sections:
(1) Information required at the macro-level. This section identifies and details key questions on gender issues which should be answered during sectoral planning and project formulation (macro-level).
(2) Information required at the micro-level. This section identifies and elaborates on key questions which should be answered for development interventions in specific areas or communities.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation.
(4) Suggestions for incorporating gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
The main text focuses on key information needs related to gender in aquaculture. Users should consider selecting those issues which are most relevant to their needs. More detailed lists of all the information required and how this information can be collected and used in planning and project formulation are given in Appendices 1 and 2.
The guidelines arc structured in such a way as to introduce the user to key issues concerning gender in aquaculture for those less familiar with such issues. Having read these chapters, the user should then proceed to Appendices 1 and 2, where a more comprehensive set of information needs, how such information is used and sources/methods to collect it, are given.
For those familiar with gender issues, the user can proceed directly to Appendices 1 and 2 and only refer to the main text, if a particular topic requires some clarification.
Broadly speaking, macro-level guidelines are intended for sectoral planners and as a first step in project formulation. Micro-level guidelines are intended for project formulation, monitoring and evaluation. However, users should refer to both levels when carrying out a specific task, because many issues manifest themselves at both levels.
Users interested in setting up monitoring and evaluation systems may read Chapter 5 and then refer to the matrices presented in Appendices I and 2 for ideas on useful indicators.
The guidelines assume that users have some basic training in the application of socio-economic methodologies. Users interested in the application of such methodologies to collect gender-specific information are referred to Chapter 5. This presents general information on how to overcome problems associated with official statistics and field work and how to aggregate information once it has been collected.
<section>4</section>
2. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Development policies and programmes/projects for aquaculture on gender issues
Institutional^1 capacities
Sectoral characteristics
Demographic characteristics
Health and nutrition characteristics
Legal status of women
Credit availability
Extension services structure and training
Biological and technical research
2. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Although the need for socio-economic information on aquaculture planning and project formulation has gained recognition in the recent past, these data have not been included in conventional information collection systems in the fisheries and aquaculture administration of many countries. Neither has there been much consideration for developing operational and systematic approaches or strategies to consider gender concerns. For integration of gender issues into aquaculture planning, the starting point is better awareness of gender issues. Such awareness has to come through data.
This section highlights key issues which provide an entry point for planners in analyzing and incorporating gender-related socio-economic issues at the macro-level, including information for sectoral planning and project formulation.
There are several actions that a government department or a project could undertake to address gender issues. The areas of action vary from the structure of their own organization, their policies and working methods, to staff training. The effects of actions which do not take gender aspects into account as well as recommendations for courses of action to remedy this situation are discussed in more detail below.
Development policies and programmes/projects for aquaculture on gender issues
Key questions: What are the existing national/donor policies and objectives in support of gender issues in aquaculture? What strategies and programmes in support of gender issues have been undertaken? What are their achievements and constraints which need to be addressed?
Knowing existing government and donor policies and objectives on aquaculture and on gender issues is the first step in sectoral planning. This provides the basis for future development interventions. Past activities and current programmes in support of gender issues should be reviewed to establish the actions taken to meet national and donor objectives and the level of commitment to meeting these objectives.
Another area of consideration is budgetary allocation to gender issues by the national government and by donors. Special budget allocations for gender issues show a general commitment to implement policies. However, one must be aware that money allocated to gender issues does not necessarily represent actual activities implemented at the practical level on gender issues, unless specified.
Institutional^1 capacities
^1 Institutions include governments, research, training and educational institutions, universities and NGOs.
Key questions: What gender expertise is available within institutions? Which institutions are suitable for cooperation/collaboration on gender issues? Do the relevant institutions require assistance in gender skills?
Gender awareness, and competency in gender analysis in existing institutions, provide the starting point for the development and implementation of gender-sensitive programmes. In some countries, activities related to gender issues are administered by other ministries (Ministry of Women Affairs, Ministry of Community Development and Social Welfare etc.) with which aquaculture staff rarely have contact. Consequently, aquaculture officers often have limited access to general socio-economic information and gender-specific information in particular; moreover, when available they find it difficult to incorporate this information in sector and project planning.
One approach is to identify and collaborate with relevant institutions competent in collation, collection and analysis of gender-related information during sector planning and project formulation and for monitoring and evaluation. Where competency in gender analysis is weak or non-existent, another approach would be to strengthen skills in gender analysis by training.
Sectoral characteristics
Key questions: What are the roles of men and women in fish farming? How do the resource requirements of the different culture systems affect men and women ? Which fish species are kept in ponds ?
Few women own fish ponds. This does not mean that they arc not involved in fish production. The majority of women assist men in pond construction, feeding and fertilizing, as well as harvesting. Two main factors appear to have contributed to this situation:
- The choice of the technology and intensity of production. Past experiences have shown that more intensive fish culture systems are not within the reach of many small-scale farmers, especially women. Access to resources differ for men and women, and some of the biggest constraints women face are time and labour. A different kind of technical package may allow greater adoption by women farmers than is possible now.
- The planners' perception of women and their roles has led to the introduction of aquaculture as a male activity. Consequently, extension services have ignored women's work in aquaculture.
Regarding the choice of fish species to raise in ponds, different people may use different criteria to decide. For example, whether it is a fast growing and easily marketable species, whether the fish has scales or not, how many bones it has as this can be dangerous for small children. Moreover, women's choice may be governed by the many taboos during pregnancy and the lactation period.
Aquaculture planning should be done in close collaboration with other users of the land and water resources so as to avoid conflicts. Women are often the users affected. For example, before the adoption of fish farming (especially in the case of cage culture), women may have used those water resources, for drawing drinking water, washing dishes, for laundry, or for soaking cassava. Moreover, the water level in wells may have gone down through aquaculture development. As a result, women will have to look for other sources of water.
Demographic characteristics
Key questions: How does population growth and density affect resources and its users? How do demographic characteristics affect male and female labour availability in aquaculture? What is the dependency ratio for rural and urban areas?
Population growth and density will affect pressure on existing resources and the distribution of limited resources amongst existing and potential users.
In addition, population movements into and out of an area change household composition and the type of households in the area. For example, an increase in the number of female-headed households may mean this group needs special development intervention. The occurrence of female-headed households might also affect gender relationships in decision making and division of labour. However, care should be taken in assuming that female-headed households are a homogeneous group and are all resource-poor.
For aquaculture, the proportion between economically active household members and dependents as well as the ratio between adult men and women in different areas, are important indicators of the availability of labour for pond construction.
Health and nutrition characteristics
Key questions: Which areas have a relatively low nutritional and health status? What are the main problems? Who is affected? Will fish help improve the nutritional status of an area?
Improving the nutritional well-being of the population is often an important objective of aquaculture development. If the nutritional status of the rural population is generally low, and particularly if there is a shortage of animal protein, an increase in fish supply for local consumption should be considered. Women should be involved in the planning and implementation of projects aimed at improvement of health and nutritional status since they are usually primarily responsible for the nutritional welfare of the family.
Anthropometric measurements such as weight for height and weight for age are general indicators of the symptoms of malnutrition. These require to be analyzed in combination with other related socioeconomic indicators, in order to identify the causes of malnutrition. The gender-disaggregated measurement can be used, whenever available, to identify the relative well-being of men and women. During pregnancy and lactation, women need to eat well. In fish eating areas where the birth weight is low and infant mortality rate is increasing or higher than in other areas, special attention may be needed to augment fish consumption by women. Toward this end, special investigations will be required which clarify the types of fish preferred and allowed to be eaten by women and the intra-household distribution of fish.
Legal status of women
Key questions: Can men and women own and/or inherit productive resources? Register land? Obtain water rights?
Inheritance law and property ownership rights have gender implications. For example, if women lose their fish pond upon the death of their husband because they cannot own property, they may not be encouraged to invest time and/or money in these developments.
Specific laws relating to aquaculture do not exist in most African countries. However, there are laws regarding the ownership and inheritance of land, a prerequisite for fish farming. Land laws register land titles almost exclusively in favour of men. Where women do not have secure access to or control over land, development of commercial aquaculture will have different impacts on men and women. The lack of title deeds also limits access to credit for commercial aquaculture.
However, few farmers apply for land title deeds. It is mainly commercial farmers or farmers in resettlement schemes who do. In rural areas, customary laws that determine access to land, still prevail (see also micro level).
Credit availability
Key questions: Do men and women enjoy equal de facto access to institutional credit? Are credit programmes and lending procedures suitable for both men and women? Are there sources of credit which are more suited to either men or women? How can banks and other financial institutions be assisted to cater better to credit requirements of men and women?
Experiences in field projects show the potential for integrating a specific credit package for women into the banks' lending policies. For example, women entrepreneurs in Kigoma, Tanzania, who received credit for fish processing activities demonstrated a high economic return on their activities. The scheme was successful because lending policies and repayment schedules were tailored to women's seasonal work schedules and earning capacities. Credit facilities were combined with the production of seedlings for planting of trees, training on energy-saving processing techniques and other community development activities.
For aquaculture, the design of credit packages is usually based on intensive systems integrated with animal husbandry. When evaluating the feasibility of these systems, the different needs and constraints of men and women should be taken into account. Chances are high that different packages need to be designed for men and women fish farmers to suit their different situation.
There are also a number of other inhibiting factors which prevent women from obtaining credit such as low literacy levels, lack of collateral, and lack of guarantee of a regular salary. As a result, although conditions may be equal for both men and women, women find it more difficult to meet these conditions.
Extension services structure and training
Key questions: What are the number of persons working in the extension service, by position and by sex? Is the extension staff competent and motivated to integrate gender issues into extension work ? Are they developing and implementing extension methodologies which are gender sensitive ? Are there barriers to the entry of women in vocational training and higher education? Do the curricula of training institutions incorporate gender issues?
There are few female extension personnel at any level in most extension services. It is male personnel who are the decision makers who are able to affect programmes and policies. The few female extensionists that do exist (3% in Africa) are usually found in the junior ranks because of their lower educational level.
Education is not the only constraint to incorporating women in the extension service. It has been difficult to motivate women to take up field jobs because they might conflict with household duties.
One remedial approach is to utilize more women trainers in on-going training programmes. They can serve as an example and attract other women to the extension service. At the same time, the ongoing training programmes should be evaluated to determine their accessibility to women (e.g. whether there are structures which cater for both men and women, child care facilities, etc).
Once appointed, women should be given equal opportunities as men to carry out extension and to go on study tours, thus receiving informal on-the-job training. If female extension agents are marginalized, they will become less professionally competent than their male colleagues so that it becomes increasingly difficult for them to contribute to the extension service, and a vicious circle will operate.
Since there are usually few vacancies within extension services, the recruitment of additional female field workers is not always possible. Nor is it a guarantee that gender issues will be considered. Therefore, another and perhaps more practical approach is to utilize existing male extension agents as much as possible. Although conventional belief is that women prefer advice from female extension agents, experience in agriculture and aquaculture extension has shown that the sex of the extension agent is not necessarily a critical issue in reaching women. Good communication skills and sound technical knowledge are more important.
The training of fisheries officers and extension agents mainly concentrates on technical and biological aspects. Therefore, extension agents should be trained in extension methods which can effectively reach men and women.
Biological and technical research
Key questions: How relevant is existing research and development (R & D) to the needs of men and women involved in aquaculture? How do men and women benefit from the research results? Are there disadvantages? If so, who are affected?
The choice of culture systems and fish species for research, does have gender implications. Access to the resources required for the technology determines who can benefit from the research. On the other hand, men and women may prefer different fish species for pond culture. The choice regarding the species to use for research thus indirectly affects men and women. Consequently, if research is to benefit both men and women, it should focus on culture systems which are within the reach of women and on species which are of interest to women as well.
<section>5</section>
3. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: the micro level
Aquaculture
Household structures
Location of fish ponds
Key factors affecting access to resources and control over them
Household availability and allocation of resources
Access to and quality of extension services
Division of labour and time allocation
Household decision-making
Economics of fish farming
3. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: the micro level
At the micro-level, the aquaculture sector can be arranged into community and household levels. When formulating plans and/or projects for specific areas, information is needed for both levels. The key issues regarding gender which need to be taken into account at this stage, are examined in the following sections.
There are many factors at the community level which influence men's and women's activities and their access to and control over resources: the general economic conditions, the nature of government bureaucracies, socio-cultural factors, familial norms and religious beliefs, legal parameters, training and education. Most factors will not be amenable to change by a project. Therefore, an assessment should be made on whether and how these factors will affect or can be affected by a project.
Generally speaking, activities should focus on the community as a whole, with equal importance accorded to addressing the differing needs of men and women. Special women's projects should be the exception rather than the rule, in order to avoid the isolation and marginalisation of women. It is equally important to tackle the weaknesses in gender-sensitivity within existing institutions and services. Only in cases where a high degree of sexual segregation and separation of productive roles exists or there is a clear case of positive discrimination in a local community, will such components be necessary.
A community is made up of different types of households. However, a "household" is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with a production and consumption function, i.e. with shared and equal access to resources for production and benefits from it. In many cases, individual household members may have different production priorities.
The relative bargaining power of the two sexes within the household will influence the allocation of productive resources as much as purely economic considerations do.
Aquaculture
It is necessary to study all the main actors in aquaculture and understand the extent of interrelationships between men and women with regard to labour, income and transfers in kind (fish, clothing, etc.). As a result, different aquaculture systems can be identified, not only on the basis of the intensity of the aquaculture system, but also on the extent to which men and/or women are involved in aquaculture.
- Dual aquaculture system; Both husband and wife are fish farmers but they have separate ponds. This situation often occurs in pert-urban areas, where the husband has a full-time occupation other than farming. He contributes some labour himself and hires labour (especially for pond construction) if needed. The wife usually feeds, fertilizes and manages his ponds. In exchange for her contribution, she is often given another pond over which she has complete control. The pond yield is hers.
- Male aquaculture system; Fish ponds are controlled by the husband but the wife provides a significant amount of labour.
- Female aquaculture system; This situation occurs in female-headed households where ponds are taken over by widows, or in case men have migrated and have relegated fish farming to their wives. There are also exceptional cases of divorced, single, or married women who have started fish farming on their own.
Projects should thus address the contribution of different actors in fish farming and their remuneration. Neglect of this "rule" may obscure the fact that what is in the best interests of the household may not be in the best interests of its members. The unpaid family labour of women or of younger members may increase the income, status and living standards of the household, but it may not be rewarded with an equitable share of the benefits. In this case, women often react by minimizing their input into aquaculture. This can affect the project or sector negatively.
Household structures
Key questions: What types of household structures are there in the community 7 What percentage do they make up of the total number of households? Are all household types equally reached with the information on aquaculture?
Demographic information at the household level is an indicator of differences between households on needs, resources and constraints on production. The appropriateness of an aquaculture system will depend partly on the composition of the household and their labour availability. Generally speaking, large households constitute a pool of labour. Female-headed households (about one third of all households in Southern Africa) are usually smaller and thus face a bigger labour constraint. However, it is important to know the type of household they head. For example, husbands may have migrated and may be sending remittances home regularly. On the other hand, there are widowed or divorced women who do not receive any material support. Female-headed households are often sub-divided into three categories:
- de lure female headed household where the head is either unmarried, divorced or widowed;
- de facto female headed household, because of male migration;
- periodically female headed household which may be one of several units attached to an adult male through polygamous marriage, or households where male migration is seasonal.
Female-headed households should thus not be grouped together, as they may have different needs and constraints.
By introducing new employment and income opportunities, aquaculture may reduce migration and thus affect the composition of the household.
Location of fish ponds
Key questions: Where are the suitable sites for ponds in relation to the village? And the sites of men's and women's major activities (e.g. agriculture, herding and watering of cattle, collection of firewood, fetching drinking water) ? Considering the location of other activities, who would find it easier to adopt fish farming -- men or women?
The location of suitable sites for fish ponds is physically constrained by the need for water resources adjacent to suitable land. Villages as residential areas are often separated from farm land and fish ponds. The distance between the village and the ponds, as well as between the fields of both men and women and the ponds, determines the time required to visit the ponds. If ponds are located at a distance from all the other major activities of a household, and thus special trips are required to visit them, women will be disadvantaged -- as time is a bigger constraint for them than for men.
When the extension service is oriented mainly toward men, they are the early adopters; women may have to be content with less suitable sites. Moreover, they may experience more theft in their ponds because they are further away from the village.
Key factors affecting access to resources and control over them
Key questions: How is access to resources (land, water, labour, inputs) and control over them regulated? What needs and opportunities exist for increasing women's access to resources? Hove men and women been consulted in identifying such needs and opportunities? Can an aquaculture project affect women's access to resources/and control over them?
Besides factors at the macro-level which affect access to and control over resources (like institutional structures, legal parameters, training and education, etc.) there are also community-level factors. Class stratification is characterized by a hierarchical distribution of social power, income and productive resources, while kinship systems are mainly concerned with resource allocation and its use - which lead to gender differences in access to productive resources.
Often, planners are concerned about the incompatibility of matriliny and male development because of their insecurity of tenure associated with it. In matrilineal systems the couple often settles in the wife's village upon marriage. The husband thus gains access to land and water required for aquaculture in his wife's village. The dissolution of the marriage means that the man loses such access as well as the activities he has developed. Therefore, it was often believed that this type of residence, which is related to the matrilineal system, inhibits aquaculture development.
Although matrilineal systems are now an exception, they have received more interest than the more common patrilineal systems. Moreover, evidence shows that the large majority of men manipulate the matrilineal system once aquaculture proves its benefits. The question is thus whether women can, to the same extent as men, find ways around the patrilineal system and gain access to the necessary resources and reduce the insecurity of tenure which is inherent in the patrilineal system.
Women's ability to gain access to resources within a community and within rural households depends not only on the kinship system or the class to which they belong, but also on their marital status, motherhood and age.
During project design, class or kinship systems which bar women's access to productive resources in the project area must be identified. The project should find ways to deal with these barriers, either bypassing them or by modifying project expectations.
Household availability and allocation of resources
Key questions: Does aquaculture development induce 