<title>Women groups leadership development and management training Bhusunde Khola watershed (13-28 April 1995) - Nepal</title>
<section>1</section>
0. Summary
0. Summary
During the course of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development 32 User Groups, including 8 Women Groups, have been formed to date. The Women Groups differ from the general user groups in several respects: they consist of women only; most of them were formed spontaneously; and they are usually focused on income generation and welfare, whereas the general user groups were often formed to implement and manage infrastructures.
The women groups in the project area (Bhusunde Khola watershed) have certain recurrent weaknesses. such as: vague group constitutions, with very broad and unattainable objectives; lack of awareness of the objectives of their self-set group constitution, or of their rights and responsibilities within the groups; and insufficient managerial and organizational skills to secure a long-lived fruitful existence of the groups.
From the point of view of watershed management, women are very important as users and managers of natural resources. Women are therefore a major target group in the participatory approach to integrated watershed management, and need to be supported by specific training in both managerial and technical skills (income generating activities).
The objectives of the Leadership Development and Management Training were: to teach local women a process of local leadership and management techniques, as a result of which they will be able to develop realistic group constitutions. effective meetings, record keeping systems, and so on; to motivate existing women groups: and to develop lesson modules for leadership development and management training that are adapted to the local field situation and can be replicated.
Lesson plans were developed based on the FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book, a practical guide to building rural self-help groups", topics included: features of a successful participatory user group; basic principles of group formation; how to make a group constitution; participatory leadership; what is a record keeping system; roles and responsibilities of a management committee; income generating; inter-group association; and participatory monitoring and evaluation. These lesson plans serve mainly as a backbone, while most depends on the actual oral presentation by the trainers.
Three local resource persons were identified and provided with a trainers training of two days during which the lesson modules and their presentation were extensively discussed, modified and finalized.
A total 59 women of 8 women groups (all members of management committees) were trained in two day sessions in their own villages during the period of 13-28 April 1995. The training sessions were often conducted in the evenings, women being too busy during the day to attend. The costs involved in the training were about NRs 15,000 (US$ 300), or about NRs 250 (US$ 5) per trainee.
The training was overall very well appreciated by the participants. Its impact on the beneficiaries, was evaluated by 91 % of the women as good or excellent; 40% of the participants found the time allocated for the training too shoe, and only 5 % found it too long.
The leadership development and management training should be seen as an initial training to improve the process of women group formation and performance. It is recommended to systematically conduct such training in all existing and newly formed user groups.
It is recommended to monitor the performance of the trained women groups through regular visits of the project motivators; and to organize follow-up with training courses in specific management and technical skills.
Any organization or project working through people's participation and using the concept of (user) group formation is recommended to use the FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book, a practical guide to building rural self-help groups" as an important resource in design and implementation of their programs.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
1.2. Objectives of the training
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
During the course of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (the project) 32 User Groups, including 8 Women Groups, have been formed to date. Most of these user groups have been actively involved in the participatory planning and implementation of activities coordinated by the project.
The Women Groups differ from the general user groups in several respects:
1. They (obviously) consist of women only, whereas general user groups are often dominated by men.
2. Most of the women groups were formed spontaneously, while the general user
groups were often induced by the project.
3. The women groups are usually focused on income generation and welfare where the general user groups were often formed to implement and manage infrastructures.
Women are relatively disadvantaged: they do not inherit paternal property or rights to land and property, they have less access to services, they often are less well educated, lack confidence, and so on. By organizing themselves in women groups, they hope to improve their situation.
While visiting and reviewing women groups in the project area (Bhusunde Khola watershed), the National Consultant Sociologist (the consultant) became aware of certain recurrent weaknesses of these groups, in particular:
a. Vague group constitutions, with very broad and unattainable objectives. It seemed that all women group constitutions were similar and copied from each other.
b. Many women were not aware of the objectives of their self-set group constitution, or of their rights and responsibilities within the groups, some were even ignorant that they actually were members of a group.
c. Insufficient managerial and organizational skills to secure a long-lived fruitful existence of the groups.
From the point of view of watershed management, women are very important as users and managers of natural resources. Women are therefore a major target group in the participatory approach to integrated watershed management. Women groups will play an increasingly important role in conservation and development activities in the project area (as elsewhere in Nepal), but this process needs to be supported by specific training in troth managerial and technical skills (income generating activities).
Thus the project decided to initiate a series of training courses to development group leadership and management skills.
1.2. Objectives of the training
The objectives of the Leadership Development and Management Training were:
1. To teach local women a process of local leadership and management techniques, as a result of which they will be able to develop realistic group constitutions, effective meetings, record keeping systems, and so on. This in turn will improve their ability to identify and initiate appropriate income generating and other activities.
2. To motivate existing women groups, and to generate enough interest. so that they will be better able to function independently, and get more involved in the participatory conservation and development activities of their own resources and environment.
3. To develop lesson modules for leadership development and management training that are adapted to the local field situation and can be replicated for training of other user groups as well, to build their capacity to organize and manage their own activities with little or without outsiders assistance.
<section>3</section>
2. Results and conclusions
2.1. Methods and design
2.2. Training courses
2.3. Evaluation
2.4. Conclusions
2. Results and conclusions
2.1. Methods and design
Lesson plans were developed by the consultant, based on the FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book, a practical guide to building rural self-help groups" (see text box). Certain modifications were made, for instance concerning the legal status in Nepal of user groups, whereby "women groups" will be registered as "women user groups".
FAO 1994: THE GROUP PROMOTOR'S RESOURCE BOOK
A practical guide to building rural self-help groups
The group promoter (or GP) is a key figure in rural development. He or she has three important tasks: to help the rural poor to form small, autonomous groups, to help group members develop their skills, and to facilitate between groups and development services.
This resource book is designed to Guide GPs in all phases of group development. It provides a step-by-step approach to identifying the poor in rural communities, forming groups, linking them in associations and building group income generating activities.
It includes detailed suggestions for strengthening democracy within groups and for planning group enterprises.
The following topics were selected as lesson plans to conduct the training (see also annex A):
1. Features of a successful participatory user group.
2. Basic principles of group formation.
3. How to establish a group, what is needed for a group.
4. What is a constitution, how to make a group constitution.
5. What is leadership, what is participatory leadership.
6. Dealing with individuals.
7. What is a record keeping system.
8. The roles and responsibilities of a management committee.
9. Income generating activities
10. Promoting inter-group association.
11. Participatory monitoring and evaluation.
12. A last lesson module concerns some personal questions and a closing session.
The training courses consisted of 12 lesson plans divided into two days sessions. In itself these lesson plans seem rather meager, they serve mainly as a backbone, while most depends on the actual oral presentation by the trainers.
2.2. Training courses
Trainer's training
Three resource persons were identified as potential trainers (the projects two motivators, and a chairwomen of one of the women groups, see annex B) and provided with a trainers training by the consultant during two days in Chorkate Base Camp. During this trainers training the lesson modules and their presentation were extensively discussed. modified and finalized.
Women group training sessions
A total of 8 women groups were trained in two day sessions in their own villages during the period of 13-28 April 1995 (see table 1). A total of 59 women were trained. all members of their group's management committee (see annex B).
The training sessions were often conducted in the evenings, women being too busy during the day to attend. Despite their heavy workload and resulting tiredness in the evenings, women were very motivated to participate in the training.
The costs involved in the training, including trainers salary, snacks during the training session, and stationary, but excluding cost of the consultant, were about NRs 15,000 (US$ 300), or about NRs 250 (US$ 5) per trainee.
Table 1. Women Group Leadership and Management Training courses organized in the Bhusunde Khola watershed in April 1995.
Place
Date of
Number of
Name of the group
VDC
Ward No.
training
Participts.
Laxmi Narayan Women Group
Harmi
Indreni Women Group
Chhoprak
Arunodaya Women Group
Chhoprak
Maheli Chetana Women Gr.
Chhoprak
Pragati Women Group
Chhoprak
Janajagriti Women Group
Ampipal
Janajoyti Women Group
Ampipal
Prabhat Women Group
Khoplang
2.3. Evaluation
The training courses were evaluated by the participating women, the results of which are presented in table 2.
The training courses were highly appreciated, especially with regards to its impact on the beneficiaries, which 91% of the women classify as good or excellent. It is interesting to note that 40% of the participants found the time allocated for the training too short, and only 5% found it too long.
While conducting the training sessions, it became clear that in some cases very able women with obvious leadership capacities could not formally be nominated as chairperson of their women group, because their husband would not allow them to do so.
Table 2. Evaluation of the Women Group Leadership and Management Training by the participants.
Women Group
Lax. N W.G. Har. 6
Indr. W.G. Chh. 2
Arun. W.G. Chh. 2
Mah. C. W.G. Chh. 8
Prag. W.G. Chh. 7
Ja. gr. W.G. Amp. 6
Ja. jo. W.G. Amp. 7
Prab. W.G. Kho. 1
Total
No.
Rating
Effectiveness of training
Excel.
Good
Fair
Poor
Rating
Effectiveness of trainer
Excel.
Good
Fair
Poor
Rating
Effectiveness of lesson
Excel.
Good
Fair
Poor
Rating
Impact on users (beneficiaries)
Excel.
Good
Fair
Poor
Rating
Time allocation for training
Short
OK
Long
V. L
2.4. Conclusions
The leadership development and management training of 59 management committee members of the eight existing women groups in the Bhusunde Khola watershed was overall very well appreciated by the participants.
The training fulfilled a great need to improve the process of women group formation and performance. However, the training courses were also quite short, and should be seen as an initial training, requiring follow up:
1. Regular follow-up visits by the project motivators in order to monitor the group performance, and assist in particular needs, or to bring such needs to the attention of project management.
2. Follow-up training courses in general and specific management skills (e.g.
book-keeping), as well as in specific (to be identified) technical skills.
A limiting factor in any training course, and indeed any activity to be undertaken by the women groups, is the time constraint, due to the heavy workload of the women. Training courses should be conducted as close to the residences of the attending women as possible.
The training also improved the motivation of the participating women to continue with their women groups, and to become more active and effective (as indicated by the 91% rating of good to excellent impact of the training on the beneficiaries in the evaluation).
The FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book, a practical guide to building rural self-help groups", proved to be a very useful basis for the design of this training course, although some minor modifications were needed to adapt the contents to the local situation.
The 12 lesson plans development by the project can be used for similar training courses of women groups as well as other user groups in the project area and elsewhere in Nepal. However, it should be noted that the selection and training of trainers is of critical importance to the success of such training activities.
<section>4</section>
3. Recommendations
3. Recommendations
The leadership development and management training should be seen as an initial training to improve the process of women group formation and performance. It is recommended to systematically conduct leadership development and management training in all existing and newly formed user groups.
It is recommended to monitor the performance of the trained women groups through regular visits of the project motivators.
It is recommended to organize follow-up with training courses in specific management and technical skills (to be identified).
It is recommended to organize any training course targeted at women as close to their residence as possible. Training courses should also be organized in such a way that they can be combined with the heavy workload of women, e.g. not too much in one day, and preferably evening sessions.
Any organization or project working through people's participation and using the concept of (user) group formation is recommended to use the FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book, a practical guide to building rural self-help groups" as an important resource in design and implementation of their programs.
<section>5</section>
Annex A: Lesson modules
Annex A: Lesson modules
The following lesson modules were developed on the basis of the FAO publication "The Group Promotor's Resource Book" and adapted to the local situation in the Bhusunde Khola watershed by the project consultant.
A. 1. LESSON - 1
Features of a Successful Participatory Users group
1. The user group members should have common interest, desire, goals and objectives.
2. Members should be honest, dedicated and hard working to achieve their objectives.
3. The user group should organize regular meetings and every member should participate in the meetings.
4. The user group should have its constitution and members should write the constitution and must be flexible to achieve objectives.
5. The members should constitute an executive body. The executive body must consist of very able chairperson, secretary and treasurer.
6. The members should regularly discuss their activities and decide to act upon fund raising and record keeping and share benefits among beneficiaries.
7. The user group should clarify its goals and objectives and this must be written in black and white. The goals can only be met if objectives are achieved e.g. the objectives are the stepping of the house and the goal is the room where we aim to reach.
8. The objectives should be clear, simple, observable and quantifiable.
9. The objectives should be realistic otherwise it will be limited to paper only.
10. The user group must be democratic and all members must be allowed to discuss, opine, comment and present logic. All members should have like mindedness.
11. There should not be any discrimination on castes, big and small, rich and poor literate and illiterate. The members should always try to learn and teach each other.
which will ultimately lead to attainment of objectives.
A.2. LESSON - 2
Basic Principles in Group Formation:
1. An ideal group should have at least 8-10 member and maximum up to 15-20 members because small groups will have the chance to speak and to contribute their energy and ideas to take the right decision. If the group is big there will be little chance to express ideas and arguments and the elite member will have better chance to dominate others. There will be time constraints for open discussion if the group is big.
2. There should be social equality in groups. If not, there will not be openness. Cooperation and mutual trust.
3. Every group should have income generating goals. There will be a spirit of independence and self-reliance if income is generated.
4. Membership should be voluntary and democratic. The member should decide who can lead them as a chairperson, vice chairperson, secretary and treasurer. The outsiders should not interfere in the election or nomination process. Decision should be taken by consensus or by majority vote. The decisions should be written in the minute book. The minutes should be written either by the secretary or by the joint secretary. The accounts on saving and other incomes and expenditure should he maintained by the treasurer or the joint treasurer.
5. The secretary and treasurer are responsible to maintain office administration and accounting management respectively. They should inform group members in the meeting by reading loudly the statements of administration and accounts.
A.3. LESSON - 3
How to establish a group?
1. After formation of a group the name of the group should be chosen to match with its local values (social/cultural/religious).
2. After establishing a group, the dates and place of next meeting should be fixed as far as possible.
3. The agenda for discussion should be selected prior to discussion in a group meeting.
What is needed for a group?
4. The group should have a dedicated leadership with other committed members in the management.
5. The group should have compulsory savings. The savings develop the feeling of ownership which leads to community spirit.
6. The group should have its own constitution with its own objectives. A constitution is a written agreement among group members which helps to avoid internal conflicts, differences and obstacles. The constitution makes the responsibilities of each member
clear.
7. The group should maintain accounts, decisions and activity lists in record. Records help the group remembers what has been decided and what expenditures were incurred in the past. Record helps in monitoring and evaluation.
A.4. LESSON - 4
Constitution
A constitution is a written agreement which provides guidelines for members to become active, disciplined and effective. The rules and regulations are meant for the betterment of the group but must always be flexible. The set of rules is called constitution.
How to make a group constitution
A constitution is developed by the group with the advice and counsel of its members. It should be made step by step, if members can't make it at one time.
Members are guided by the rules of constitution
The members should follow the rules of constitution. The group should not copy the constitution of other organizations. The members can't express their needs and can't voice their choice if it is copied from others. The constitution must be developed in accordance with their choice and demand.
Constitution can be changed and amended
The constitution is a set of rules that are necessary to guide and discipline members. It is a package of rules to set out what is expected from them and what they can except from the group. If the constitution creates conflicts, the members can ease it by amending or changing the rules of the constitution.
What is written in a constitution
The constitution provisions rules and responsibilities of all members. It should also mention financial rules. The constitution points out rules to minimize conflicts and issues that may arise in the separation of a group. The members can add or change items. if needed, to improve efficiency of the constitution.
A.5. LESSON - 5
Leadership
What is leadership?
Leadership is that quality of a person that can influence the attitude and action of one or more persons, leading towards achievement of some purpose or goal. This happens through various ways. For example: imparting knowledge, giving advice or suggestion. expressing a belief or opinion, making decision on behalf of groups providing assistance exercising power. lending approval or support.
Leadership involves overseeing and monitoring the group's activities. These tasks are carried out by a few people who are recognized and accepted by all members.
How to find local leadership?
Some people are natural leaders. Others have skills that remain hidden because they never had the opportunity to display or develop them, but these skills can be enhanced through training. Local leadership usually has the following qualities:
a. Active, energetic and good at motivating others.
b. Respectful.
c. Brave, honest and patient.
d. Able to work with others.
e. Able to communicate with others.
f. Able to keep group secrets.
The above qualities will help a group to run smoothly, to grow strong and to achieve its goals.
What is participatory leadership?
Participatory leadership does not believe in dictatorship. Participatory leadership allows every member to have equal opportunity to grow and become leaders. Participatory leaders encourage all members to be fully involved in group affairs by keeping them informed, by delegating tasks and having open discussions.
Types of leadership
1. Organizational leadership: this refers to the official positions in organization, the duties of the chairperson, secretary. treasurer. Leadership can be made more effective by providing appropriate training.
2. Subject leadership: this leadership is a person's particular skills and knowledge that he or she has to offer to the community (example, a singer or musician who leads the whole orchestra team and chorus singers).
3. Action leadership: this refers to the implementation of a given activity, project or group action, for getting some specific goal accomplished (example, the blacksmith/cobblers have specific action leadership to work as masons etc.).
4. Opinion leadership this refers to the judgement that one exercises about given subjects. Sometimes the assistants obey the opinion of their boss, because his opinion is always unquestionable.
5. Legitimation leadership: this refers to the approval given by relevant power structure in relation to given specific proposals (.e.g. leader of marwadi, leaders of blacksmith, Tharu etc.).
6. Initiating leadership: the beginning of ideas, some people in the community may come up with proposal for new programs, policies or solution to particular problems. The idea could be fruitful or negative.
7. Decision leadership: decision making is self-explanatory. Decision making is crucial process some one has to make. The decision leadership seeks to get support from group members for initiating activities.
8. Advisory/counsellor leadership: advisory leadership is the assistance provided for the group to suggest and advice. This is an indirect leadership. Some groups nominate such leadership to have certain knowledge interest.
A.6. LESSON - 6
Leadership must be ready to deal with the following individuals
Leader have to satisfy individual needs irrelevant to the purpose and goals of the group, and they have to deal with the following individuals in the communities.
1. Aggressor: the aggressor is that type of person of the community who always expresses disapproval of values, acts and feelings of others if his ideas are not accepted by the group.
2. Blocker: the blocker usually disagrees with every proposal of the group. Blockers also have a negative attitude towards development.
3. Recognition seeker: the recognition seeker is that person who always tries to call attention to himself. He always expresses about his past experience and bravery hut pays no attention to the group needs.
4. Self-confessors: self-confessors are those who express their personal feelings and do not pay attention of others feeling.
5. Play boy: the play boys make display of their lack of involvement in the group decision. They pose that they have nothing to do with group dynamics and group proposals.
6. Dominator: the dominators always try to disturb the group dynamics and put pressure on groups to do according to their opinion. They try to assert authority.
7. Special interest pleader: the special interest pleader tries to gain popularity by putting proposals of some interest groups. He tries to clock his prejudices in pleas for special groups.
A.7. LESSON - 7
What is a record keeping systems
Record keeping is the maintenance of information concerning the group, for future reference, such as: information about the group organization in minutes, activities, income and expenditure. Records include minute book. cash receipt, cash book and debit/credit book etc.
What are the advantages of record keeping
It is difficult to remember what happened before and what activities are planned for the future if records are not maintained. Records provide information and data to monitor progress and help to check expenditure and incomes. The records provide information on what decisions were made before and what was planned accordingly. The cash receipts help in maintaining incomes from different sources. The cash book helps in understanding the income and expenditure of cash items.
What can be seen in a record:
Records are like a mirror which provides all information about group activities. It shows us all decision, activities implemented and expenditure made so far.
Who is responsible for record keeping
Records are kept by secretary and treasurer for administrative and financial works respectively. The joint secretary keeps administrative records in the absence of the treasurer.
The secretary keeps record of decisions of the minutes, receipts, and despatch of administrative works, whereas the treasurer maintains income and expenditure records and keeps balance money in either bank or office.
Who reviews the records
The management committee should review records frequently. The chairperson should make announcement of each activities, expenditure, income and also objectives achieved so far by the user group.
A.8 LESSON - 8
The roles and responsibilities of a management committee
Roles and responsibilities of a chairperson
1. To chair meetings.
2. To review sessions on specific issues
3. To run meetings and create a disciplined and democratic atmosphere in the session.
4. To encourage participatory discussion and decision making and work.
5. To organize meeting as per constitution and review activities.
6. To asses the roles and responsibilities of management committee members and provide feedback.
7. To review the progress on achievement towards objectives and check accounts.
8. To delegate responsibilities to management committee members.
9. To help the management committee to plan activities and implement them.
10. To maintain harmony, co-ordination and co-operation in the group.
11. To represent the group in meeting, seminar, tour and workshop.
Roles and responsibilities of a Vice-chairperson
1. To chair meetings in the absence of the chairperson.
2. To advice the chairperson and assist in executing works.
3. To work as per the advice and guidelines of the chairperson.
Roles and responsibilities of a Secretary
1. To write the agenda and minutes.
2. To keep a record of attendance at meetings and get signatures of attendants.
3. To maintain all group records.
4. To read aloud the minutes of meetings.
5. To deal with letters to and from the groups.
6. To inform group members about the ongoing and future plan through the chairperson.
Roles and responsibilities of a Joint Secretary
1. To write agenda and minutes in the absence of the secretary.
2. To keep records of attendance in the absence of the secretary.
3. To work as secretary in his absence.
4. To set up rules as directed by the management committee.
Roles and responsibilities of a Treasurer
1. To keep financial records of the group.
2. To safeguard and manage the money, maintain accounts and make expenditures in accordance with the decisions of the management committee.
3. To maintain cash book and receipt of purchases, sales and received money.
4. To take care of the money kept by the group and outside agencies in the presence of members.
5. To manage the use of group funds.
6. To act as per the decision of the management committee.
Roles and responsibilities of a Joint Treasurer
1. To represent as treasurer in his absence.
2. To act as per the management committee decisions.
Roles and responsibilities of other Management Committee Members
1. To attend meetings regularly.
2. To advice the management committee and give opinion and provide comments.
3. To elect executive members according to the constitution.
4. To deposit funds on time.
5. To follow the decisions of the management committee.
6. To inform other beneficiaries about the decisions of the group.
A.9. LESSON - 9
Income generating activities
No group can become self-reliant, independent and self-confident without increased income and savings. Self-help groups are best organized around income generating activities. Before choosing a group activity, members should discuss in depth and work out together what they expect from income generating activities.
As with a successful and sustainable group, successful income generation requires a numbers of key building blocks. The following buildings blocks should be noted by the groups members and they should carry out analyses before starting income generating activity:
Step 1.
Whether the chosen activity is feasible or not: it is crucial to analyze that the activity chosen by the group is feasible or not. The group activity must be able to produce a product that people want to buy. The market place of the buyers and the quality of product cost are to be assessed.
Step 2.
The product is profitable or not: the activity must produce more income than it costs. The costs include labour, transportation and skilled inputs involved in the production. If the costs involve more than the income it does not earn profit. The profit must be more than the costs.
Step 3.
The activity should be well-planned: the group must work out with the members whether the activity should be well-planned or not. The market depth should be assessed before doing any income generating activity. It should be well thought out how to expand market.
Step 4.
Marketing: the group should know the market and marketability of products. The group must strive to satisfy its customers. The group should identify the status of customers and their preference on quality. The group must discuss on customers and market.
Step 5.
Savings: savings provide the resources to start and expand the group activities. Without saving, there is a danger that may create dependency instead of self-reliance. The group's own resources should always be the primary source of funds.
Loans
It will be difficult t