<title>Vanuatu - Technical Report: An assessment of the role of women in fisheries in Vanuatu</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Summary
1. Summary
Vanuatu women provide for their families from dawn to dusk, in all weathers. Rural women engage in agriculture and sometimes fishing, household and community activities and rear children; their working hours far exceed those of men. Most of production from their hard work is used to feed the family and maintain it; so where markets are available surplus is sold. This enterprise also contributes to the economic activities of the country. Women produce much of the food and they are the major resource base in agricultural production.
Fisheries has a low accent in Vanuatu, but it is receiving more attention as the population grows and the economy attempts to keep up with the population's demands. Women and men who rarely go to the sea to harvest for subsistence may simply lack knowledge of the value of fish protein to their family's nutrition. As knowledge expands and education increases people's expectations however, there will be increasing pressure on inshore resources coupled with an increase in opportunities for women to sell their harvest. While the government, NGOs and other organisations should support those women who want to sell fish, the Fisheries Department will have to establish and maintain a fine balance between encouraging fisheries exploitation and discouraging over-exploitation. This it can do by establishing and supervising the ground rules for sustainable fishing practices and developing, promoting and supporting new and improved ways of handling the harvest. Women having little time
to go fishing will be tempted to engage in unsustainable fishing practices to harvest rapidly; and. unless firm measures are maintained, inshore fish resources will be severely impacted as the national population increases.
Across the board, women are increasing their involvement in business, per se. Of those who already engage in economic activities to support their families most of those interviewed admitted that they could spend more time on those activities. As their children grow up and the raising of school fees becomes important' they will almost certainly do so.
Support for women's increasing involvement in fishing activities should come firstly from offering relevant training. The nation cannot develop to its potential if it continues to only offer women training in domestic activities; and if it continues in that way, it does a disservice to women's capabilities. Other important government and non-government assistance can come from access to appropriate credit lines and credit levels. making available information on new fishing techniques and resources. improving domestic marketing systems and facilities, supporting the development of more cooperative activity within communities and between organisations, and by developing a national appreciation of women s fishing' as being worthwhile and distinct.
Where yield from offshore fishing appears unable to meet expectations the government is looking at inshore fisheries resources to contribute to sustaining the national economy. Inshore areas are the domain of the women fishers. Women should always be consulted in the preparation of plans for inshore fisheries. Through being consulted people offer support, and their knowledge contributes to wise utilisation and management.
The recommendations in this report are made to increase awareness of the contribution that women's fishing activities make to the national economy and the nation's well-being, to promote the increased involvement of Vanuatu women in national fisheries development activities, and to enhance income-earning opportunities for women based on and around fisheries.
Practical suggestions offered in this report are not in themselves new; yet their application in Vanuatu and the necessarily different approach to national fisheries development required appear not to have been considered before. Undertakings such as grow-out fish farming, value-adding, maintenance of quality, wise resource management and marketing can utilise the skills and situation of women as part of communities.
<section>2</section>
2. Introduction
2.1 General
2.2 Status of women
2.3 Legal status of women
2.4 Population
2.5 Government services
2.6 Health
2.7 Schooling
2.8 Fishing
2. Introduction
2.1 General
This report is about fishing and Ni-Vanuatu women as part of communities. Whereas several reports have been written about Ni-Vanuatu women (the most, recent being Charlotte Bowie's 1995^1 assessment of needs of Vanuatu's rural women: Voice blong of woman) there is little information about women in relation to fishing.
In the two months allowed, the consultant attempted to investigate the national role and needs of women in fisheries matter and to gather as much information as possible from and about women fishers in the six Vanuatu provinces. The information contained in report, although it is of necessity limited, will assist decision makers within the national government, non-government organisations and other aid organisations, to accommodate the needs of communities in fisheries development plans and policies in the country.
Whilst attempting to avoid making this report another in the series about women, it is important that an outline is given of women's position in Vanuatu society - as witnessed, verbalised by nationals and written about. This outline will provide background to the fisheries issues central to this report.
2.2 Status of women
Gender bias favouring men is widespread in Vanuatu^1 as illustrated by the higher number of boys in school, less females in training initiatives, less employment opportunities for girls, the lack of female participation in local and national government and lower participation in high level policy decisions and planning^2. However, because of the sexual division of labour, there is little or no time left for women to participate in community and government decision making, nor attend training and development sessions is widespread in Vanuatu.^1,2
Vanuatu women are the bearers of children, are responsible for all aspects of childcare, agriculture, food preparation, firewood and water collection, household duties, and are expected to contribute to household income-generating projects and church activities. Reports stress over and over that, outside of caring for children, preparing meals, carrying firewood and water (all of which add up to a considerable time and work load), the woman's role is to spend most of her day working in the garden. Walking to and from the garden may take several hours. Often the gardens are a long way from their home, sometimes more than two hours' walk, one way.
These basic societal tasks are not valued in monetary terms. Bowie (1995^1 : 59) considered that in Vanuatu, women's family labour is discounted and often viewed as the obligation of the female, i.e. her social role rather than real 'work'. 'When men do the same tasks, it is labelled as economic activity.'
According to Mackenzie-Reur (1995^2 : 20), 'More women are involved in agriculture and other primary activities (82%) in comparison to their male counterparts (63%), yet their contribution towards the economic and social development of the country is not recorded and inadequately recognised....' A 1985 survey on Tanna showed that 85% of adult women did moderate to heavy work, while the proportion of men doing the same was much lower^3.
Speaking about Pacific nations, Liloqula (1989^4 :182) said 'women are really the significant force in the economic development of our nations and an effective programme to support and promote their production and participation needs to be looked into.' However, gender blindness prevents statisticians and economists from seeing how and how much women contribute to the economy. Their invisibility in databases is then reflected in economic policies and therefore in the distribution of benefits (Stephens, cited in Bowie, 1995^1). The present report is intended to provide the basis of an effective programme to support women who fish in Vanuatu.
2.3 Legal status of women
The Vanuatu Constitution states that women and men have equal rights. Even then, Ni-Vanuatu women have to be educated on what their rights are.
When Parliament passed the Divorce Bill in 1986 its action was seen as amajor breakthrough. The Family Law Act was presented to Government in 1985 yet by 1995 it had not been actioned. Similarly, the Convention for Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women has not been signed and ratified. Hence it cannot be used as a guideline for formulating national legislation affecting women. However, Vanuatu has signed the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection, and Development of Children^3 and this could form the basis for a national policy on family welfare.
2.4 Population
The relatively low human population has also produced a lower fishing intensity - but this is set to change. The human population has been steadily climbing back from the decimal on of labour recruiters ('blackbirding') and white-man's diseases of the later 1800-early 1900s. In 1967 the national population stood at 77,988; increasing to 111,251 in 1979 and 142,944 in 1989. Although most of the population Iives in rural Vanuatu, the 'drift to the towns' is illustrated by the comparative figures of 90% of the population being rural dwellers in 1967, falling to 81.6% in 1989^2. Rapid urbanisation is one of the more outstanding features of Vanuatu's demographic history, such that between 1967 and 1989, the urban population (Luganville and Port Vila) increased annually by 5.4%. Between 1979 and 1989 it increased by 7.5%^2. In 1994 the national population was estimated at 160,700 of which 126,200 was in rural areas, and the 1996 population at 168,400 of which 128,800 lives in
rural areas (source: Statistics Office). Recent information from the Statistics Office is that the national population is increasing at slightly more than 2.8%.
In 1991, just under half (44%) of Vanuatu's population was under 15 years of age and present information suggests that the proportion under 20 years of age is about half of the population. The large number of children brings an immense burden on women who are largely responsible for their care. Life for many Ni-Vanuatu families is becoming more difficult^3 and there is considerable pressure on women as providers for the family, particularly as their subsistence role is becoming linked, with the needs of a cash economy.
Overall population density is 11.7 persons/sq. km, and it is highest in the Shepherd Islands, Paama Island and Efate Island. Relatively high population density also exists in Mere Lava (Banks Islands), Tanna (Tafea Province) and north Pentecost (Penama Province); and many smaller islands lying offshore of larger ones are densely populated. The highest densities recorded^2 are in Avokh (southern Malakula Island), Ifira Island near Port Vila and Atchin Island (northern Malekula Island) where there are more than 1,000 persons/sq. km. Emigration takes place from areas of high population density; for example, north Pentecost people move to Maewo, Ambae and Port Vila; Banks people move to Luganville.
2.5 Government services
Economic problems have meant that the national government has cut expenditure on government services. This cost-cutting has also meant the lack of money in rural areas has affected disposable income which in turn negatively affects the standard of living^3.
In recent years, the proportion of the national budget allocated to social services has decreased. e.g. Health and Education received 38% of recurrent expenditure in 1986 but this was reduced to 31% in 1989^2. Information provided by the Statistics Office (1996) is that whereas the population is increasing, the numbers of dispensaries and doctors has dropped slightly over the past three years, and the number of registered nurses has dropped substantially (342 in 1993, 220 in 1995). In this country where there is social inequity, these cut-backs find most expression in the comparative lack of programs addressing women's health and nutrition, women's education, access to clean water and Sanitary facilities. Lack of atention to such matters is a waste of human resources.
Vanuatu is the second most expensive place in the Pacific to live, according to the report. The average income in Vanuatu is 37,000 vt/head/year (1989 census). Urban income is 8.5% times than the higher than per capita rural income^2 - reflecting the presence of high-income earning expatriates in the towns. Many Ni-Vanuatu have moved back to the rural areas because of the expense of living in the towns (despite urban population numbers) and the public servants' strike of late 1993 was partly a reflection of the difficulty of 'making ends meet' by salaried Ni-Vanuatu working in Vila or Santo. The minimum government wage is 16,000 vt/month; and many Ni-Vanuatu urban families are extremely poor, their incomes as low as 7,000-10,000 vt/month if rent has to be taken out) (pers. comm., DWA). The DWA estimated that a family would have less than 400 vt/month to spend on fish Nearly 40% of the entire Port Vila population lives in squatter settlements with poor sanitation,
over-crowding, poor water supply and disease (National Planning Office report). Poor urban dwellers are also much more affected by the lack of income than are rural dwellers, as they have little or no land nor access to the sea.
2.6 Health
The infant mortality rate is 50/1,000 live births (1989 census), a high figure compared to other countries in the Pacific region^2. This could be one indication of the social and health status of women in the community; viz. the higher the infant mortality rate the lower the social and health status of women, and vice versa. The total average fertility rate for Ni-Vanuatu women was 5.1 in 1989 (census) and women in rural areas have more children than do women in urban areas. The WBU (1995)^5 recorded a national average family size of six.
A major factor which impacts on the health of women is the number of children they have and their age, and the spacing of children. Twenty-one percent of women aged
15-19 years had already had one child (1989 census) and 8-9% of these had had two children. The spread of children is greater in the rural areas, with 25% of rural mothers older than 35 years^2. Use of contraceptives is very low in Vanuatu (compared to the situation in other developing countries), being used by only 15% of child-bearing age women. Many rural men do not agree to their wives using contraceptives.
Nutritional anaemia is one of the major health problems of Ni-Vanuatu women, being particularly high in pregnant and lactating women, and in women and children eating only small amounts of protein foods^2.
2.7 Schooling
Vanuatu education system provides for six years of primary, four years of junior secondary and 2-3 years of senior secondary. In 1989, about 78% of the female population and 83% of the male population were attending school^2. Although it is difficult to estimate the literacy rate, it would be less in older age groups. At ages 1015, 25.7% of males were in school, but only 17.9% of females were (1989). Two main issues which impact on secondary school attendance for primary school leavers are the reduced number of spaces in secondary school (in 1989, only between 20% and 25% of Grade 6 children were selected to attend junior secondary schools) and the requirement to pay school fees (c. 10,000 vt/term/child). In rural areas, it is likely that girl students are negatively affected by the school fees issue. In 1989, 26 Ni-Vanuatu females had obtained a degree, compared with 106 males.
2.8 Fishing
A feature of traditional inshore fishing activity in Vanuatu is that there appears to be so little of it. By comparison with the inshore fishing performed in some other countries in the western Pacific region, Vanuatu is a minor player. Fishing is not an important traditional economic strategy among Melanesian coastal dwellers^6 and the populations of Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands and Vanuatu are generally more orientated to cultivation of root crops and pig husbandry. Including poultry and beef raising to the community's larder appears to be more comfortable than taking to the water for many Ni-Vanuatu - even coastal dwellers. The situation in Vanuatu is probably like that in PNG, where only half of the coastal population regard fishing as an important activity: those communities are where there is little land for agriculture riverine and swampy areas and small, infertile islands^6. However, over the past 100 years, during which up to 70% of Vanuatu's population
has moved to the coast^7 nearshore coastal waters have played a more important part in rural people's lives.
In Vanuatu land is available to many communities although there is high human population density on some islands or areas thereof (e.g. north Pentecost, Atchin Island, Tanna, Ra Island). Land-based protein (cattle, pigs, poultry, nuts) is relatively cheap - especially beef- and in many areas these items are consumed as protein sources, or protein is infrequently consumed. Access to inland communities whereby fish could be brought to for sale - is inhibited in the large islands. Moreover, the volcanic origin of most islands often restricts general access to the sea. There are few atolls or extensive reefs in Vanuatu. The inner reef areas of Vanuatu (c. 478 sq. km.) are limited to a narrow fringing reef or reef platform surrounding the islands and few lagoons and barrier reefs and the mangrove and estuarine areas (c. 25 sq. km) are also limited^7. Almost all of the subsistence and artisanal catch of fish and shellfish is taken from these inshore areas.
Added to that is the earnings from agricultural commodities. When copra, beef and Lava prices are improving, there is little incentive for people who are not traditionally fishers, to go fishing.
Another factor affecting fishing activity is the retention of strong customary tenure over land and inshore areas: even if an inshore area is unworked by its traditional owners they may not allow outsiders to fish there.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to sweep all of Vanuatu under the one blanket. Commentators have reported often that it is a diverse country: the potential to earn income is different between islands and areas, and application of a single 'remedy' or plan to the whole nation would result in general failure. This study on community (women's) fishing in Vanuatu supports those views.
Information gathered in the 1992 and 1993 agricultural censuses show that fishing activities are most important in Banks/Torres (Torba Province) followed by Efate and the Shepherds (Shefa Province), although on average only 35% of rural households reported fishing in the seven days prior to the survey. Of those not fishing, 60% (1992) and 38% (1993) said that was the result of work in the garden. Preston (1996)^8 estimated an average subsistence harvesting rate of 42 kg/hectare in inshore Vanuatu waters, which is moderately high. Because the rate would vary throughout the country, he suggested that over-exploitation must be taking place in some areas.
In 1993, 70% of rural households reported eating fish at some time during the previous 12 months^7. Compared to others Pacific Island nations, this consumption rate is very low. The actual fishing rate over the 12 months is relatively much lower, with 53% of the fish consumers having purchased the fish (61% of them from fishers within the village or from other villages (51%).
It is noteworthy that 40% of fishing households reported selling fish in the seven days prior to census-recording. In other words, 'The ongoing introduction of a cash economy to many rural households has also led to the much greater fishing effort as an alternative income generating activity.' (Statistics Office, 1994 : 11.2^7) It is almost certain that Vanuatu's inshore waters will be subject to greater fishing pressure taking into consideration the increasing population size and its attendant issues.
Self-sufficiency and balanced development depend on the contribution of both women and men to the collection of fish resources in the Pacific islands^9. In some areas of Vanuatu, where the sea is often rough or where social tabus prohibit women fishing from boats, men's fishing provides the fish protein for families; and export fisheries do bring revenue to nations. This report is about the contribution of women's fishing to Vanuatu's national security however. The pattern se. down in other western Pacific nations^10 is to investigate the importance of women's contribution to subsistence and artisanal fishing, the nutritional contribution of women's fishing, the effects of environmental impacts on women's fishing; and the increasing activity in fish processing and marketing often or mainly involving women.
^1 Bowie C. (1995) Voice blong of woman. "The women's voice". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of women. 183 pp.
^2 Mackenzie-Reur V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^3 UNICEF (1991). A situation analysis of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp
^4 Liloqula, R. (1989). Paper (untitled), pp. 179-182, Workshop on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Fourth regional conference of Pacific women. Suva. Fiji, 17 -23 September, 1988. South Pacific Commission, Noumea. New Caledonia.
^5 Women's Business Unit (1995).A study of women in micro business. their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women s Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
^6 Schoeffel, P and S Talagi (1989). The role of women in small-scare fisheries in the South Pacific. Report of case studies in Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and Western Samoa. London Commonwealth Secretariat, Food Production and Rural Development Division 60 pp.
^7 Statistics Office (1994). Vanuatu national agriculture census 1994 [sic]: main report. Statistics Office. Office of the Prime Minister. Port Vila. Vanuatu
^8 Preston. G.L. (1996). Masterplan for the sustainable management and development of Vanuatu's inshore fisheries resources. Food and Agricullural Organisation of the United Nations, Technical Cooperation Programme. TCP/VAN/4552. technical report no. 2. pag. var.
^9 Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People. society, and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
^10 Naqasima, M. (1994). Women and Fisheries Network. SPC Traditional marine resource management and knowledge information bulletin, no. 4: 24-25.
<section>3</section>
3. Women's social and economic role in the fisheries sector
3.1 Pacific overview
3.2 Ni-Vanuatu women and fishing
3.3 How much
3.4 Social role
3.5 Economic role
3. Women's social and economic role in the fisheries sector
"Women don 't fish; they just gather shells"
3.1 Pacific overview
Women engage in many types of fishing in the various Pacific Islands cultures, from deep-sea fishing alongside men and community fishing to reef gleaning and freshwater trapping activities. Traditionally however, women are much more involved in fishing activities in shallow near-shore waters^1 while men's fishing activities are focused on deep-sea areas.
In the western Pacific, women contribute to fisheries in many ways:
o they collect fish and other marine resources on a daily basis^1;
o their fishing produces a high proportion of the daily protein intake of families;
o their fisheries often provide family income;
o they are often involved in marketing and processing fish catches;
o they engage in gear mending and manufacture; and
o they are crew or observers on fishing boats^2.
Women are also employed in fisheries organisations, and are involved in fisheries research, education and training.
Unfortunately, most of these kinds of contributions have often been underestimated. Fisheries studies have focused often on men's fishing activities, and Pacific men have tended to ignore their womenfolk's work. Men's fishing is given higher social status and official support, fisheries divisions usually concentrate on training and projects for men, and emphasis on high technology and deep-sea fisheries excludes proper attention to inshore and subsistence fishing (where women are involved)^1.
3.2 Ni-Vanuatu women and fishing
When the consultant asked Ni-Vanuatu about women's fishing, the response varied from curiosity (at the question) and 'mild disinterest' to enthusiasm. There appeared to be a general view that women don't (want to) fish, or that they do so only occasionally, or very often, or that it was a normal part of the woman's role as a provider so why should it be remarked upon. The women who gather fish and shellfish for home consumption did not clearly identify this activity as 'fishing': 'fishing' was done usually when selling was involved, and women selling fish is not so common in Vanuatu. Yet throughout Vanuatu women engage in many kinds of fishing, including 'men's fishing': Atchin, north Pentecost and north Efate women go in canoes to dropline or troll; Litslits women are good divers; Mere Lava women fish almost every day from their canoes. Probably as many women seldom fish.
The understanding of the word 'fishing' on a commercial or men-only basis is unfortunate, as it negates the role of subsistence fishing performed largely by women on the one hand and supports the concept of exploitation performed largely by men on the other. Indeed, as in other western Pacific nations, Ni-Vanuatu women are engaged in the three recognised forms (end-products) of fishing: subsistence, artisanal (or smallscale) and commercial. The preservation, marketing and distribution of fish catches also remains the responsibility of women.
In coastal areas of Vanuatu, women's main fishing activity is reef or mud-flat gleaning and collecting. This practice is mainly for subsistence, and the provision of fish food to households is largely (but not always) the preserve of women. Women also fish for reef fish with handlines (from shore or canoe) or with fishing rods of bamboo (where sloping foreshores or reefs do not exist). In some areas women and men use nets to catch shoals of small fish including 'mangrou' (Decapterus, Selar), 'picot' (Siganus), sardines and herrings (Clupeidae). Fishing is also carried out in freshwaters by damming or handlining.
Artisanal fishing is becoming more important in areas within travelling distance to large markets: often on Efate, women, girls and boys use handlines to catch small reef fish which are then fried and sold with laplap. On Efate octopus (nawita) is also targeted for sale with laplap, and very occasionally baskets of shellfish (kai - Anadara, chitons, turban shells; not giant clams, Tridacna) are sold. Aquatic resources from Malo Island are targeted for similar sale in Luganville (Santo). At both urban areas reef fish are also sold direct to stores (e.g. Natai, Au Bon Marche, Chinese stores). When men catch reef fish for market sale, women are almost always the sellers.
Fishing for commerce is engaged in at various levels. Whole communities often harvest sea cucumber, trochus, lobsters, mud crabs ('Caledonie crabs', Scylla), mangrove oysters, freshwater prawns, coconut crabs and mangrou (eastern Santo). Sometimes the harvest of lobsters, greensnail, trochus and sea cucumbers is restricted to men, and it is uncommon for women to engage in fishing beyond outer reefs (e.g. for drop-line fish ('poulet', Pristipomoides; 'loche', Epinephetus). Women may engage in processing sea cucumbers. In Vanuatu there is no fish processing facility, and the processing of drop-lined fish is the task of the fisher.
3.3 How much
Despite women's contribution, there is no quantitative information on the amount of fish (for food security; family nutrition) provided by Ni-Vanuatu women to their own households, nor is there any information on the amount of fish sold at urban and rural markets. Information on fish harvesting in Vanuatu is limited to a few of the commercial fisheries. Women's participation in the fisheries sector is little acknowledged 'officially'. The priority of the planners is to see how much fish is exported or traded to restaurants, hotels and shops: it is not to see how much the fishing by women (or communities) contributed to the nation's economy through providing 'free' fish protein to families and thereby facilitating a healthier population.
The subsistence catch in Vanuatu in 1990 was estimated at more than 2,000 tonnes or more than four times the commercial catch, a comparative factor common to all nations in the western Pacific^3. The few studies performed on women's fishing input in the western Pacific (such as in Fiji^4, Western Samoa and Kiribati^1) generally support claims to their high contribution to family nutrition. Tuara^5 quotes Ram-Bidesi (1994) who estimated that subsistence fishing supports two-thirds of the western Pacific's population.
3.4 Social role
Harvesting and preparation of food for home consumption are the main activities performed by women in Vanuatu, and rural areas relies primarily on their subsistence sector to provide the daily food requirements. Social activities involving women in fishing range from two women fishing from a canoes, groups of women gathering shellfish and other invertebrates, and women participating in community fishing activities (e.g. coconut leaf sweep net).
3.5 Economic role
In many Pacific Island nations the sale of surplus seafood is an established activity and the money earned is used to supplement the family income. This situation is also beginning to occur in Vanuatu, although many women still often harvest inshore fish solely for subsistence. Mangrou is a resource which is being increasingly targeted for sale as well as consumption - assisted by the ready availability of gillnets. The yield is eaten by the family and sold or given away within the community; or it is targeted by small-scale fishers and transported to urban centres with a small portion of the yield left for family consumption (this situation is more like that of commercial fishing).
In Vanuatu women are directly involved in commercial fishing activities by:
o diving for trochus(some islands)
o reef and mudflat gleaning and gathering trochus, sea cucumbers, mudcrabs and mangrove oysters
o gathering land crabs
o participating with husbands on commercial fishing trips (for 'poulet')
o selling fish or fish products in markets
o catching octopus to sell on laplap
o netting mangrou fish and selling
o ·?catching freshwater natura for sale
o working in the shell factories
o processing (and buying) bêche-de-mer
o selling seashells
o selling shellfish
o catching coconut crabs and selling
o repairing fishing gear
o working at fish processing establishments (Santo & Vila Natai, supermarkets)
o trapping lobsters for sale
o working in shops that sell fishing gear
^1 Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People. society, and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
^2 Tuara. P. N. (1995). The participation of women in fishertes in the.South Pacific. 4 pp. Paper presented at the SPC regional workshop on the role of women in fisheries development. Iloilo City Philippines, 17-21 July 1995.
^3 Dalzell, P., T. Adams and N. Polunin (1995). Coastal fisheries of the South Pacific. Paper presented at the joint FFA/SPA Workshop on the Management of South Pacific Inshore Fisheries, SPC, Noumea, New Caledonia, 26 June-7 July 1995.
^4 Matthews, E. (1995) (ed.). Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji: Women and Fisheries Network. 177 pp
^5 Tuara, P. N. (1996). Women's fisheries development section: supporting women in fisheries. Paper presented at the South Pacific Commission Twenty-sixth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries. Noumea, New Caledonia. 5-9 August 1996. SPC/ Fisheries Information Paper 11. 5 pp.
<section>4</section>
4. Changes in women's role in the fisheries sector, and their impact
4.1 Providing through fishing
4.2 The 'down-side' of selling
4.3 Change in fishing
4.4 Women in business
4. Changes in women's role in the fisheries sector, and their impact
"We sell our fresh fish to buy tinned 