<section>e</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
This report presents a third party assessment and evaluation of the PHI/89/P16 Project on Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Specifically, the study was focused on the following:
* project's impact on the social and economic status of women beneficiaries with emphasis on economic activities, income and expenditures, credit and savings, living condition and fertility behavior and family planning practices;
* Project implementation and management efficiency
* Identification and documentation of the achievements as well as limitations and constraints of the Project; and
* Assessment of the sustainability and replicability of Project achievements and activities.
The study was completed with the use of both primary and secondary data. The secondary data were sourced from published and unpublished project reports and documents that were made available at the Project coordinating office in Manila and at the implementing Provincial offices of Capiz and Pangasinan. The primary data were gathered through interviews of key informants including project field staff, barangay officials, women group leaders and others and through an structured survey interviews of about 20% of all women who joined and remained members of the first batch of groups which were formed in Capiz and Pangasinan in 1990 and with another survey respondents consisting of 20% of the women who initially joined but drop-out from the Project.
Project Impact on the Socio-Economic Status of Women
The survey respondents that were used as basis for determining the Project impacts could be characterized as follows:
* Their ages range from 19 to 63 years with an average age of 41 years for participants and 36 years for drop-outs. The participants from Capiz are slightly older (43 years) than the participants from Pangasinan (36 years). The participants generally have passed the most fertile age of women,
* On the average, the women respondents have completed seven years of formal schooling or at leases have reached secondary education. A greater proportion of the Project participants completed high school than that of the dropouts.
* Household size of Project participants is slightly larger than the drop-outs.
Economic Activities
A clear indication of the Project impact is that all the women participants have engaged in at least one livelihood activity. This can be substantiated by the fact that many of the project drop-outs (29%) had remained plain housewives.
The most common economic activity the women participants have engaged in are fishery-based enterprises such as fish vending, processing and marketing, that are generally complementary to their respective husband's main source of income, i.e. fishing.
Income and Expenditures
A significant change on women's income and their share to total household's income was observed as a result of the Project. The women participants' average monthly income had increased by more than 200% from an average of P727 in 1990 to- P2,283 in 1993. Likewise, the proportional share of women's income to the total household income have also increased from less than 35% to at least 45%.
The average total household's annual income had increased from P28,551 in 1990 to P65,255 in 1993 for Pangasinan and from P22,122 in 1990 to P53,622 in 1993 for Capiz. For both provinces, the estimated increase in household annual income was about 133% which is quite significant. Even considering the effect of inflation' the real income of the households had increased by more than 100%.
The increase of the total household's income has been attributed to the greater contribution of women, as a result of their income generating projects that were supported by the Project.
In terms of household's expenditures, no significant changes have been observed. The basic food items remained to be a major household expenditure. The estimated total annual expenditures is comparatively less than the total annual income of the average household. The household's surplus income is either used as additional capital for IGPs or used for housing improvements as well as cash savings.
Credit and Saving Practices
Through the provision of guarantee funds, the Project was able to assist the disadvantaged women in coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan in establishing their respective IGPs. Through this assistance, the women were able to increase income contribution to their respective households and also they were able to acquire the habit of savings.
Fertility Behavior and Family Planning
The PHI/89/P16 Project has greatly contributed to improvements in family planning awareness and knowledge. But no significant impact on women fertility behavior and family planning practices may be expected considering that the first batch of Project participants have already passed the most fertile age of women. However, the IGPs of women in the coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan have supported the women's decisions to continue some form of family planning practices or in providing them a broader choice of methods or encouraging them to shift to more effective form of family planning.
Living Condition and Social Gains
Based on selected indicators such as ownership of land, residential houses, household facilities as well as transport, an observable improvements of living conditions of the women participants can be attributed to the Project. These are brought about by the increase of household income due primarily to the IGPs of women that were supported by the Project. Such an improvement in household income consequently enhanced family welfare.
In terms of social gains indicators, such as access to credit and social services, family welfare, self-confidence and self-esteem, respect to one's family, neighbors and community, among others, this present assessment and evaluation of the PHI/89/P16 confirms earlier reports. The Project contributed social gains in the targetted coastal communities.
Project Implementation and Management Efficiency
The PHI/89/P16 Project was implemented as a collaborative endeavor of various institutions such as UNFPA, FAO, GFIs, DOH, DABFAR, DSWD, DECS, POPCPM, CDA, NGOs and Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan. In the implementation, the role and functions of these participating institutions were clearly defined, and the complementary of functions to maximize efficiency had been emphasized.
The targetted women beneficiaries of Project interventions including group organizing, training assistance, technical assistance, credit assistance, family planning and health related services among others, have been successfully served.
In terms of the management of Project funds, particularly credit guarantee funds, the implementation of the Project appeared to be satisfactory. The credit fund utilization index was estimated to be 190%. As of August 1994, the total outstanding loans amounted to US$1103,367. Even if this amount will not be repaid, about US$105,478 of the total allocated guarantee fund of US$180,000 will still remain available.
Project Achievements and Limitations
The following have verified as achievements of the PHI/89/P16.
* Economic improvements in the selected coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan due to the introduction of IGPs, improvement of women's skills in the management of economic, enterprises, acquisition of capital assets and resources mobilization. Overall, the Project has influeced the increases of women's income and their contribution to total household income and family welfare;
* Social-related improvements which includes improved awareness of family planning and active participation in community activities;
* Formation of women groups and strengthening community relation and various group activities, e.g. community services as well as community political decision making.
Several but manageable limitations in the project implementation have been identified such as:
* Administrative problem on frequent replacement of Project staff may adversely affect smooth implementation of Project activities)
* Delay in the releases of credit assistance had created some doubts and disappointments among the targetted women beneficiaries;
* Inadequate monitoring and evaluation of Project activities, particularly the family planning interventions.
Sustainability and Replicability of Project Achievements '
* The sustainability of the, Project achievements will depend not only on the continued support of the Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan but also on the commitments of the women beneficiaries themselves., The creation of group volunteers formation of women group federation and the inclusion of the Project in the regular Provincial Governments programme will help sustain the Project achievements.
* The Project implementation strategy or approach through community-based participation can be replicated in other parts of both Provinces of Capiz and Pangasinan.
<title>An evaluation of project PHI/89/P16 - Improving the status of disavantaged women in small-scale fishing communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviations/acronyms
List of abbreviations/acronyms
AB
- Allied Banking Corporation
ACPC
- Agricultural Credit Policy Council
SC
- Barangay Council
BHW
- Barangay Health Worker
BSPO
- Barangay Service Point Officer
CARD
- Center for Agricultural and Rural Development
CDA
- Cooperative Development Authority
CO
- Community Organization
CRS
- Catholic Relief Services
DA-BFAR
- Department of Agriculture - Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
DECS
- Department of Education, Culture and Sports
DENR
- Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DO
- Drop-outs
DOH
- Department of Health
DOST
- Department of Science and Technology
DSWD
- Department of Social Works and Development
FAO
- Food and Agriculture Organization
FP
- Family Planning
FPOP
- Family Planning Organization of the Philippines
FPV
- Family Planning Volunteer
FW
- Field Worker
GVO
- Group Volunteer Organizer
IEC
- Information-Education-Communications
IGP
- Income Generating Projects
INCH
- Institute of Maternal and Child Health
LBP
- Land Bank of the Philippines
LGUs
- Local Government Units
MCH
- Maternal and Child Health
MWRA
- Married Women of Reproductive Age
PAX
- Participants
POPCOM
- Population Commission
PPDO
- Provincial Planning and Development Office
RHU
- Rural Health Unit
TLRC
- Technology and Livelihood Resource Center
UNFPA
- United Nations Fund for Population Activities
UNICEF
- United Nations Children Fund
USAID
- United States Agency for International Development
WGs
- Women Groups
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
The evaluation team wishes to express their appreciation for the valuable assistance extended to them by the Project Team. In this case, some staff of the Project were exceptionally helpful and the team is grateful for their support and for the arrangements made to facilitate its task.
The team furthermore likes to place on record its gratitude for the warm and friendly welcome by officers and members of the Women Groups visited especially the survey respondents, both the participants and drop-outs who were very cooperative in giving useful information. Other persons worth mentioning are the Barangay Officials. Rural Health workers and husbands of respondents who gave valuable insights about the Project.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
1.2 Rationale of the study
1.3 Objectives and scope of the assessment study
1.4 Methods and approaches of the study
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
On June 1988, the FAO Population Programme Office in Rome in coordination with the FAO Fisheries Department sent a mission to the Philippines to identify areas for possible integrated schemes taking into account population and fisheries related concerns.
The Philippine National Population Plan 1989-1993 emphasizes among other thrusts, the integration of population-related concerns into sectoral plans and programmes. This is based on two fundamental principles expressed in the social plan namely:
(a) that population-related matters must be seen by people as part of government's broader developmental concerns and are not to be pursued in isolation of other development efforts; and
(b) that strategically, such integrated approaches build a more lasting commitment on the part of people when both their economic and social development needs are addressed in a holistic manner.
In 1987, smaIl-scale fisherfolks contributed 49.4% of total fish production, and amounting to 18.5 billion pesos, to 44.4% of the total value of production. Inspite of this, small-scale fisherfolks belong to the economically and socially most depressed groups of society. Gender role analysis show, that women contribute essential functions to these basically household managed enterprises. Due to the heavy exploitation of marine fishing grounds, the fisherman's catch is progressively decreasing. The woman's small fish marketing business thus augments husband's income. But due to their low income, they are at the mercy of private moneylenders or "loansharks''.
Improving the income of these fisherfolks alone is not sufficient to raise the level of the quality of their lives. There is a need to intensify health, nutrition and family planning information and education. Equally important is the provision of basic social services. Traditionally, these communities are not reached by the services of government.
To improve their status, the Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan and- FAO formulated this project with funding from UNFPA. This was first implemented in February 1990 and was to last through December 1993, but the Project was extended for another year to allow time for sustainable impacts and for the newly-organized groups to build-up their capabilities.
1.2 Rationale of the study
The Project implementors, executing agency and funding agency assess the progress of this project through a Tripartite Review on a yearly basis. During the last quarter of 1992, the UNFPA conducted a case study of the project to examine the linkage between women's economic participation, empowerment and family planning practices. Moreover, in June 1993, "An Initial Assessment of Project Impact on Selected PHI/89/P16 Women Focusing on Specific Economic and Social Gains" was prepared by the former National Project Coordinator in response to UNFPA's request to gather more data on the results of the implementation of women's economic activities. However, impacts on fertility behavior and/or linkage to family planning practicies were not fully examined since it would require more time to get a reasonable assessment. In general, both studies found positive results in the economic and social benefits to women resulting from project assistance.
Even as UNFPA already conducted a study and the project coordinator prepared an internal preliminary asseesment, there is still a need for the third party evaluation as stated in the PRODOC. This evaluation was supposed to have taken place in December 1993, but with the one-year extension, it was deferred to this year to come up with a more reasonable and empirically objective assessment of hard statistical data.
This paper will also be used as input in the forthcoming Tripartite Evaluation Review in October 1994.
1.3 Objectives and scope of the assessment study
The main purposes of the evaluation as outlined in the Terms of Reference are as follows:
(a) to assess the impact of the project on the social and economic status of women participants in a statistically and empirically objective manner. Specifically, it focuses on changes in women's:
1. economic activities;
2. income for the past 4 years)
3. household expeditures;
4. credit and savings performance;
5. living conditions;
6. fertility behavior and family planning practices; and
7. perception of social gains.
(b) to assess the efficiency of project implementation and management by participating agencies,
(c) to identify and document project achievements as well as the constraints and shortcomings encountered by the project; and
(d) to assess the sustainability, replicability and durability of project achievements and activities.
A copy of the full Terms of Reference of the evaluation team is attached in Anne>: 1.
1.4 Methods and approaches of the study
The report of the evaluation team is based on a survey and a review of documentation available at the project's National and Provincial offices and on information provided by the Project staff- and key informants which include barangay officials, midwives, school teachers and selected leaders and members of women groups.
The impact assessment was done by comparing 20% of all women who joined and remained members of the first batch of groups which were formed in Capiz and Pangasinan in the second half of 1990 (107 women participants) and with another sample consisting of 20% of the women who initially joined but then dropped out from the project (34 drop-outs). Table 1 presents the distribution of the women respondents by province and by type of women's group.
The women included in the sample were interviewed individually using a questionnaire designed by project management with slight revisions integrated by the team. The information gathered from women respondents were supplemented through interviews with women's husbands and key informants, group discussions with the officers and members of women groups and through observations.
Field survey and project evaluation were conducted from July and August 1994. The survey was administered by field workers in the provinces and validated by the evaluation team through interviews of selected respondents.
Analysis of the data was done using some statistical tools (e.g. percentages, minimum, maximum, mean and growth rates). Data were presented in a tabular forms. The periods covered in this study are from February 1990, to December 1993.
The views expressed in the report are those of the authors. The report does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNFPA or FAO.
<section>4</section>
2. Project description
2.1 Objectives of the project
2.1.1 Long range objective
2.1.2 immediate objectives
2.2 Project scope and activities
2.2.1 Project participants
2.2.2 Activities/components
2.3 Project framework/approaches/method of implementation
2.4 Project inputs/interventions and accomplishments
2.4.1 Community/group organization
2.4.2 Training assistance
2.4.3 Technical assistance
2.4.4 Credit assistance
2.4.5 Social services/linkages to resource and service institutions
2.4.6 IEC materials support
2.4.7 Monitoring and evaluation
2. Project description
2.1 Objectives of the project
2.1.1 Long range objective
To contribute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the National Population Plan through an integrated approach to improve the living conditions of small-scale fisherfolks, with particular emphasis on women.
2.1.2 immediate objectives
(a) By the end of project life, at least 50% of project participants would have increased their income; improved their skills in managing their micro-enterprises.
(b) By the end of project life, at least 50% of project participants would have manifested positive changes in attitudes, knowledge and practice in FP/POP-ED and MCH related matters.
(c) By the end of project life, a community-based/managed integrated system would have been developed and tested.
2.2 Project scope and activities
2.2.1 Project participants
An estimated 3,200 women in 13 coastal communities in Pangasinan and 7 coastal communities in Capiz will directly participate in the project.
2.2.2 Activities/components
The two major components, namely the economic and social development components will be managed as one inter-active whole. Both components will be supported by (a) participative problem needs identification survey; (b) a training system; and (c) ongoing technical assistance.
2.3 Project framework/approaches/method of implementation
The community organization principle is applied in introducing in an interactive manner, the economic and social development inputs, into the selected women participants.
Economic inputs will be provided in the form of revolving fund, to support income-generating activities of the women. Social development focus will be in areas related to population education, family planning, MCH and nutrition. Based on the same community organization principle, these groups will organize and manage their own concerns in both economic and social development concepts. The groups will manage their own motivation strategies and facilitate required services.
Technical guidance in various aspects of both the economic and social development aspects as well as in community organization will be provided by the project staff, supported by FAO. The key person at the barangay level is the Field Worker or Area Coordinator.
Figure 1 presents the project's conceptual framework.
2.4 Project inputs/interventions and accomplishments
2.4.1 Community/group organization
* 30 Women Groups (WGs) with 864 members were organized in 7 coastal municipalities of Capiz
* 48 Women Groups with 1185 members were organized in 13 coastal municipalities of Pangasinan
Annex 2 presents the total membership of WGs organized organized from 1990-1994.
2.4.2 Training assistance
* WGs were trained in the areas of team building, organizational skills, micro-enterprise development and family welfare. Refresher training activities were also conducted.
* A total of 332 training were conducted for 7,738 women participants.
Annex 4 presents the summary of training conducted by the project for women participants from 1990-1994.
2.4.3 Technical assistance
* Through project consultants and specialists, technical assistance provided to WGs in the preparation of project proposals for funding and specific fishery-related technologies
2.4.4 Credit assistance
* 1612 members received loans totalling P7,242,245.16 to finance income-generating projects in 1993. An additional loan of P1,863,668 was released as of August 1994.
* Repayment rate is 81/. for 1993 and 78% for 1994
* Percent utilization of Guarantee Fund for both provinces is 190% in 1994
Annex 4 shows the summary of credit assistance extended by the Project.
FIGURE 1
2.4.5 Social services/linkages to resource and service institutions
* Family welfare classes conducted
* Family planning referral system in place
* Linkages with DOH, POPCOM, FPOP, USAID, UNICEF and other line agencies established at local levels
* Social action projects in various stages of implementation
* Contraceptive prevalence rate for women participants increased from 20% in 1990 to 65% in 1994
Annex 4 presents the contraceptive prevalence rate from 1990-1994.
2.4.6 IEC materials support
* Produced 3-year calendar and comics for WGs
* Produced Field Worker's Manual and Diary for Project Staff
* Produced a Consolidated Manual of Training Activities for PHI/89/P16 WGs
2.4.7 Monitoring and evaluation
* Installation of client-based and gender-focused monitoring tools and evaluation
* Annual Tripartite Reviews
<section>5</section>
3. Project impact on the socio-economic status of women: an assessment
3.1 Profile of women respondents
3.2 Economic profile
3.2.1 Type of economic activities
3.2.2 Income profile
3.2.3 Household expenditure
3.2.4 Credit and savings practices
3.2.5 changes in level of living conditions
3.3 family planning knowledge and adoption among project participants
3.3.1 Knowledge of family planning methods
3.3.2 Adoption of family planning
3.3.3 Impact on fertility
3.4 Perception of gain
3.4.1 Project interventions
3.4.2 Significant changes on women
3.4.3 Social gains/effects
3. Project impact on the socio-economic status of women: an assessment
3.1 Profile of women respondents
The general profile of survey respondents representing the women project beneficiaries and drop-outs is presented in Table 2 Survey results revealed the following:
AGE. The age of all the respondents ranges from 19-63 years with an average age of 41 years for participants and 36 years for drop-outs. Average age of Capiz participants (43 years) is slightly higher than Pangasinan participants (36 years). The average age of participants has passed the most productive/fertile age as little emphasis has been given on age requirement during the selection process of the first batch of women groups (WGs).
CIVIL STATUS. Majority of the respondents are married. This is expected as the selection focussed on married women. There are WGs composed of all mothers only. However, a few WGs accepted single members in order to inculcate social and economic values at an early age.
RELIGION. Most of the respondents for both participants (85%) and drop-outs (94%) are Catholics. Respondents from Capiz have a more solid composition of Catholics.
EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT. On the average, all respondents completed seven years of schooling or at least have reached first year in High School. Between participants of Pangasinan and Capiz, the former has higher percentage of High School graduates (40% vs 27%). As far as all participants and drop-outs are concerned, majority (35%) of all participants finished High School while a majority (44%) of drop-outs had only completed an elementary schooling.
HOUSEHOLD SIZE. Size of the household ranges from 2-12 members. Of the total participants and drop-outs, the average size is 7 and 5 members respectively. Between Pangasinan and Capiz pax, the latter's average household size (9) is greater than the former by only one member.
NUMBER OF CHILDREN. This ranges from o to 10 children. On the average, all participants has 4 children while all drop-outs has 3 children. A very small percentage of married respondents is still childless because they are either newly married or have health problems.
Age and education of respondents hyphotesized to have an influence on the number of children were analyzed as presented in Tables 2a and 2b.
As expected, as the mother becomes older, the number of children increases. In general, younger women have lesser number of children, i.e. 1 to 3 children. This group of women should be the focus of the family campaign since they are still on the way of building a family.
With regard to educational attainment, it was found that women's number of children is related to their education. As educational attainment reaches a higher level, the number of children becomes smaller. This could be attributed to the fact that educated women are more knowledgeable about FP practices and realize the importance of planning for the future of their families.
3.2 Economic profile
3.2.1 Type of economic activities
Table 3 presents information on the economic activities of women respondents in Pangasinan and Capiz. The number and type of economic activities by both participants and drop-outs are presented.
Baseline data shows that 26% of all participants and 44% of all drop-outs were plain housewives doing their daily routine household chores. After 3 years, all participants have engaged in at least one economic activity but on the part of the drop outs, 29%. had remained plain housewives.
Majority of all the respondents were engaged in fish vending even before the project as it is about their only available source of daily income to complement their husbands earnings from fishing, as shown in Table 3a. Commodity trading, in the form of operating small sari-sari stores, selling native food or ready to-wear dresses (RTWs), is also a common source of income.
There are activities which are common only in one or the other project provinces, e.g. shell craft and salt production are adaptable in Pangasinan while mussel culture and crab fattening are common in Capiz. This can be attributed to the salinity of the water and availability of resources.
With women's reproductive work, i.e., child bearing and rearing and household chores, the economic activities they engage in are mostly home-based and require less of their time as compared to women with a regular wage employment. These kinds of work allow them to fulfill their family responsibilities.
3.2.2 Income profile
The income of the respondents depend on the type of economic activities they engage in, the amount of capital outlay, duration/frequency of harvest or sales, the management skills and other external factors (market, climate, etc.).
Below is the monthly income of some types of economic activities based on some of the IGP proposals in Capiz:
Capital
Monthly income
Fish marketing
(20 days/mo @ 50kgs/day)
P 4000
P 2059
Fish processing /marketing
P 4245
P 3467
Commodity trading
P 4100
P 2433
Food vending (5x/wk)
P 3800
P 1926
Acquisition of fishing gear/ fish coral (3 kgs/day scooped at 25 kgs)
P 5500
P 1519
The project's baseline data shows that majority of the participants (48%) and drop-outs (47%) have monthly incomes amounting to P1,000 and below. However, present data shows that several of the respondents, (40% of participants and 32% of dropouts) monthly income rose to P1,001 to P2,000 bracket. By province, average monthly income of Pangasinan participants (P2,478) is slightly higher than that of Capiz participants (P1,983), as shown in Table 4.
For all the respondents, it is observed that the current average monthly income of participants is more than double the average income of drop-outs. This is an indication of the positive effects of the Project.
The occupation of household members (other than respondents) who are economically active and their average monthly income are presented in Table S. Fishing, farming and hired labor are the most common occupation of household members.
Other sources of income of women in the project provinces are presented in Table 6. This includes hog fattening, dressmaking, caretaker of fishpond F pension allowances and others.
The contribution and changes in total annual income by household members are presented in Table 7. On the average, the contribution of women participants to their respective total household annual income was about 43% during the evaluation period ( 1991 to 1993) . In both provinces, the drop-outs on the other hand contributed only about 31% to their respective total household income.
It is also observed that there was an increase in the average total household income of participants from P28,551 in 1990 to P65,253 in 1993 for Pangasinan and from P22,122 (1990) to P53,622 (1993) for Capiz. Overall, the average household income per annum increased by 133% for both provinces. On the other hand, average total household income among the drop-outs increased from P20, 512 in 1990 to P47,216 in 1993 indicating a 130% growth rate. The present increase in the household income may be attributed in part to the greater contribution of the women participants as well as some of the drop-outs. Even considering the effect of inflation, the real income of the households had increased by more than 100%.
The different factors which contributed to the increase in household income in Pangasinan and Capiz are presented in Table 8 A majority of the participants attribute the increase of income to the IGP which has been supported by the Project.
3.2.3 Household expenditure
Table 9 presents the household expenditure by items. A major proportion of total household expenditure is on food items which is about 40%. Comparing the annual expenditure with the annual income, it was observed that the household expenditure is less than- income, and the balance is either used for IGP and household improvement as well as cash savings.
The utilization of increases in income with respect to household expenditures is summarized in Table 9a. For all respondents, increases in income are generally used for food consumption, followed by children's education. On the average, 72/. of total increases in income of participants was utilized for basic needs (food, medicine, education, clothing and transportation). Only 1% had used the income for recreation. The remaining proportion of the increases were utilized for house improvements, acquisition of home appliances and additional capital for their IGP.
3.2.4 Credit and savings practices
Credit Practices
The provision of credit is a major Project input in improving women's status, particularly women's income. Operated through a guarantee fund scheme administered by a government bank (Land Bank of the Philippines) in Pangasinan and a private commercial bank (Allied Banking Corporation) in Capiz, cr