<title>Economic role of women in fishing communities: A case study of Koko, Nigeria</title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviation
List of abbreviation
AAWORT:
Association of African Women for Research on Development
CIRDAP:
Center on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and Pacific
CARDER-OUEME:
Le Centre d'Action Régional Pour le Développement de l'Ouémé
DANIDA:
Danish International Development Agency
FAO:
Food and Agriculture Organisation
FSP:
Family Support Programme
ICLARM:
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDAF:
Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa
ILO:
International Labour Organisation
LGA:
Local Government Area
SIDA:
Swedish International Development Agency
UNDP:
United Nations Development Programme
WHO:
World Health Organisation
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
The mission on economic role of women in fishing communities in West Africa was proposed by the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries (IDAF) in West Africa in the framework of FAO. The Programme commissioned Dr. Stella Williams of Nigeria to collect field information on the economic role of women in fishing communities of Koko, Nigeria. The purpose of the mission and this report is to:
· describe all the sources of employment for the women in the communities,
· investigate how the women spend their time in the household and in their place of work,
· describe how labour is distributed among the women during the day;
· evaluate the daily activities of the women in cash and in kind,
· determine the daily real income of the women and the various sources of such incomes,
· make recommendation on areas (technical, economic, and institutional) of assistance for the improvement of the socio-economic position of the women.
The study was initiated by Dr. B.P Satia, IDAF Programme Coordinator He (was facilitated instrumental) in the creation of a working group of ten professional women who met for the first time in Cotonou in August 1995. The field study was conducted in Nigeria during a period of tense economic and political transition (01 - 29 March 1996). The collection of field data became more and more difficult as the study progressed, due to an increasing scarcity of, petrol and kerosene as well as the communities' anxiety over the zero party local government area, council and chairmanship elections ( 16 to 26 March). The economic environment in the fishing communities was so depressed that members were more interested in the survival of their families and business ventures. In spite of all the constraints, the field study was carried out from 01 - 29 March 1996. Data interim, report writing and documentation was done from 30 March to 14 April 1996 Report submission was on 15 April 1996.
<section>3</section>
Acknowledgement
Acknowledgement
I wish to express my deep appreciation to Dr. B. P Satia, IDAF Programme Coordinator, who initiated the mission and Mr. A.L. Cruz, FAO Representative ad interim and Staff of the FAO Office in Lagos.
The hospitality extended to the group by Chief Kofi Katey, Chairman, Warri North Local Government (LGA), resident in Koko, his dedication and commitment to the welfare of the fishing communities are very commendable. Thanks are extended to officials of the Warri North Local Government, especially the Deputy Chairman and Principal Officers, for their immense contribution to the success of the study. Special appreciation is also extended to Mrs A.N Egere, Community Development Officer based in Koko who devoted so much of her precious time and efforts assisting in the scheduling of interview and the interpretation of the questions to the respondents. Her exemplary dedication to duty contributed greatly to the cooperation of the women in the study area. Special thanks go to everyone of the women interviewed, whose names are listed in Appendix 1, who watched with amusement as the study group consumed not only their words, but the food and hospitalities of the people of Koko
Fishing Communities. Particular reference is made here of the President and members of the Ogben Cooperative (Farmers Multipurpose FSP) for their enthusiasm and tenacity in accomplishing the goals of the study.
Finally, I wish to thank the members of the study team: Mrs Lami Fadiora and Miss Remi Ajayi for their assistance in data collection, as interviewers and facilitators of focus group discussions. Additionally, the cooperation and the patience of the numerous grassroots economic units who actively participated in the Participatory Action Research for Development (PARD) survey, focus group discussions and other questionnaires are worthy of being mentioned. Last but not the least, Mr. Femi Ogungbamila should be mentioned for the documentation of the report.
<section>4</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
Koko fishing community is one of the major fishing communities in Nigeria. Activities within this sector are mainly controlled and affected by women. Because of the prevailing economic situation in Nigeria, many of these fishing communities face numerous problems, such as inadequacy of fish catches, spoilage, loss of income and others
In this context, this study was aimed mainly at an enumeration of sources of employment for women in the communities, a description of labour and time utilisation by women, a determination of women's daily real income and their daily activities in cash and kind and recommendations for improvement of the women's socio-economic conditions.
The study was carried out through the use of individual interviews, focus group discussions and use of secondary data between March and April, 1996.
The results indicated that:
· women in Koko fishing communities were engaged in various income-generating activities including fishing, fishing-related activities, farming, petty trading, fashion designing, hairdressing, making of soap, powder, and other toiletries, selling of empty drums from the oil industry, mat weaving, oil palm extraction, sale of fire wood, pepper grinding sale of locally made alcoholic drinks, kerosene, ice cream and government service,
· the women divide their time between household chores and income-generating activities, sometimes spending up to 16 hours between both functions It is also revealed that women, children and other relatives participate in the daily household chores,
· fish marketing and the marketing of other products is the most lucrative activity in the communities while production earns very small returns,
· the daily real income of women is made up of income from various sources including primary and secondary activities. Also, activities in kind, though these do not directly attract income, are indirect income-generating activities for these women For most of them, especially the full-time house-wives, activities in kind are the only income-generating activities;
· fisherfolk are aware of their dwindling fortunes due to inadequate capital to expand their businesses, low volume of catches and loss of income due to spoilage These inadequacies have also negatively affected other sources of employment in the area.
The study highlighted some of the problems confronting the fisherfolk as well as other categories of the working population.
Some of these problems and suggested solutions include:
· Loss of income from fish spoilage.
Technical assistance in the form of training workshops in the areas of fish handling. Preservation and processing will go a long way to arrest the situation to the extent that fish spoilage due to poor handling and inadequate processing would be considerably reduced. This improvement will increase fisherfolk's income, resulting from their sales of better quality fish products.
· Low volume of fish production due to the lack of good working relationship and capital. This is why only 20% of the fisherfolks belong to co-operative societies. Many of the respondents claim ignorance of the roles and functions of cooperative societies, yet it is one of the surest strategies for receiving help (financial, technical and training).
Training in conflict mediation exercise would help to remove distrust and other conflict factors responsible for their lack of good working relationship. Once the conflict situation is remedied, they can come together to solve financial problems which must be undertaken through group credit and savings scheme.
Training workshops on the benefits of co-operative membership is long overdue. It would assist the fisherfolk in their education vis-a-vis advantage in raising required capital and managing the funds for the purchasing of fishing nets, traps, canoes/boats and outboard engines.
· Transport and storage problems can be solved when people are organised into groups that can be trained to build canoes/boats and storage boxes.
Establishing trades co-operative groups according to what they do is essential. Using the laid down rules of co-operative societies, these trade co-operative groups will therefore use their official mandate to raise capital through their co-operatives to build and sell canoes/boats for transportation purposes.
Carpenters and woodworkers trained and resident in the communities would be employed in constructing transportation canoes/boats for the use of the fisherfolk.
· Following closely with issues of transport and storage problems is the issue of lack of employment opportunities.
Currently there are very few carpenters and woodworkers (only two men) in the fishing communities of Koko. Demand for transport canoes/boats as well as insulated ice boxes for the storage of fish products is a great opportunity for job creation for the unemployed members of the communities. Repairs and maintenance of transport canoes/boats and insulated boxes would be an essential section of the training programme to complement the life span of these activities. Therefore, more people would acquire the skills and be available to carry out orders resulting from the demand for canoes/boats and insulated boxes by the fisherfolks.
Those interested in acquiring this trade need no special skills except that they need minimum education. Their training programme will entail constructing items according to specified measurements. Thus, they need to learn how to carry out measurements, calculations, recording of information and reading instructions given to them.
Service areas with low market demand for small scale enterprises (not fishing-related) such as manual mat-weaving and so on can be improved with decorative designs for local and export markets These mats, in various sizes, will meet demands for gift items, curios, home floor and wall decor.
<section>5</section>
Maps of the survey area
Maps of the survey area
Fig. 1: Map of fishing communities of Benin river estuary.
<section>6</section>
1. Introduction
1. 1 General background of Nigerian fisheries
1.2. The role of fisheries in the national economy
1.3. The artisanal sector
1.4. Fisheries catch disposal
1. Introduction
1. 1 General background of Nigerian fisheries
Nigeria, with a population of about 88 million (1993 census), is multi-ethnic. It is the largest single consumer of fish and fish products in the African Region. It lies within the tropics between latitudes 4 ° and 14 ° north of the equator and longitudes 3 ° and 14 ° east of the Greenwich Meridian. It is bounded on the west by the Republic of Benin, on the north by Niger Republic, on the east by the Republic of Cameroun and washed on the south by the Atlantic Ocean. Sandy beaches stretch along most of the country's 800 kilometre coastline which is intersected by the Niger Delta noted for its intricate network of creeks and rivers.
The country which has an area of 913,072.64 square kilometres is well watered by the rivers Niger and Benue and their tributaries. Its climate varies from tropical at the coast to sub-tropical further inland. Two well-marked seasons are: dry season. from November - March, rainy season from April to October. Temperature at the coast hardly rises above 32°C, but humidity may be as high as 95%. The climate is drier further north and extreme temperatures are reputed, sometimes ranging from 36°C to 12°C.
In Nigeria, like all coastal West African countries. fish is the cheapest form of animal protein in the diet of the people for many decades before the economic woes of the 1990s. Therefore, the importance of the fisheries products in satisfying the nutritional needs of the people as well as providing employment cannot be overstated. Entire family units - men, ``omen and children in the fishing communities are engaged in the sector. Most of the coastal fishing is carried out by local fisherfolks from canoes operating from surf-beaten beaches and riverine areas. In Nigeria. women play a crucial role in fish production, processing. distribution and marketing. In addition. some of the women are crucial in financing fish production units Therefore, the economic role of women in fishing communities is significant and timely.
1.2. The role of fisheries in the national economy
Since the 1960s, the fisheries sector has contributed between 1.11 to 2.4 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) or 3.0 and 6.0 percent of the Agricultural GDP This is because fish is a major source of animal protein and has continued to grow in importance over the years, particularly, as a substitute to beef Recent studies confirm the increasing shift from meat to fish consumption among households in Nigeria (CBN/NISER, 1992). The artisanal fisheries sub-sector constitutes a major source of employment, especially in the southern coastal maritime/riverine areas. The estimated revenue is over five hundred million naira^1. Fish in Nigeria is caught from the sea, inland and more recently from ponds and other artificial culture systems. Artisanal fish catches from all the states in Nigeria rose steadily from about 465,569 metric tonnes in 1980 to 506,790 metric tonnes in 1983. Thereafter began a steady decline, starting with about 326,963 metric tonnes in 1984 to just
184,412 metric tonnes in 1993 (Table 1). Little wonder then that the self-sufficiency ratio in fish production based on a 3.5% population growth rate is given as 2X% for 1996 and projected to just 35% in the year 2010 (Table 1).
^1 US $ 1 = 80 naira (October 1996)
A downturn in the economy of the country naturally affected all sectors. Consequently, the fishing sector is also being affected by the impact of the worsening economic situation. The artisanal catches which have therefore started dwindling since 1983 got worse with the introduction of Structural Adjustment and has continued unabated as Table 2.1 clearly shows, thus resulting in demand being far below supply (Table 2).
Table 1: Nigeria Fish Production (Artisanal by States, 1980-1993)
YEARS
COASTAL
Akwa Ibom State
Edo/Delta State
Ctoss River State
Lagos State
Ogun State
Ondo State
Rivers State
SUB TOTAL
INLAND STATES
Anambra/Enugu St.
Bauchi State
Benue State
Borno/Yobe State
Adamawa/Taraba St.
Imo/Abia State
Kaduna State
Kano/Jigawa State
Katsina State
Kwara/Kogi State
Niger State
Oyo/Osun State
Plateau State
Sokoto/Kebbi State
SUB TOTAL
GRAND TOTAL
Source: Federal Fisheries, Abuja, 1995.
Table 2: Supply-Demand Projections and self-sufficiency Ratios in Fish Under 3.2 and 3.5 percent Growth Rate: 1996-2010 (' 000 Tonnes).
1. 3.2% Population
a. Supply
b. Demand
2. 3.5% Population
a. Supply
b. Demand
c. self-sufficiency Ratio
Source: NISER: Economic Background to NARSP.
* This is the proportion (percentage) of overall demand that is met by the available supply of fish.
1.3. The artisanal sector
In harvesting fish, shrimps and molluscs in the coastal regions marine, brackish and fresh water artisanal fishermen and women use gill nets, set nets, hook and line, traps, and other types of gears traditionally used in most fishing communities. They carry out their fishing activities using fishing crafts ranging from small unmotorised paddled dugout canoes to the motorised large Ghana-type boats. In general, fishing activities in the Niger Delta are characterised by low unit productivity, intensive labour, relatively low capital, low operational costs and limited gear coverage. Post harvest losses are high while profits are relatively low.
Unfortunately, there are limited research studies that have published quantitative information on the contribution of the fisheries sector to the Gross Domestic Product for Nigeria. However, it has been established that the inshore and offshore waters of the West African coast have rich fish resources available in quantities that can support commercial exploitation to meet at least 45 - 55 percent of domestic fish demand while in Nigeria, domestic fish production is responsible for 90 percent of fish consumed locally (Tobor, 1991). For over two decades now, the nation's population depended on the artisanal fish production as the main source of animal protein. This is due to the production problems in the livestock sector. These problems range from Sahelian drought to desert encroachment, rinderpest outbreaks and animal feed scarcity (Ajayi and Talabi, 1984).
In 1969, FAO published the result of a comprehensive survey on the coastal and estuarine fisheries of the then Western Region, now made up of Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Osun and Oyo States as well as the then Mid-Western Region, presently composed of Edo and Delta States The survey results compiled data on 300-600 fishing communities visited including the study area. A total of 91,203 fishermen were identified of which 54.32 percent were engaged in full-time fishing operations (FAO, 1969). Researches by Scott (1966) and Ndaguba (1983), Ssentongo et al (1983) indicated that fishing communities and fishermen estimated for Rivers and Cross River States (now Akwa Ibom and Cross River States) more than double the estimated population recorded for the Western and Mid-Western Regions.
Ajayi and Talabi (1984) estimated artisanal fishery potential for Nigeria to fall within the range of 128,000 to 170,000 out of which about 25,000 metric tonnes is Nemato palaemon hastatus, the rest being fish (Marioghae 1981). More recently, Okpanefe et al. (1991) carried out a survey of 62 fishing communities including the study area. The study highlighted the fact that fishing took place in every village surveyed, but on quite different levels. For example, in villages located in small creeks, fishing appears to be but one of two or three economic activities.
Bolaji et al. (1994) carried out a population growth and development study of two fishing communities in Delta State. Their study, like the previous studies, concluded that fishing is a primary viable profession of the fishing communities in the study area, hence, the need to manage the fishery resources in a way that it will continue to provide employment, adequate income and food to the increasing population of these fishing communities. Although figures on the growth rate were not given, the authors suggested sensitizing the fisherfolk on the interrelationships between population growth and the fishery resources, with emphasis on the limited nature of resources and its consequent need for conservation.
1.4. Fisheries catch disposal
FAO (1969), Talabi (1982), Ajayi and Talabi (1984) indicated that generally, fisherfolk (men and women) market large-sized fishes in the fresh form while fish landed alive are sold alive, for example the catfishes. Fisherfolk only preserve their fish products if there is no possibility of marketing the fish in the fresh form. It is therefore an accepted socio-cultural practice that over 90 percent of the artisanal catches are processed. They are smoke-dried or sun-dried, salted, or fried. Often, the rest of the products is marketed fresh with heavy loss of quality. Major difficulties affecting fish preservation are the design of fishing canoes which make chilling of products on board difficult and, the lack of ice and other preservation facilities at the landing sites since the artisanal fisherfolk hold on to traditional practices. These difficulties are responsible for the poor quality and high losses inherent to fish disposal with regard to fresh form.
<section>7</section>
2. Methodology
2. Methodology
A participatory action research approach was employed in addition to the use of primary and secondary data. Data from the author's previous studies were used to supplement secondary data from published and unpublished sources in addition to data compiled from participatory group discussions Information gathered is based on individual life histories or through open-ended questions from women of different generations in order to determine the way in which women's productive and reproductive labour, changes in relation to traditional, social and economic factors.
A sample of 88 women was selected. Purposive sampling method was used in order to cover various aspects of women's economic roles in the fishing communities. Special effort was made to include all economic ventures, attention was given to the scale of operation and method of fishing activities by men and women who supply the primary products. In-depth interviews, formal and informal and group discussions were carried out for the qualitative method.
For the analysis, simple counts, tables of frequencies were used. With respect to estimates of income, where applicable, figures were solicited for. In some cases, quantities were converted to the cash equivalent by using existing market prices for such products (e.g. fish, beef and farm products consumed in the home). Tables were used to bring out salient points.
<section>8</section>
3. Koko, the study area
3.1. Demographic characteristics of the respondents
3 1.1 . Age of respondents
3.1.2. Marital status
3.1.3. Educational level
3. Koko, the study area
Koko, a town in the Niger Delta, lies about 60-70 kilometres west of Sapele and Warri. It serves as a port on the Benin River Estuary in the same manner as Sapele and Warri for the Mid-Western Region. The relief is flat and low-lying with a coastal mangrove and rain forest vegetation. The population is about 10,000. The people belong to the mid-western multi-ethnic riverine group. Four ethnic groups identified in the area are: Itsekiri (the most prominent), Ilaje (migrant from Ondo State of the south-western region), Ijaw and Urhobo.
Koko is the administrative headquarters of Warri North Local Government Area. It is well-known for some important features. Historically, it was one of the European settlements in Nigeria because it serves as a gateway to the 62 villages scattered on both the left and right banks of the Benin River Estuary. Access is through the mouth of the Escavos River As a port for commercial boats and sea vessels, it has a historical past with trade relationship with Europeans. Finally, it is well located in relation to villages downstream because it has a good road link to Benin City, capital of Edo State and the rest of Nigeria. It is heavily patronised by villages around it, primarily for its hospital.
The importance of the fishing industry in Koko and surrounding villages cannot be overstated. It will remain one of the major fishing towns in coastal Nigeria, especially because it is well-situated along the Benin River Estuary (Fig. 2).
3.1. Demographic characteristics of the respondents
3 1.1 . Age of respondents
The age of respondents ranged from 17 to 75 years. Out of a total of 88 women, 67 (76%) fall within the active age bracket of 20-59 years (Table 3).
3.1.2. Marital status
Majority of the respondents (65%) were married. One of them was abandoned by her husband, while four (5%) were separated, six (7%) were divorced, five (6%) were widowed and the rest (17%) were still single. The natural thing expected of women in fishing communities is to bear children. Six of the unmarried respondents have one or two dependents (Table 4). l he social status of the women are enhanced by observing the traditional expectation of bearing as many children as possible, thus, ensuring the provision of an adequate labour force for the family chores. Also, the children are expected to take care of their parents in old age. Thus, about 49% of the respondents had between 5 and 11 children, followed by 40% that had between I and 4 children while 11% had no children yet (Table 5).
Table 3: Age Group of Respondents
AGE GROUP
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
N/S^3
TOTAL
3 N/S = Not Stated
Table 4: Marital Status of Respondents
MARITAL STATUS
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
Married
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Single
Abandoned
TOTAL
Number of Children
Frequency
Percentage
TOTAL
3.1.3. Educational level
Thirty-one (35%) respondents had no formal education, but thirty-two (36%) completed primary school education. Three (3%) had vocational training after primary school, while two (2%) had professional training after secondary school and another two (2%) had university education This is a unique situation. Lack of formal education is common among fisherfolks because of a lack of the infrastructure.
<section>9</section>
4. Sources of employment for women in Koko
4.1 . Economic activities
4.2. Secondary activities
4 3. Aspects of fisheries undertaken
4. Sources of employment for women in Koko
Women's economic activities are closely related to the socio-economic condition and tradition of the people. In general, fisherfolk are a special breed of people. They devote all their attention to fishing activities, repairing and maintaining their fishing equipment and making great efforts in solving problems connected with the industry. The fishermen migrate when there is a scarcity of fish to search for more fertile fishing grounds The women, especially the Itsekiris and jaws harvest fish and fish products from the main channels of rivers and maze of creeks.
The women are significant participants in the artisanal fishing industry. They are also considered specialists in post harvest activities even though traditional socio-economic expectations place special demands on the role of the women. They change their economic activities in line with the economic environment of the community. Trading for example is a versatile activity in which they naturally participate. They easily move from one commodity to another and entry into the market is open. The activities range from fish processing to street food vending and financial management in the fishing industry. Their activities vary according to the seasons. These are survival strategies which they employ as a show of concern for the welfare of their families.
Vending of cooked food is very popular with women as well as the selling of processed agricultural products. These include cassava and cereal based foods such as gari, starch, rice and corn dishes such as eba, foofoo, rice and beans as well as eko and moinmoin. Famous stews for cooked foods are locally prepared from oil palm fruits called "banga soup", served with starch foofoo or gari from cassava. Others are fried yam, cocoyam sweet potatoes and plantain. Palm oil extraction is popularly carried out. Making of traditional alcoholic drink from sugar cane is also an important economic activity.
Mat-weaving from papyrus reed and palm fronds also contributes to the economic activities of the women in addition to farming vegetables, pepper, cassava and yams. Some of them raise chicken, sheep, goats and pigs. Harvesting of periwinkles (molluscs) is gaining importance as the empty shells of the small snails are used in construction. These are mixed with concrete and gravel to strengthen foundations in construction.
Children are not left out in the economic activities. The women involve their children in trading. They are sent to hawk ice water and a variety of products. Vending of street foods take different forms from the port to the residential area or special market stalls and shops. Koko has three market locations from which goods from inland and neighbouring villages are taken and sold.
An important role women play as part of their economic activities is that of hostesses for migrant fishermen and visitors to the port town. They provide accommodation and cooked food for their migrants as well as finance their fishing activities by providing money for the purchase of needed items, repair of fishing equipment in return for acting as "middlemen" for the migrants. This role allows them to purchase and sell all the output of the migrants, thereby, profiting from the relationship.
Women also work as seamstresses, hairdressers, cosmetologists, soap makers and butchers. Professionally, there are women nurses, teachers, and civil servants. There are traditional mid-wives and healers. A survey of a sample of six women provides information on the daily activities of women engaged in the main economic activities in the study area.
4.1 . Economic activities
The people of Koko are primarily fisherfolks. Men, women and children are actively engaged in fishing activities. Other economic activities include: farming, trading, boat carving carpentry, driving and masonry. The men go to the sea throughout the week except Sundays (an accepted day of rest). Fishing is with small unmotorised dug-out canoes. The main gear used for fishing in the area are cast nets, gill nets, traps, hooks and lines. Associated with the industry is the promotion of other income-generating activities such as firewood selling, sale of fuel and water and road transportation of people and goods Therefore, the industry in Koko attracts men and women from other parts of the country. Throughout the year, on a weekly routine, traders from other towns such as Warri, Sapele, Benin City and so on, come to Koko to purchase goods which include all forms of fish products. The Ilajes from Ondo State are migrants who have become permanent settlers. Petroleum companies,
especially Total, Shell and Mobil, have set up offices in Koko.
Fish handling forms the primary economic activity for the majority of respondents. Sixty (68%) acquired the trade by legacy from their parents, especially their mothers. Ten (11%) stated that their engagement in fish production (artisanal fishing) was based on vocation.
4.2. Secondary activities
Some of the respondents disclosed that they now depend on other sources of income as primary activities while fish production and other fish related activities have become secondary for them (Table 6). The reasons given include the current economic depression which has made fishing an expensive venture.
Seventeen ( 19%) of the women are engaged in buying and selling of a variety of products from petty trading, provisions, clothing, firewood, plastics and so on. Ten (11%) are engaged in farming as a secondary activity, cultivating crops such as okra, cassava, yam, pepper and vegetables. They also grow plantain and oil palm Part of the harvested products are sold, while the remaining are consumed by the family. Some (6%) are engaged in street vending of cooked food items such as foofoo (made from processed cassava), pounded yam, fried yam and plantain, rice and beans.
The list of activities which women undertake in Koko is inexhaustible. They include fashion designing (dress making), hairdressing, making of soap, powder and other toiletries, selling of empty drums from the oil industry, mat-weaving, oil palm extraction, sale of firewood, pepper grinding, sale of locally made alcoholic drink, kerosene, ice cream and the government service. These activities can be grouped into five main categories namely: Fishing and Fishing related activities, Trade and Commerce, Service Industries, Agriculture and the Civil Service (Table 6).
4 3. Aspects of fisheries undertaken
The various stages in which respondents are engaged is reflected in Table 7.
Marketing of fresh fish is done by 22 (27%) of the respondents. Since electricity is unreliable, access to cold storage is hardly affordable, hence, most of the women sell their fish fresh to the middle men who take the fish to larger markets in Benin City, Sapele and Warri. As an alternative to preserving the fish products, fresh fish are processed. Processing and Marketing of fish is done by 15 (18%) of the respondents. Therefore processing and marketing of fish products rank second in position to the various aspects engaged in by Koko fish dealers. Of the women interviewed, only ten ( 12%) are engaged in fish production, although the cost of fishing nets is reducing women being fully active in the job. The remaining combine their various activities as the economic situation dictates.
Unlike previous interviews where some of the women consider themselves as fish producers because they finance the fishermen's activities, t