<title>Consultancy report. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
Basic project data
Basic project data
"IMPROVING THE STATUS OF WOMEN (THROUGH INCOME GENERATION AND FAMILY PLANNING) IN SMALL-SCALE FISHING COMMUNITIES IN CAPIZ AND PANGASINAN"
PHI/86/P16
KEY DATES
PANGASINAN
Appraisal
Negotiations
Approval
Feb. 1990
LBP-Pangasinan Memorandum Of Agreement
July 1991
Effectivity
Jan. 1991
Tripartite Review
Jan. 1992/Oct. 1994
Project Extension
Project Completion
31 Dec. 1994
Loan Closing
31 Dec. 1994
Post-Evaluation
KEY PROJECT DATA
Total Project Cost
P
Guarantee Fund
(As of 1990)
2.7 Million
(As of Sept. 1994)
3.3 Million
LOP Co-Financing
Interest Pate
CREDIT PROGRAMME
No. of Women's Groups Assisted
(As of 31 Aug. 1994)
Total Amount of Loans Releases
(as of 31 Aug. 1994)
P 4.501 Million
Outstanding Balance
0.896 Million
Current Accounts
0.795 Million
Past Due Accounts
0.101 Million
Collection Pate
Guaranteed Accounts
Past Due Accounts
Figure 1 - Map of Pangasinan
<section>2</section>
I. Executive summary
I. Executive summary
I. Background
1. This Report documents the outputs of the Credit /IGP Consultant pursuant to her Service Contract (SO) 94/014 covering the period 01 June to SC, September 1994.
II. Terms of Reference
2. This Consultancy Report therefore summarizes the
project proposals identified appraised prepared for 10 women's groups in Pangasinan for credit extension by the Land Bank. It highlights new and larger-scale IGPs identified for women associations and reports on the analysis of the use of loan funds. Finally, conclusion and recommendations were drawn on project implementation problems, issues and concerns in so far as they are relevant to the Consultant's scope of work as defined in the Terms of Reference.
III. Identification and Appraisal of IGPs
3. As of 30 September 1994, 32 IGPs categorized into 10 project types have been identified and corresponding project appraisal reports/proposals were prepared based on the results of the feasibility studies. The IGPs proponents consist of 10 women's groups in seven coastal barangays with a total membership of 288 participants.
4. A total of P 2,511,768.00 is required to implement the 32 IGPs. The loan component amounts to P 1,754,786.00 which is 70 % of the total investment, while P 756,982.00 or 30 % will be provided by the participants as their equity contribution to their projects.
IV. New IGPs for Development
5. This section focuses on new and larger-scale IGPs that contribute significantly to value-added formation. These IGPs will involve investments in productive assets in addition to working capital in order to increase income and create employment opportunities in the fishing communities. These proposed IGPs are presented in the form of concept plans or financial feasibility studies.
V Development of Transportt and Marketing Services
6. The provision of transport and marketing services as a project by itself or a support service to program assisted IGPs is deemed essential for the attainment of sustainable level of operations. A concept plan with implementing strategies and guidelines is presented for further refinement during the expansion/extension phase of the project.
VI Analysis of Loan Fund Use
7. In general, the loan funds were utilized by the women's groups for the intended purpose, i.e., as working capital for operating their chosen IGPs. There are, however, a few cases of fund diversion, three of which are highlighted in the Case Studies (Append): 2). Recommendations were also developed to avert such mal-practices in the future.
VII. Conclusion and Recommendations
8. In general, the credit program as a component of PHI/89/P16 is an effective strategy for providing women in selected fishing communities in Pangasinan an opportunity to engage in their chosen micro-enterprises.
9. Endorsement of the project extension/expansion is merited. Recommendations along this direction are as follows:
a) Improvement of project planning/appraisal process;
b) Emphasis and phasing of project extension expansion;
c) Redefinition of acceptable level of household income to reflect the effect of inflation as a criteria for project beneficiaries,
d) Funding process/terms and conditions;
e) Strategies to ensure sustainability of assisted IGPs after 1994;
f) Other lending channels; and
g) Strengthening of project management and administration.
<section>3</section>
II. Terms of reference
1. Project background
2. Objectives
3. Scope of work
4. Expected outputs
II. Terms of reference
1. Project background
In the past, population control program alone was not effective. It was therefore deemed essential that the two fundamental principles expressed in the Philippine National Population Plan 1989 - 1993 be integrated. Hence population related concerns must be seen by the people as part of the government broader developmental concerns and not to be pursued in isolation.
Towards this direction' the Project covering the Provinces of Capiz and Pangasinan was conceptualized and implemented as a community-based approach to family planning. It is envisioned that in the long run, such as an integrated strategy will build a lasting and meaningful commitment on the part of the people.
2. Objectives
The project therefore, aims to achieve the following objectives:
a) Long-Term Objectives: To contribute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of National Population Plan through an integrated approach to improve the living conditions of small-scale fisherfolk with particular emphasis on women;
b) Short-Term Objective: By the end of the project life:
b.1 At least 50 % of project participants would have increased their income and improved their skills in managing their micro-enterprises;
b.2 At least 50 % of project participants would have manifested positive changes in attitude, knowledge and practice in family planning! population education and MCH-related matters; and
b.3 A community-based,' managed integrated system would have been developed and tested.
3. Scope of work
As provided in the Terms of Reference for Consultancy work as Credit/IGP Consultant for Pangasinan, under Service Contract (SC) 94/014 for a duration of two months spread over four months from 01 June to 30 September 1994, the following were the tasks performed:
a) Assisted the new members of women's groups in Pangasinan in the identification of income-generating projects (IGPs) and preparation of project feasibility studies;
b) Assisted new borrowers in completing loan applications;
c) Prepared summary appraisal reports for submission to the Provincial Project Coordination Committee (PPCC);
d) Identified new and larger-scale income-generating activities for women which, in addition to working capital advances, involve capital assets such as equipment and facilities used for aquaculture, fish/food processing, transport, storage, catering, tailoring, etc., and which can be carried out on an individual basis or by several women on a voluntary basis but not necessarily by all the members of a women's group;
e) Reviewed and analyzed the use of loan funds already granted to women's groups;
f) Coordinated with the National Consultant, Fish Processing Expert, in the preparation of marketing enterprises for women in the province; and
g) Prepared a Consultancy Report at the end of the assignment.
4. Expected outputs
The initial outputs expected from the Consultants are the following:
a) Project appraisal reports in the form of project proposals for submission to the PPCC;
b) Assistance in the identification of IGPs and preparation of feasibility studies;
c) Assistance in presentation of the project proposal to the participants; and
d) Assistance in completing loan applications.
At the end of the tour of duty, the Consultant shall submit the following outputs:
e) Concept Plans and/or financial studies for new asset-based IGPs/micro-enterprises;
f) Analysis of loan fund use; and
g) Consultancy Report consolidating all the above-mentioned outputs as well as conclusions and recommendations.
The work plan indicating the objectives/activities, linkages timetable and expected outputs, a" approved by the National Project Coordinator, is presented in Appendix 1.
<section>4</section>
III. Identification and appraisal of income-generating projects
1. Project types
2. Financing schemes
3. Gestation and sustainability
4. Status of loan applications
III. Identification and appraisal of income-generating projects
1. Project types
As of 26 September 1994, a total of 32 IGPs categorized into 10 project types has been identified and corresponding project appraisal reports/proposals have been prepared based on the results of the feasibility studies. The IGPs are proposed by 10 women's groups to benefit 288 participants in seven barangays within the project area (Table 1).
2. Financing schemes
Table 2 presents the financing plan for each of the 32 IGPs prepared, indicating the key components (LBP loan and participants' equity contribution) and total project cost. As a whole, the 32 projects require a total investment of P2,511,768.00, of which 70% or P1,754,786.00 will be provided in loan proceeds and P756, 982.00 or 30% as equity contribution of the participants.
By project type, the average percentages of total project cost per key components are as follows:
PROJECT TYPE
NO. OF PROJECT
AVE. PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL PROJECT COST
LOAN COMPONENT
EQUITY CONTRIBUTION
a) Fish Trading Retail
Wholesale
b) Commodity Trading
c) Hog Fattening
d) Bamboo Trading
e) Fish Capture
f) Fish Nets
g) Canteen Operation
h) Dried Fish Trading
i) Rolling Store
i) Bagoong Trading
k) Palay Trading
TABLE 1
PROJECT TYPES BY PROPONENT
PROPONENT
LOCATION
TOTAL NO. OF PROJECTS
NO. OF PAX
PROJECT TYPES
1. Mona Mothers' Association
Mona, Alaminos
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Hog Fattening
2. Dangley Loving Mothers' Association
Fish Trading
Dangley, Agno
Commodity Trading
Bamboo Trading
Fish Captureng
3. Masiden Loving Mothers' Association
Masidem, Bani
Wholesale Fish Trading
Retail Fish Trading
4. San Isidro Women's Action Club
San Isidro, Binmaley
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
5. Boracay Women's Ass'n.
Pao-llio-llio, Burgos
Fish Trading '
Commodity Trading
Fish Capture
Fish Nets
6. Samahan Ng Mga kababaihan sa Bolasi (SAKABO)
Bolasi, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Hog Fattening
7. Longos Women's Ass'n.
Longos, Amangonan,
Fish Trading
San Fabian
Commodity Trading
8. Rang-ay Women's Ass'n.
Mabilao, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Canteen Operation
Hog Fattening
9. Narvarte Women's Ass'n.
Nibaliw, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
10. Pangascasan Mothers' Association
Pangascasan, Sual
Dried Fish Trading
Rolling Store
Bagoong Trading
Palay Trading
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
TOTAL
SUMMARY:
TOTAL NO. OF PROPONENTS : 10
NO. OF PROJECT TYPES : 12
TOTAL NO. OF PARTICIPANTS : 288
TOTAL NO. OF PROJECTS : 32
TABLE 2
FINANCING SCHEMES BY PROJECT, TYPE/PROPONENT
PROPONENT/LOCATION
PROJECT TYPE
LOAN COMPONENT
PARTICIPANTS' EQUITY CONTRBN
TOTAL PROJECT COST
AMOUNT
AMOUNT
AMOUNT
1. Mona Mothers Association Mona, Alaminos (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 52,620
P 7,040
P 59,660
Cmdty Trading
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 208,273
P 83,834
P 292,107
2. Dangley Loving Mothers' Ass'n. Dangley. Agno (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 96,075
P 16,100
P 112,175
Cmdty Trading
Bamboo Trdg.
Fish Capture
SUB-TOTAL
P 203,835
P 68,610
P 272, 445
3. Loving Mothers' Association Masidem, Bani (2nd Round of Loans/*New IGP)
Wholesale Fish Trig.*
P 102,000
P 6,882
P 108,88
Retail Fish Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 161,500
P 20,907
P 182,407
4. Women's Action Club, Sn. Isidro Norte, Binmaley (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 69,175
P 15,725
P 84,900
Cmdty Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 96,720
P 129,74
5. Boracay Women's Association Pao-Ilio-Ilio. Burgos (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 81,230
P 15,295
P 96,525
Cmdy. Trading
Fish Capture
36,4S
Fish Nets
SUB-TOTAL
P 163,370
P 350,275
6. Samahan ng mga Kababaihan sa Bolasi (SAKABO) Bolasi, San Fabian (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 58,420
P 68,26
Comdty Trdg.
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 311,446
P 114,480
P 425,926
7. Longos Women's Association Longos Amangonan, SF. (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 80,885
P 17,860
P 98,745
Comdty Trdg.
SUB-TOTAL
P 106,152
P 31,300
P 137,452
8. Rang-Ay Women's Association Mabilao, San Fabian (1st Round of Loans/New IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 24,640
P 6,965
P 31,60
Comdty Trdg.
Canteen Optn.
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 207,190
P 320,02
9. Narvarte Women's Asssociation Nibaliw, SF. (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 94,895
P 17,290
P 112,18
Commodity Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 123,184
P 33,290
P 156,474
10. Pangascasan Mothers' Ass'n. Pangascasan, Sual (2nd Round of Loans/ Same IGPs)
Dried Fish Trading
P 6,400
P 300
P 6,70
Rolling Store
Bagoong Trdg.
Palay Trading
Fish Trading
Comdty Trdg.
SUB-TOTAL
P 173,116
P 71,792
P 244,908
GRAND TOTAL
P 1,754,786
P 756,982
P 2,511,768
3. Gestation and sustainability
The results of the feasibility studies indicate that that the IGPs submitted for financing are viable from the marketing, financial and operational viewpoints and, consequently, favorably recommended for approval.
Through series of financial projections, the financial profitabilities of the project were appraised, including their capability to generate the cash requirements of project operations as well as the debt-service obligations of the proponents.
Hereunder are the selected financial profitability indicators for each project type (based on the average):
PROJECT TYPE
RETURN ON INVESTMENT
PAYBACK PERIOD
PROFIT MARGIN
MONTHS
a) Fish Trading
· Wholesale Trading
· Fish Retail Trading
b) Commodity Trading
c) Hog Fattening
d) Bamboo Trading
e) Fish Capture
f) Fish Nets
g) Canteen Operation
h) Dried Fish Trading
i) Rolling Store
j) Bagoong Trading
k) Palay Trading
The foregoing indicates the potentials of the IGPs for sustained profitability and higher income with the proper management guidance and direction.
4. Status of loan applications
As of 22 September 1994, proposals for seven women's associations have been submitted, out of which loans of three women's groups were released for the month of September
The project proposals of three remaining women's associations are due for submission to the Land Bank within the week of 22 September 1994.
<section>5</section>
IV. New IGPs development
1. Fish drying
2. Improved processing technologies for various fishery products
3. Other potential IGPs
IV. New IGPs development
In the future, the planning direction is to put up new and/or related but are larger-scale IGPs that contribute to value-added formation. These IGPs involve investments in productive assets, in addition to working capital, in order to increase income and create employment opportunities in the fishing communities of Pangasinan. Such asset-based, larger-scale IGPs can be carried out on an individual basis or by several women's groups as whole.
Some of these IGPs are hereunder presented by way of concept plans or financial studies. Proposed IGPs involving improvement of fish processing technologies were developed/studied in consultation with Mrs. Anselma S. Legaspi, Fish Processing and Marketing Consultant, PHI/89/P16.
1. Fish drying
1.1 Background
Pangasinan is rich in aquatic resources which have made its people highly dependent on the marine waters for food and livelihood, especially those living in coastal communities.
Because of the abundance of fresh fish and the shortage of supply at different seasons, a participant from the Narvarte Women's Association, Mrs. Norma Orjeda of Nibaliw, San Fabian, Pangasinan, has identified the prospects of a fish drying project. She decided to engage in this IGP with the initial batch of loan she obtained from the Land Bank.
Although her second tranche of loan is being processed at present, Mrs. Orjeda hopes that in the future, she could invest in productive assets that would improve the project's earning capacities.
1.2 Objective
This section focuses on the development of an appropriate fish drying technology and analyzes its effects on the production, finance and management of the project, in order to provide a guiding tool in the preparation of a feasibility study in the future.
1.3 The Product
Dried "tuyo" ("lapad" and "tulis") and bolasi constitute the project's main product lines. The dried fish are packed in corrugated boxes at 20 kilograms per box for wholesale buyers, or in plastic bags of varying sizes depending on the number of kilograms ordered by retail buyers.
1.4 Market Prospects
In general, the dried fish industry is a sellers market since consumers as well as wholesale and retail buyers purchase dried fish as fast as the processors can produce them.
The market for dried fish in the project area is composed of households and eateries. The present market coverage of the project includes Mangaldan, Dagupan City and Baguio City. Market expansion towards the northern provinces is projected.
Due to the shortage of supply against an increasing demand, the price of dried fish has steadily increased. The prevailing market prices follow the law of supply and demand. To the processors, this is the safest pricing scheme in order for their product to compete in the market. At present, the proponent sells "tuyo" at P60.00 and dried bolasi at P65.00 per kilogram on wholesale basis.
1.5 Trends in the Industry That Warrant Improvement in Processing Technology
a) Seasonality of Fresh Fish Supply
The processing of dried fish in closely associated with the supply of fresh fish available locally. When supply of fish is high and prices are relatively low, the proponent cannot engage heavily in the purchase of fresh fish due to lack of storage facilities. A glut in the supply of fresh fish normally occurs during the rainy season, when sundrying is limited.
As practiced, fish are dried in bamboo trays with nylon netting to allow adequate air circulation. Fish are covered with plastic sheets to protect them from the rain and flying insects.
b) Severe Competition
Processors in the project area and the rest of Central and Northern Luzon are faced with keen competition from dried fish produced in the Visayas, Palawan and Bicol areas due to their higher quality.
c) Small-Scale Production
The proponent like the other processors in the area has low volume operation. As a result, optimum production could not be achieved and production cost per unit becomes relatively high. Efforts should be exerted to increase production volume to attain greater efficiency and reduce production costs.
1.6 Proposed Technological Improvement
a) Technical Description
The drying process can be improved by setting up a bunkhouse for drying fish. This structure (Schematic Diagrams are presented in Figure 2) can serve dual purposes: working area for splitting and cleaning of fish and drying area. It utilizes indigenous materials and may be constructed by modules of 6 meters by 4 meters per unit depending on the target production volume.
Other technical specifications are as follows:
- 31.50 m. in height
- 0.5 concrete sidings
- Concrete flooring (or natural earthfill flooring)
- Transparent roofing
- Fully screened
- With movable drying shelves/trays
The bunkhouse for drying has a maximum capacity of one ton and reduces drying time by 35%. Moisture content can be controlled, unlike in sundrying where there is a tendency to overdry.
b) Advantages
i) Duration of drying-during sunny days is reduced from 1-1/2 to one day and during rainy days from 2 days to I-1/2 days;
ii) The operation from fish splitting to cleaning and sundrying is completely free from flies and other insects;
iii) Pat infestation is avoided;
iv) Higher quality is achieved since moisture is controlled and overdrying due to direct sunlight is avoided;
v) Manpower utilization during drying time is kept to a minimum since there is no need to cover the fish when rain falls; and
vi) As a result, production increases by 30 to 35% quality is improved.
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, A
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, B
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, C
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, D
1.7 Results of Financial Study
Based on the financial profitability analysis (the results of which are presented in Annex 1), the adoption of the proposed bunkhouse for drying will increase production per month by approximately 35% and, correspondingly, monthly sales revenues will increase by 35% and month net profit by 65%.
1.8 . Recommendations
In view of the favorable result of the financial study, the proposed technology may be considered for further refinement/improvement of design and, subsequently, for pilot testing possibly using a fund to be set up for purposes of technology testing, among others, as proposed in item 4.4 of the overall recommendations.
2. Improved processing technologies for various fishery products
2.1 Introduction
With the presence of abundant and very cheap fishery resources in various project sites in Pangasinan, the Office of the National Project Coordinator has initiated the development of fish processing technologies that will enhance not only the marketability but likewise add more economic value to the fishery raw materials available in the areas. At the same time, introduction of improved technologies will also promote the income-generating capability and sustainability of the various women's associations in the province.
Determining the technical feasibility of improved technologies as well as the market acceptability of the end products does not guarantee the financial viability of undertaking the projects; thus, the need for a financial study.
The objective of the present study is, therefore, to assess the projects financial profitability and capability to service loan obligations.
2.2 Basic Assumptions
The appraisal of the projects profitability and debt-service capacity is based on the following assumptions:
a) Production processes to be utilized are technologically sound;
b) Market acceptability of final products has been clearly established;
c) Each project will be implemented by a women's association as a group;
d) The project duration is six months;
e) The loan conditions are as follows:
i) The women's association will provide as equity contribution at least 5/. of the total project cost;
ii) The loan proceeds will be utilized only for the intended purpose; and
iii) The loan is payable within a six-month period at 14% interest per annum.
f) The project is financially feasible if it meets the following criteria:
i) The project is commercially profitable, i.e., it generates a rate of return of at least 15%; and
ii) The project can meet its debt-service obligations.
2.3 Results of Financial Studies
Included in this section are the results of the financial profitability analysis (Annex 2) of two fish processing technologies applicable/appropriate to Pangasinan, namely: fish smoking and oyster sauce making.
Smoked fish preparation was prepared particularly for Pangasinan, while the latter, although designed for women's associations in Capiz, can be looked into for possible adoption in Pangasinan when oyster farming is pursued by women's groups so that the prices of the raw materials could be reduced.
The financial feasibility studies conducted by the IGP Consultant for other fish processing technologies in Capiz are likewise included in Annex 2 for information and reference.
a) Fish Smoking
The study looked into the financial viability of three options based on the type of smoked fish products, namely:
Option 1: Smoking of Milkfish - Traditional Way
Option 2: Smoking of Boneless Milkfish
Option 3: Smoking of Small Fish (Herring and Scads)
The project cost consisting of loan component and equity contribution and selected financial indicators for each option are presented below:
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Project Cost
(P)
Loan Component
(P)
Equity Contrbn.
(P)
Total Monthly Sales
(P)
Gross Profit on Sales
(P)
Ave. Monthly Net Profit
(P)
Return on Investment
Payback Period
(Mos.)
Profit Margin
Break-Even Sales Vol. Per Month
(Packs)
Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit
(P/Pack)
On the basis of the above indicators, Option 2 is recommended for implementation with credit extension from the Land Bank. As shown in the projected cash flows, the project under Option 2 will be able to provide the daily cash requirements for its operation as well as the monthly loan amortizations.
b) Oyster Sauce Making
The project requires a total of P14,868.00 for implementation. This amount will be financed through a P2,995.00-loan from the bank and P1,870 will be contributed by the women's association as equity. These figures represent 87.4% and 12.6% respectively of the total project cost.
The project has been found to be financially profitable on the basis of the following indicators:
Monthly Sales Revenues:
P17,920.00
Ave. Monthly Net Profit:
P 4,645.00
Return on Investment:
Payback Period:
3.20 Months
Profit Margin:
Break-Even Sales Vol. Per Month:
54 Bottles
Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit:
P10.37
In view of the foregoing, the project may be pilot tested in Pangasinan when oyster farming shall have been fully operationalized and prices have been brought down to acceptable level for purposes of processing.
3. Other potential IGPs
The following projects have been identified by the Consultant as potentially viable and have forward and backward linkages to the existing IGPs. These projects may be the subject of detailed feasibility studies in the future.
3.1 Hog Breeding
About five women's groups are engaged in hog fattening projects of various production scales: 3, 4 and 6 heads. The financial profitability of this project has been proven by the participants and accepted by the Land Bank itself. However, one crucial factor to the continued success of the project is the availability of reliable and quality stocks of hybrid piglets.
Along this direction, the development and implementation of a hog breeding program may be explored as an income-generating activity of the Federations of Women's Groups at the provincial or municipal level, or as an inter-federation undertaking.
The hog breeding program should take into account the production requirements and scheduling of various women's associations engaged/to engage in hog fattening projects and will need a strong technical support through linkages with appropriate agencies/institutions, both government and private, within the province.
Capital assets in the form of hog breeding facilities and equipment as well as initial working capital may constitute the loan component of the project.
3.2 Meat Processing
Various meat processing/preservation methods can be taught to the women with the end in view of increasing the value-added to fattened hogs. Such methods include the preparation of the following processed meat products:
Tocino
Fork Hamonado
Longaniza
Bola-Bola (Meat Balls)
Embutido
Pork Nuggets
Pork Ham
Corned Pork
Capital assets that may have to be put up for this project include:
Pressure Cooker
Kitchen Tools/Utensils
Gas Stove
Weighing Scales
Cooking Kettles
Plastic Sealing Machines
Working Tables
Comparative cost and income per unit as well as break-even volume and selling price should be established through detailed financial feasibility study.
3.3 Catering Services
Two participants from Mabilao's (San Fabian, Pangasinan) Rang-Ay Women's Association have embarked on their respective projects involving canteen operation. As their capability is developed, they and other participants could expand into larger-scale operation as canteen concessionaire and/or catering service outfit.
Facilities and equipment for large volume food preparation, dining/food service, catering and other paraphernalia are the capital assets that are needed.
A detailed feasibility study is again called for as basis for financial assistance and as a guide to project management operation.
<section>6</section>
V. Development of transport and marketing services
1. Rationale and objectives
2. Proponent
3. Strategies of implementation
4. Guidelines fop transport operation
5. Recommendations
V. Development of transport and marketing services
1. Rationale and objectives
For LOP-assisted IGPs to attain sustainable level of operations, a viable marketing support mechanism and transport/delivery services should be put in place. Provision of these two basic services will ensure the availability of fishery products, basic commodities and other commercial goods to target clients/customers at the right volume, price and quality.
2. Proponent
The development and implementation of transport and marketing services may be undertaken as a project itself or as a support service by either of the following proponents:
a) New or existing women's associations or fishermen' 5 groups (under the proposed expansion plan for 1995 onwards);
b) Federation of women's/men's groups at the municipal level; and
c) Coalition of women's/men's groups at the district or provincial level.
3. Strategies of implementation
Any or a combination of the following strategies may be considered in pursuing the proposed project:
a) Market matching as a strategic intervention in linking buyers and suppliers in a cost-effective and sustained manner;
b) Development of market information system to provide timely and reliable information needed by both buyers and sellers;
c) Market explorations through meetings/discussions with buyers/sellers' groups, producers, processors, exporters and coordinating agencies;
d) Linkage with government agencies and private institutions providing technical assistance, such as :
- Department of Trade and Industry - Trade Exhibits
- Cooperative Development Authority - Nationwide Marketing Grid
- Fisheries Development Support Services Division (FDSSD), Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources - Promotion and Market Matching
- Development Bank of the Philippines/Dept. of Transportation and Communications- Transport Cooperatives
4. Guidelines fop transport operation
a) Choice of trucking fleet should be appropriate to the requirements of the products to be delivered. Based on interviews with project participants, 2-tonner Elf Trucks with insulated aluminum vans will be most appropriate for fishery products and dry goods.
b) Availability of spare parts from nearby auto/truck supplier at any time should be a prime factor in the selection of truck brand and model.
c) Supplier of the trucking fleets should be able to provide one-year guarantee on parts and service, availability of back-up spare parts and free truck registration;
d) Trucking operation should emanate from an accessible location from the standpoint of clients and delivery points;
e) The proponent or any member of the group should be knowledgeable on the repair/maintenance of vehicles.
f) Prior to commencement of trucking operations, the proponent must secure the requisite franchise from the Land Transportation Franchise Regulatory Board (LTFRB) of the Department of Transportation and Communication (DOTC).
g) A business license shall likewise be obtained from the Municipal Mayor's Office.
5. Recommendations
A full development of the concept and implementation plan for pursuing the project is necessary. Likewise a thorough marketing and financial study should be undertaken to assess its viability.
<section>7</section>
VI. Analysis of loan fund use
1. Introduction
2. Analytical tool
3. Limitations of the study
4. Findings and analysis
5. Recommendations
VI. Analysis of loan fund use
1. Introduction
During the three-year project implementation, in general group members of different women's associations have utilized their loans for the intended uses. Most of them made use of their loans as working capital for various trading projects. A few others have invested in assets such as engines for fishing boats and fish nets.
It cannot be denied, however, that there have been instances of fund diversion which should be prevented in the future for greater program outreach and project sustainability. The analysis of loan fund use, therefore, has been conducted with the end in view of formulating appropriate strategies, safeguards and control measures to ensure proper use of loan funds.
2. Analytical tool
To generate the information necessary for analysis, interviews with women members and project staff were undertaken with the aid of guide questions (Appendix 2).
The basic premise of the program is that a credit line extended to the women members can make any or a combination of the following happen:
a) It will enable the memb