<title>Study on women's organizations in Brufut and Gunjur communities and the factors that favour or impede their sustainability in the Gambia. Study on women s organizations in Brufut and Gunjur communities and the factors </title>
<section>1</section>
Summary
Summary
The study looked at women organizations in the Brufut and Gunjur communities with the aim of determining their objectives, the relationship between and problems within the groups, technical assistance needs of the groups, their credit needs and associated problems, their access to equipment, and the utilization of their revenue
Thirteen organizations were studied, 6 from Brufut and 7 from Gunjur - two coastal towns in the Western Division of The Gambia The population of the two towns combined is 18,627 of which women constitute 50 percent
The major conclusions from the study are:
Group Relationship
Generally, the women tend to come together on the basis of a common objective to empower themselves. The strategies applied are the fostering of unity, improving their living standard, and increasing their income.
The bigger organizations tend to have a more complete structure than the smaller ones While the smaller ones have only a President and Vice president, the bigger ones have President, Vice President, Treasurer, and Social Secretary.
The sizes of these organizations range from 20 to 500 members. The most common criterion for membership of these organizations is to be female. Most of the organizations also require a membership fee For eight of the organizations studied, the membership fee ranges from D5.00 to D50. 00. An exceptional membership fee of D100.00 is charged by the Brufut Women Fish Smokers and Driers Kafo (a mandinka word for organization) of 36 women. In some cases, having exemplary character is demanded for membership.
All the year round activities occupy 92 percent of the organizations Of this number 76 percent work as a group and 24 percent as individuals within the framework of an organization.
Written records of activities and decisions are kept by 46 percent of the organizations. Most of these, with sizes from 175 to 500 members, are from Brufut This indicates that bigger organizations with complete structures keep written records of activities and decisions.
Problems encountered
All the organizations covered encounter problems. These range from inadequate implements, lack of capital, to lack of transport. Those with severe implement problem constitute 62 percent, those suffering from a lack of capital, 30 percent, and those with transport shortage, 8 percent.
Finance and Credit
Contributions from members finance 68 percent of the organizations. The rest are financed through trade (petty trading, 8%, and sale of produce, 8%), NGO funds (8%), and membership fees (8%)
All the organizations need credit But none of them had access to credit because it was either not available or the procedures for access are not known. Inability to get access to the credit institutions or agencies was reported by 76 percent of them. If they were to receive credit, 92 percent prefer group loan and 8 percent as individuals. The desired use for the credit has been expressed as increasing production (61%), buying more materials for their activities (23%), solving managerial problems (8%), and meeting production targets (8%)
In order to fill the gap in financing their activities, they engage in traditional fund raising. Traditional methods like drumming and kora (24 string Gambian musical instrument) shows are applied by 54 percent of the organizations The revenue realised is used to buy equipment, materials, and to conduct maintenance
Savings is practiced by some of the organizations. At least 54 percent are involved. Of these 72% save with the International Bank for Commerce and Industry (BICI) and 28% with the traditional scheme ("Osusu") That indicates that either the BICI is more readily accessible to the women or they trust it more than the local scheme The money saved is used as soft loan to members, as contingency funds, and for maintenance work. Apart from the savings, many of the organizations receive financial assistance either in cash or in kind At the time of the study 2 received financial assistance from the EEC, I in kind from the Christian Children's Fund (CCF), and 3 received assistance in kind from the Women's Bureau and the Department of Community Development.
Conclusion
The study indicates that women do organize themselves in various groups to address their needs and aspirations. Each of the organizations has clearly defined objectives. In achieving the objectives they encounter management problems and little or no access to resources.
Recommendations
o A specially designed management training for members of the executives in the various women's organizations is essential to ensure an effective and sustainable structure
o Target small group members for training on simple accounting, record keeping, and business management skills in the local language
o Assist the organization by creating awareness on how to reach the relevant agencies for assistance.
o Fund raising activities should be encouraged to enable groups to finance their activities locally
o Groups should be encouraged to save to ensure sustainability of activities.
o Deep wells should be provided to supply water for all year round activities
o Provide appropriate technology for preservation of fish and garden produce. Train the members on the techniques
o Create marketing outlets, proper storage facilities, and suitable sheds for selling fish to passersby at strategic locations along the roads.
o Adequate and suitable materials relevant to the group's activities should be provided in consultation with the organizations to encourage their participation in their development.
o Create a system to sensitize women's organizations on avenues to secure loans.
o Nutritional education programmes should be directed to groups that are working on improving nutritional standards
o Provide funding to groups and individuals and monitor the utilization for effective management
o Provide improved delivery systems such as good roads for transportation of goods to markets.
o Short term technical assistance should be provided to the organizations.
o Encourage closer working relationship between interdependent organizations that have complementary roles
<section>2</section>
Meanings
Meanings
Organization
Organization is a word many use loosely, it includes all the behaviour of all participants Others equate it with the total system of social and cultural relationships, while others refer to it as an entreprise But, generally the term organization implies a formalized "Intentional Structure of roles or positions "
"Intentional structure of roles or position:-" People working together to fill certain roles The roles people are asked to fill should be intentionally designed to ensure that required activities are done and to make sure that activities fit together so that people can work smoothly, effectively and efficiently in groups.
Informal organizations:- A network of personal and social relations not established or required by formal organizations but arising spontaneously as people associate with one another These dynamic interpersonal relationships are influenced by the number of people in the group, the actual personnel involved, what the group is concerned with, its changing leadership, and the continuing process of change. Informal organizations eventually emerge as formal organizations
KAFO
Is a Mandingo terminology for organization. Literally meaning coming together
OSUSU
A traditional scheme of saving among women to assist each other A daily, weekly or monthly contribution is made among members who have agreed to undertake this scheme A leader is identified who collects the money and hands it over to one of the members by turn until the whole group benefits. The amount of money paid depends on the individuals in the group and the income they earn. Sometimes the group may decide that the amount of money collected be used to purchase materials to facilitate individual members activities.
ENTREPRENEUR
An entreprising person working within or outside an organization
INTRAPRENEUR
A person who focusses on innovation and creativity and who transforms a dream or an idea into a profitable venture by operating within the organizational environment
"BANA BANA"
A Fish Monger.
"BENTENGO"
A locally made platform usually made up of wooden planks or corrugated iron sheets used for selling, storage or drying fish.
"KORA''
A traditional Gambian Musical instrument with twenty-four strings.
<section>3</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
AGE:
ASSOCIATION OF GAMBIAN ENTREPRENEURS
B.I.C.I:
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
CCF:
CHRISTIAN CHILDREN FUND
EEC:
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMISSION
GWFC
GAMBIA WOMEN'S FINANCE COMPANY
IBAS:
INDIGENOUS BUSINESS ADVISORY SERVICES
IDAF:
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF ARTISANAL FISHERIES IN WEST AFRICA
WISDOM:
WOMEN IN SERVICE DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT
WIDP:
WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
WB:
WOMEN'S BUREAU
TANGO:
THE ASSOCIATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
<section>4</section>
Summary of Findings for Brufut and Gunjur Women's Organizations
Summary of Findings for Brufut and Gunjur Women's Organizations
The study looked at women organizations in the communities of Brufut and Gunjur with a view to determine their objectives, the relationship between and problems within the groups, technical assistance needs, credit needs and the problems associated with the group credit schemes, access to equipment for their work and utilization of revenue
A total of thirteen organizations were studied, six from Brufut and seven from Gunjur, which are two coastal towns in the Western Division of The Gambia. The population of the two towns is eighteen thousand six hundred and twenty seven. In both communities women constitute fifty percent of the population.
The most important conclusions arising from this study are as follows:
Overall, women tend to come together, based on their common objectives to empower themselves These objectives range from fostering unity, improving their standard of living to increasing their income
In terms of structure, the bigger organisations tend to have a more complete structure than the smaller ones. While the smaller organisations have only a president and Vice president, the bigger organisations have president, Vice president, treasurer and social secretary.
The overall sizes of these organizations under study range from 20 to 500 members A common criteria which emerged from both Brufut and Gunjur communities is that to become a member of the organization you must be a female. In addition to that most of the organisations require a membership fee. Eight out of the thirteen organizations studied require a membership fee ranging from D5. 00 to D50. 00. An exceptional membership fee of D 100 00 is charged by the Brufut Women Fish Smokers and Driers Kafo which has a membership of 36 women. Some of the organizations also have qualitative criteria e.g. 'exemplary character' as an additional requirement for membership.
Ninety two percent (92%) of the organizations are involved in their respective activities all the year round and seventy percent of these organizations work as a group while twenty two percent work individually within the framework of an organisation.
The study shows that more than half (54 percent) of the organisations do not keep any written record of their activities and decisions while forty six percent (46%) do. Most of the organisations that keep written records came mostly from Brufut with sizes ranging from 175 to 500 members. The study thus seem to suggest that organisations with a complete structure tend to keep written records of their activities and decisions.
Table 1: Organisations (Membership fee charged and number of Members)
Organisations
Membership Fee Charged
Number of Member
Brufut Women Tie and Die Association
Brufut Women Soap Makers Association
Brufut Women Gardeners Association
Brufut Women Fish smokers and Driers Kafo
Brufut Market Women Association
NR
Brufut Women Bana Bana Association
NR
Gunjur Women Sesame Growers Association
NR
Gunjur Women Petty Traders Association( 1 )
Gunjur Women Gardeners Association( 1 )
Gunjur Women Gardeners Association(2)
Gunjur Women Fish Smokers and Driers Association
Gunjur Women Petty Traders Association(2)
NR
Gunjur Women Fish Smokers and Driers Club
Table 2: Duration of the activities of the organisation and how the activities are undertaken
Duration
Count
Percentage
All the Year round
Seasonally
Total
Group
individually
NR
Total
Table 3: Proportion of the organisations that keep written records of their activities
Keep written records
Count
Percentage
YES
NO
Total
All the organizations encounter problems. These problems range from indaquate implements to lack of capital and transport Sixty two percent (62%) of the organizations suffer from inadequate implements, thirty percent (30%) lack of capital and eight percent (8%) lack of transport.
Table 4: Problems encountered by the organisations
Problems
Count
Percentage
Inadequate implements
Lack of Capital
Lack of Transport
Total
Sixty eight percent (68%) of the organizations are financed through contributions from members and the rest are financed through the buying and reselling of goods (8%), sale of produce (8%), NGO funds (8%) and membership fees (8%) respectively
Table 5: Funding sources of the Organisations
Source
Count
Percentage
Membership
Buying and Reselling
Sale of Produce
Membership Fees
NGO Funds
Total
This study seems to suggest that none of the organizations has access to credit facilities. This is because credit facilities were either not available or the procedures to access them are not known. All the organizations interviewed have expressed the need for credit facilities. The overwhelming number of these organizations prefer this credit be given out to them as a group (92%) whiles (8%) of them prefer the credit individually All the organizations have indicated the willingness to repay the loan if given credit. Sixty-one percent of these organizations need credit to increase production, 15% to buy more materials for their activities, 8% to improve on their managerial problems, 8% to meet their production targets, and 8% to increase the purchase of their materials.
Table 6: Reasons for requesting Loan
Reasons
Count
Percentage
Increase production
Buy more materials
Improve management problems
Meet production target
Increase purchase of Material
Total
The organizations have problems in getting credit These problems are mostly the inability to get access to the credit institutions or agencies (76%). The other problems are lack of managerial skills, and government neglect of the organizations. However, there are not more than one organization that is, (8%) reporting each of these two problems
Table 7: Problems in securing Loan
Problems
Count
Percentage
Credit institutions cannot be accessed
Lack of Managerial Skills
Cannot identify the Sources of Credit
Neglect by the Government
Total
More than half of the organisations are involved in some form of traditional fund raising activities, atleast once in the year. Fifty four percent are involved in traditional methods of generating funds, such as Drummings, and Kora Shows. Those involved are mostly large organisations The revenue realized from such fund raising activities are utilized by the organizations to buy more equipments, materials, and to conduct maintenance activities.
Table 8: Organisations involved in traditional fund raising activity
Activity
Count
Percentage
Drumming and Kora Shows, etc.
Not involved in any traditional fund raising activity
Total
At least half of the organisations interviewed are engaged in some form of savings activity. Fifty four percent (54%) of the organizations are involved in savings while fourty six (46%) are not. Of the fifty four percent who are involved in savings, thirty -nine percent (39%) save with the BICI and the rest in "OSUSU" fifteen percent (l5%) . This suggest that BICI seems to be the most readily accessible credit institution to these women organisations
Table 9: Proportion of organisations involved in savings
Institution
Count
Percentage
BICI
OSUSU
Not Involved in saving Schemes
Total
Fifty Four percent (54%), of the organizations which are involved in savings intend to utilize the money saved as soft loan to members, 15% intend to use it for contingency and (31%) maintenance work.
Table 10: Uses of the funds realised from the fund raising activities
Use
Count
Percentage
Soft loan to Members
Contingency
Maintenance Work
Total
Slightly more than half of the organisations received some form of financial assistance either in cash or in kind. Six organizations have received assistance in cash or kind, based on the request made. Two organizations received financial aid through the EEC. They are the Brufut Women Fish Smokers and Driers Kangbeng Kafo. Each received D10,000 and D3,00O, respectively. The Brufut Women's Tie and Dye Association received assistance in kind from CCF. The other agencies which provided assistance in kind are The Women's Bureau, Department of Community Development, through the provision of materials and equipments.
Table 11: Amount of financial aid received by the Organization
Organization
Amount In Dalasis
Brufut Women Tie and Die
(In Kind)**
Brufut Women Soap Makers Association
Brufut Women Gardeners Association
(In Kind)**
Brufut Women Fish Smokers Association
Gunjur women Sesame Growers Association
(In Kind)**
The study of women's organizations in both Brufut and Gunjur have shown that women do organize themselves in various groups to address some of their needs and aspirations. Each organization was able to clearly define its objectives, and problems in terms of management and access to resources.
RECOMMENDATIONS
o A specially designed management training for members of the executives in the various women's organizations is essential to ensure an effective and sustainable structure
o Target small group members for training on simple accounting, record keeping and business management skills in the local language The Indigenous Business Advisory Services
(IBAS) and the Non Formal Education Unit have the expertise
o Assist the organization by creating awareness on how to reach the relevant agencies for assistance
o Fund raising activities should be encouraged to enable groupsto finance their activities locally (Kora Shows, Osusu, Working on farms etc).
o Encourage savings schemes for groups to ensure sustainability of activities and group continuity. Women's organizations involved in savings schemes should reach these women in their communities or setup focal points that they can access easily
o Provide deep wells with high water tables that can serve organisations activities all the year around
o Provide appropriate technology for preservation of fish and garden produce and train members of the groups in the techniques This activity can be undertaken in close collaboration with the Food and Nutrition unit of the Ministry of Agriculture, and NGOs involved in such activities
o Create marketing outlets, and proper storage facilities. Provide women with suitable sheds for selling fish to passersby at strategic locations along the roadside
o Provide adequate and suitable materials relevant for the groups' activities in consultation with the organisations to encourage participatory development
o Create a system, to sensitize women's organizations on avenues to secure loans, and how to go about it. The Women's Bureau, The Indigenous Business Advisory Services (IBAS),
The Gambia Women's Finance Company GWFC), Association of Gambian Entrepreuneurs (AGE) and WISDOM are institutions that could assist.
o Groups which emphasize improvement of nutritional standard should be targeted for nutritional education programmes
o Provide funding to groups and individual women and monitor the utilization for effective management.
o Provide improved delivery systems such as good roads for transportation of goods to markets
o Short term technical assistance should be provided to the organization.
o Encourage closer working relationship between interdependent women organizations that have complementary roles
<section>5</section>
1. Methodology
1. Methodology
In working on this report to address the above perspectives, primary data collection was undertaken in both Gunjur and Brufut Fishing Communities for analysis of the existing women's organizations
A questionnaire was designed to look at these organizations at their different levels (see annex on questionnaire).
A series of visits to both Gunjur and Brufut were made and meetings organized with the Alkalo and all the women's group leaders.
The purpose of the study was explained to the community leaders and this paved the way for free interaction of the data collector and the members of the Communities studied.
An inventory of all the existing women's groups/ organizations were made. Interviews were conducted using the questionnaire The questionnaire was pre-tested and adjusted.
The questionnaire was defined using the following variable structures- Activities, Equipment, Finance, Credit and Revenue
A focus group discussion was also undertaken in both communities. This was aimed at generating qualitative data to supplement the quantitative data. All the organizations in Brufut and Gunjur participated in the focus group discussions.
A case by case analysis was made to elicit response from individual organizations, this approach was adopted to develop individual organizational profiles
<section>6</section>
2. Individual Organizational Analysis
2.1 Brufut Women's Tie And Dye Association
2.2 Brufut Women Gardeners Association
2.3 Brufut Women Bana Bana Association
2.4 Brufut Market Women Association
2.5 Brufut Women Fish Smokers And Driers 'Kangbeng' Kafo
2.6 Brufut Women Soap Makers Association
2.7 Gunjur Women Petty Traders Association
2.8 Gunjur Women Sesame Growers Association
2.9 Gunjur Women Gardeners Association
2.10 Gunjur Women's Fish Smokers And Driers Club
2.11 Gunjur Women Petty Traders Association
2.12 Gunjur Women Fishmongers And Driers Association
2.13 Gunjur Women Gardeners Association
2. Individual Organizational Analysis
Introduction
This study aims at reviewing the factors that favour and/or impede the sustainability of women's organizations in Gunjur and Brufut Fishing Communities. Based on the findings, it also determined the objectives of the organizations and investigated and described them. The strength and organization of the groups has been reviewed through the following perspectives
o the different types of organizations,
o the relation between and problems within the groups,
o technical assistance needs,
o credit needs and the problems associated with the group credit schemes,
o access to equipment for their work and,
o utilization of revenue
FINDINGS
The organisations in this study can be classified in terms of activity into four broad industries. These are Artisanal Fishing, Horticulture, Cottage and Petty Trading. Less than half of the organisations in this study, that is, 31% are engaged in Artisanal fishing, about the same proportion 31% are engaged in Horticulture, and 16% are engaged in some form of Cottage industry whilst 22% are into Petty Trading.
Table 12: Classification of the organisations
Type of Industry
Counts
Percentages
Artisanal Fishing
Horticulture
Cottage
Petty Trading
Total
BRUFUT AND GUNJUR
Six women's organizations/groups were identified to be in existence in Brufut while seven were identified in Gunjur. They are:
o Brufut Women's Tie and Dye Association
o Brufut Women Soap Makers Association
o Brufut Women Gardeners Association
o Brufut Women Fish Smokers and Driers Kafo(2)
o Brufut Market Women's Association
o Brufut Women's Bana Bana Association
o Gunjur Women Sesame Growers Association
o Gunjur Women Petty Traders Association
o Gunjur Women Gardeners Association
o Gunjur Women Gardeners Association (two)
o Gunjur Women Fish Smokers & Driers Association
o Gunjur women Petty Traders Association
o Gunjur Women Smokers & Fish Driers Club
2.1 Brufut Women's Tie And Dye Association
The above organization has a membership of 200 women, and its structure is composed of a President, Vice President, and a Treasurer.
OBJECTIVE:
To facilitate the achievement of unity among women and to increase earnings as a group for a better living.
MEMBERSHIP
Must be a female, with D50-00 admission fee
ACTIVITY/(IES)
Involved in Tie and Dye all the year round, work as a group, and keep written records of activity
PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
o Lack of enough Dye and White Satin
o Poor quality equipments as pans
o Difficulty in replacing them
FINANCE
The organization is financed through membership subscription and entrance fees. It also had in kind Tie and Dye materials from CCF on request
ACCESS TO CREDIT
This association has no credit facilities but indicated the need for credit to increase production capacity and also to improve their condition. They expressed a need for 20,000 Dalasis as a loan fund for the group. The group attributed the problem of getting credit to lack of contact with the appropriate agencies.
This group has not been involved in any form of fund raising Instead the group is involved in savings with a Banking Institution, with the intention of ensuring timely purchase of material for Tie and Dye activities
2.2 Brufut Women Gardeners Association
This association has a membership of 175 women and its structure is composed of a President, Vice President, Treasurer, Secretary General, Assistant Secretary General and a Social Secretary
MEMBERSHIP
Must be a female, with D50-00 admission fee
OBJECTIVE
To bring the women folk of the community together, and to promote unity as well as enhance high productivity and better management of their produce.
ACTIVITIES
Grow and market vegetables throughout the year in the community and greater Banjul area Also involved in group farming. Keep records of their activities and decision (eg. minutes).
PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
o Lack of enough equipment to work effectively
o Shortage of water in the gardens
o Marketing and storing
o Transportation
o Insufficient funds to acquire tools and materials
o Lack of the necessary contacts for securing loan
EQUIPMENT/MATERIALS
Watering Cans, Pans, Hose Pipes, Spades, Knives, Hoes, Buckets etc found suitable and purchased from shops.
FINANCE
The organization is financed through the effort of its members, from the sales of garden products and entrance fees
Group has some form of assistance in kind. Four wells and some barbed wires were provided by the Christian Children's Fund (CCF)
ACCESS TO CREDIT
The group has no access to credit facilities, but interested in securing one for the organization to enable it increase its production capacity, ensure better marketing strategy and better co-ordinate its activities.
Amount needed by the group is D30,000-00 and they intend to pay back the loan as a group. The group indicated that contact with the appropriate bodies to secure loans was a problem. Other traditional methods the group employ to generate funds are, organizing traditional dances, 'Kora' shows and Concerts at least, once a year. It realizes D800-00 from such activities which it ploughs back to the organization's activities such as digging more wells, and maintenance of garden fences for the group
The organization is involved in savings with a Banking Institution (BICI). The money saved is seen as a security for emergencies
HOW ORGANIZATION CAN BE STRENGTHENED
The group suggested that it can only be empowered if enough funds to provide more wells are made available to them inorder to increase production in their garden.
2.3 Brufut Women Bana Bana Association
Has a membership of 20 women and the structure consists of only a President and Vice President.
OBJECTIVE
The main aim of this organization is to generate income by providing fish for the inhabitants of the surrounding villages.
To improve standard of living of their individual families
MEMBERSHIP
Membership to this organization is based on the individual being physically and mentally able and willing to undertake the task
No membership fee is paid, but you must be a female.
ACTIVITIES
Sale of fish in the market of Brufut and the environs all the year round This activity is undertaken individually, and they do not keep records of activity or decisions
PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
o Lack of Transportation
o No sheds for these women to place and display and sell fish along the road side where public transports stop to allow passengers buy fish from them
o Facilities for preservation are inadequate and where available is controlled by men who tend to marginalise them
o Storage and marketing facilities are major constraints
o Some of the materials used are unsuitable for the type of activities they are involved in
o The group felt neglected by authorities and does not have the appropriate contacts to secure loans
EQUIPMENT/MATERIALS
The group utilizes materials like Pans, Baskets, Buckets, Plates and Trap of different sizes
The group felt that some of the materials they used such as plates are not suitable, and they are purchased, and usually materials are not sufficient.
FINANCE
The group is financed from membership subscriptions from time to time No form of financial assistance provided but indicated the need for credit for the organization to increase the purchase of their commodities such as fish and for self enhancement.
The amount requested is D12,000-00 as a group and they intend to pay the money back. The major problem outlined by this group in securing loans are related to negligence by the authorities and lack of means of contact. This group is involved in savings in the form of Osusu, which is utilized as soft loans to members of the organization.
WAYS TO STRENGTHEN AND IMPROVE ORGANIZATION
The group felt that if enough fund is provided with good roads and vehicles and appropriate materials for the task they undertake, it will help to empower them.
2.4 Brufut Market Women Association
Has a membership of 30 women with a structure consisting of only the President and Vice President
OBJECTIVE
The main objective of this group is to generate income for themselves and increase standard of living and to foster unity among themselves
MEMBERSHIP
No subscriptions are paid, but a criteria is set for membership i.e. "A female of exemplary Character", and membership is open only to women
ACTIVITIES
This group is involved in trading of agricultural commodities, such as retailing of vegetable to the community. This activity is undertaken by these women all the year round, and they undertake this activity individually but employ a strategy in purchasing these commodities as a group which is shared among its members.
No written records of activities and decisions are made, and they do encounter problems in the organization.
PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
Market is not spacious leading to :
o lack of space to accommodate all the members,
o lack of tables or sheds to display goods,
o lack of finance for the necessary working capital,
o temporary sheds which are not cost effective
EQUIPMENTS/MATERlAL
Pans, Empty Sacks, Baskets, Strings etc
The group felt that some of the materials they use are suitable, such as pans, baskets, strings but felt that the sacks and wooden platforms (Bentengo) were not sustainable and durable
FINANCE
The group is financed from membership subscriptions
ACCESS TO CREDIT
The group has no credit facilities but expressed the need for an increase in the size of their market, and to diversify its commodities It needs D20,000 which they are willing to accept as a group loan Unfortunately, they have no source of external financing The group is not involved in any form of fund raising activity or in savings
HOW ORGANIZATION CAN BE STRENGTHENED
The organization suggested that if the market structure is improved and money is available for the purchase of items in demand their group will be strengthened
2.5 Brufut Women Fish Smokers And Driers 'Kangbeng' Kafo
Has a membership of 36 women smokers and driers with a President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary General
OBJECTIVE
The objective of this group is to bring unity among the women of Brufut and to coordinate their efforts as a group for better marketing of their goods
MEMBERSHIP
D100-00 entrance fee and must be a female.
ACTIVITIES
Individually involved in fish smoking and drying at the Brufut Beach all the year round.
Written records of activities and decis