<title>Gender issues in the Zambia forestry action programme. Gender issues in the Zambia Forest Action Programme</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary of comments on ZFAP sub- programmes
Summary of comments on ZFAP sub- programmes
Awareness of the importance of integrating gender issues in forestry programming exists and concerns are well articulated. The main constraints for gender integration in the current programme are the lack of gender disaggregated information and the lack of skills in gender analysis. Related to this is the lack of skills in initiating and maintaining participatory processes.
The following text summarizes the initiatives suggested for each sub-programme to address the above mentioned constraints.
Indigenous Forest Management and Biodiversity Conservation Programme (IFMBP)
Programming for IFMBP needs to be based on gender disaggregated information, an understanding of the contributions currently made by women and men in the areas of indigenous trees and conservation, and on documented knowledge of the rural women and men of the forest resource. IFMBP must develop strong links with the NGOs to facilitate the collection of gender disaggregated information and to strategize for future management and conservation. IFMBP must identify and develop gender sensitive tools to sustain the participation of rural women and men in indigenous forest management and biodiversity conservation.
Trees and Forest Development Programme (TFDP)
Programming for TFDP needs to be based on local level analysis of the roles of women and men in the agricultural, forestry and related sectors. The starting point for TFDP should be the reasons for the existence of trees on farms currently, not the assumption that "a tree growing culture" is entirely absent among rural people. It is fundamental that information on farm, tree activities is gender disaggregated as it is well established that there is significant variation in gender roles in this area. Supporting services, such as extension, information dissemination, and seedling provision must also be gender sensitive.
Forest Industry Development Programme (FIDP)
Not enough is known about the roles of women and men in the forest industries, particularly in the sector of non-wood products. As FIDP is also posed to have significant impacts on poverty alleviation, it is vital that gender analysis of current roles will be carried out as a basis for strategizing equitable participation in the future.
Woodfuel Energy Development Programme (WEDP)
Household fuel activities is a sector in which gender roles have always changed relatively fast depending on economic and technological changes. In any development of household strategies for woodfuel efficiency, the users need to be fully participating. The introduction of new technology at the household level, for example, can only succeed with full participation of the users to ensure that it meets cultural, economical and technological criteria of the user.
Forestry Education and Training Programme (FETP)
From the perspective of the gender issues this sub-programme needs most input. FETP has the potential of being the major strategy for redressing many of the identified gender inequities in the sector. The strategies summarized below in 2.2.2. have now been incorporated in Volume 3.
Forestry Research and Extension Programme (FREP) To make sure that FREP provides information needed for the implementation of participatory forestry, FREP should concern itself with development of methodology and tools for gender analysis and for participatory forestry, and with promoting partnerships between the scientific community, the rural community and the NGO community. The link between extension and research components of FREP must be explicit at the level of activities. The TORs of all extension staff should be reviewed to ensure the inclusion of criteria to measure performance on sustaining participatory forestry and understanding of gender roles in the area.
Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (PMEP) The monitoring and evaluation of participatory forestry must include community based evaluation indicators. The process of identifying these indicators must be sensitive to gender, age, wealth and other social factors that determine the roles of women and men in the forestry sector. All information collected through PMEP must be gender disaggregated whether it relates to the monitoring and evaluation of activities in the forestry sector or to the management of those activities. Reporting by Forestry Department personnel should be reviewed to ensure information flow on issues relating to gender and participation.
The new forestry policy represents a significant shift towards recognizing the contributions of various stakeholders in the forestry sector. This shift towards participatory forestry requires retraining and training of forestry personnel in participatory and gender sensitive planning, monitoring and implementation. Strengthening institutional capacity to carry out identified strategies is fundamental to the successful implementation of the new policy. Zambia as a country is in state of transition. As a result socio-economic pressures result in changing gender roles. The Forestry Department needs to be responsive to these changes in the community level programming. These changing roles must be identified as one of the critical factors influencing the choice of forestry objectives. Because women's participation in the management of the forestry sector is known to be out of proportion with their contribution to it, the new policy must also make explicit reference to strategies
that will correct this imbalance. Such strategies would include guaranteeing women access to forestry training in all of its sub-fields, the collection of gender disaggregated information, evaluation of performance based on indicators relating to gender participation and affirmative recruitment policies.
<section>2</section>
Summary of gender strategies for ZFAP
Summary of gender strategies for ZFAP
The following strategies have been included in Volume 3 of ZFAP report.
1. Participatory Forestry (ZFAP)
1.1. Framework for Participatory Forestry
At the heart of participatory forestry are people; women, men, girls and boys. Participatory forestry aims to build upon the existing interactions between people and forest resources. It promotes rural women and men as the agents and beneficiaries of forestry activities. Policy for participatory forestry builds on the knowledge of local women and men, their needs and priorities, and integrates forestry with agriculture, livestock production and small-scale industries.
1.2. Tool for Participatory Forestry
Implementation of participatory forestry requires detailed knowledge of what women, men, girls and boys do, what resources they have to do it with and who benefits from their activities. This kind of detailed information about the lives of rural communities is seldom available. Gender analysis is a tool to help fill this information gap.
2. Capacity Building (FETP) The identified gender strategies cannot be operationalized with current capacity. Their implementation requires that the staff of the Forestry Department as well as its partners are familiar with participatory development in general, and with gender analysis in particular. Gender analysis training increases institutional capacity to address both social and environmental concerns of forestry development. This contributes to more sustainable, equitable, and effective forestry development.
2.1. Training of Trainers
The starting point is Training of Trainers. Potential trainers should be identified among the staff of the Forestry Department, in the NGO sector and Zambia Forestry College. It is important that the selected trainers are in a position to carry out training of one or more of the key stakeholder groups, are both women and men, and are representative of Zambia geographically.
The Training of Trainers should cover the following: Participatory forestry, gender analysis, and organization of training.
2.2 Trading in Gender Analysis
Gender analysis training raises awareness about what gender is, how gender roles manifest themselves, and how gender roles interact with forestry.
2.2.1. Forestry Department All Forestry Department personnel, especially the extension service, should be trained in gender analysis as a matter of urgency. The new forestry policy adopts a participatory approach to forestry through such strategies as joint management of forestry resources. If forestry personnel does not have the skills to sustain participatory processes and to ensure gender sensitive planning, there is a grave danger that current gender imbalances will be further reinforced in the sector.
2.2.2. Zambia Forestry College and School of Forestry and Wood Science, Copperbelt
University
The institutions of higher education are key entry points to redressing gender imbalances that have been identified in the forestry sector. This can be done in the following ways.
o Ensuring increased intake of women students at the College and at the University through quotas. The purpose of the quota strategy is to ensure that attention is paid to the aspects that are currently constraints to equitable access to education in forestry. The established quota should be regarded as a goal. Two suggestions for addressing current constraints are: 1) establish separate admission criteria for those students electing to prepare themselves for the less science oriented fields of forestry, e.g. extension, small business development etc. Admission criteria should include performance in subjects such as sociology, economics, anthropology etc., and 2) establish a bridge term at the College for those candidates who need to upgrade their science skills before entering the regular programme
o Ensuring increased numbers of women receiving forestry training through improvement of physical facilities at the College and the University.
o Providing gender analysis training to all who teach at the College
o Developing and using gender sensitive teaching aids and materials
Reviewing curricula to strengthen an understanding of the roles of women and men in forestry, and to develop skills in using gender analysis
2.2.3. Other stakeholders
NGOs are a substantial resource for participatory forestry. It is important that they are involved in gender analysis training both as trainers and trainees to ensure that the partnership between the Foresty Department and the NGOs continues to be strengthened.
Gender analysis training should also be accessible to those working to strengthen the linkages between the Forestry Department activities and the private sector. The private sector development has a particularly strong role to play in poverty alleviation, and could have a significant impact on women.
3. Structural Transformation (Forest Sector Policy and Institutional Reform) The gender inequities in the forestry sector in Zambia have been well articulated. Structural transformation of the forestry sector should, therefore, concern itself not only with accommodating women in the programming but with explicitly strategizing for increasing women's access to and control over the forestry sector.
3.1. Gender Guidelines for Forestry Department
Forestry Department should develop clear departmental guidelines for integrating gender into its day-to-day activities. The Gender Guidelines would demonstrate the Department's commitment to consciously addressing existing gender imbalances. The Gender Guidelines should concern itself with such issues as the status of gender participation in the sector, its impact on participatory forestry, strategies for integration of gender in forestry activities, and criteria and mechanisms for monitoring integration of gender.
3.2. Ministerial Gender Co-ordination Unit A Gender Co-ordination Unit should be established at the Ministerial level to:
o develop Gender Guidelines for Forestry Department co-ordinate gender analysis training
o develop and strengthen links to NGOs and the private sector
o develop and strengthen links to other sectors
3.3. Departmental Gender Focal Point In accordance with Zambian Cabinet instructions that the gender focal points be senior managers, it is suggested that the Departmental Gender Focal Point should be the Chief Conservator of Forests or the Deputy Chief Conservator of Forests. S/he would be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the Gender guidelines throughout the Forestry Department.
4. Operationalization of Integration of Gender Issues (PMEP, FREP)
4.1. Review of Terms of Reference and Performance Evaluations
The Terms of Reference of forestry extension staff, forestry rangers, assistant chief conservators of forests and the chief conservator of forests should be reviewed to include explicit tasks related to the integration of gender issues in the forestry sector.
Performance evaluation of the Forestry Department personnel must include explicit criteria for assessing achievement in the areas of participatory forestry and integration of gender issues in the forestry sector.
4.2. Review of Reporting
Reporting by the Forestry Department personnel must be developed both to provide a tool for Performance Evaluations and, more importantly, to collect gender disaggregate information relating to community level forestry activities.
5. Outreach and alliances (IFMBP, TFDP, FIDP, WEDP, FREP, PMEP)
5.1. Public Awareness
As the Forestry Department is undergoing structural transformation as well as fundamentally changing its approach to implementing forestry policy, it is vital that public awareness campaigns are strengthened to ensure that the public is aware of the new expectations that are directed at them and their participation in the sector.
5.2. Gender Disaggregation of Information
As new data bases and Management Information Systems are being established for the forestry sector, it is vital that from the beginning all information pertaining to human interaction with forests is gender disaggregated. Currently the lack of such information is a major obstacle to effective planning of participatory forestry. All forestry research must explicitly seek to understand the contributions already made by women and men in the sector and consequently develop strategies based on these contributions.
5.3. Strengthening the links to the. NGO community
The current resources of the forestry sector to carry out participatory forestry are extremely limited. It is vital that the Forestry Department works together with NGOs, some of whom have substantial experience in participatory approaches, to develop an institutional understanding of the stakeholders and their roles in the forestry sector.
<section>3</section>
Summary of a gender analysis framework for ZFAP
Summary of a gender analysis framework for ZFAP
Several different Gender Analysis Frameworks exist today. They are step-by-step tools for carrying out gender analysis, which help to raise questions, analyze information, and develop strategies to increase women's and men's participation in and benefits from forestry programmes.
Gender Analysis Frameworks are concerned with:
1. The development context or patters in an area, answering the questions What is getting better? What is getting worse?
2. Women's and men's activities and roles in the forestry sectors, answering the questions Who does what?
3. Women's and men's access to and control over resources, answering the questions. Who has what? Who needs what?, and
4. The forestry programme actions needed, answering the questions What should be done to close the gaps between what women, and men need? What does development deliver?
Gender Analysis can be used for example in the following situations:
o development of village level forest management plans to ensure that the contributions of both women and men are adequately recognized in determining access to and control over resources
o development, or review, of forestry policy to ensure sustainable forestry through equitable participation of all stakeholders
o profiling of stakeholders to develop an understanding of who the stakeholders in the forestry sector are beyond gender to other socially determined characteristics.
o restructuring of the forestry sector to ensure equitable participation at all levels and in a diversity of functions by both women and men.
o development of criteria for training selection or recruitment to ensure that women and men have equal opportunities to progress in their career and that there are both women and men working in diversity of capacities in the sector to work with the women and men of the other stakeholder groups
<section>4</section>
Appendix 1: Terms of reference
Appendix 1: Terms of reference
Under the overall supervision of the Director, Field Operations Division and that of the Chief, Forestry Operations Service, with the guidance of designated technical support and operations officers, the expert/consultant will, under the direct supervision of the Chief Technical Adviser and in close collaboration with the National Project Director, carry out the following duties:
1. Review all relevant gender documentation from the government and NGOs as well as the work done by the project's local consultants;
2. Provide a clear analytical framework on the gender issues in Zambia;
3 In the light of findings and conclusions, integrate key gender elements in the ZFAP subprogrammes;
4. Prepare a report, including findings and recommendations, which should be discussed and cleared with the Government authorities concerned before departure from the country. The consultant will then present the report to FAO HQ (within one month of leaving the country) and will amend it in the light of comments received.
Entry on Duty: 7.2.1997
Duration: 2 weeks
Language: English
<section>5</section>
Appendix 2: People contacted in Zambia
Appendix 2: People contacted in Zambia
Ms Salome Anyoti, Royal Netherlands Embassy
Dr. Ermias Bekele, Zambia Forestry Action Programme
Ms Monique Calon, Royal Netherlands Embassy
Ms Theresa Chewe, Zambia Alliance for Women
Ms Anna Chileshe, Zambia Forestry College
Ms Leya Chipepa, Zambia Association for Research and Development
Mr. Frank van Dixhoorn, Royal Netherlands Embassy
Ms Christine Kahanda, People's Participation Service
Ms Margaret Kaembe, Zambia Alliance for Women
Mr. Mikko Leppanen, Provincial Forestry Action Programme
Mr. George Mburathi, Food and Agriculture Organization
Ms Mgula Mubonda, The World Conservation Union
Ms Grace Mulapesi, Gender in Development Division, cabinet Office
Ms Winnie Musonda, United Nations Development Programme
Mr. Peter Mwanfuli, Ministry for Environment and Natural Resources
Mr. John Mwanze, Zambia Association for Research and Development
Mr. David Nkatha, Zambia Forestry Action Programme
Mr. Salomon Phiri, Food and Agriculture Organization
Dr. Sr. A. B. Ponga, Gender in Development Division, Cabinet Office
Ms Tarja Saarela-Kaonga, Finnish Volunteer Service
Ms Emily Joy Sikazwe, Women for Change
Ms Ines Simuunza, Zambia Forestry Action Programme
Ms Sheila Siwela, Eastern and Southern African Management Institute
<section>6</section>
Appendix 3: Documents reviewed
Appendix 3: Documents reviewed
ZFAP documents
Main report (draft). Volume 2. 196p. & Volume 3.
Objective. To introduce the Zambia Forestry Action Programme (ZFAP) Consensus Building and Planning Process.6p.
ZFAP Secretariat (1996) Proceedings of the First ZFAP Technical Workshop. Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, Lusaka. 45p.
ZFAP Secretariat (1996). Proceedngs of the ZFAP Second Rechnical Workshop to review findings of the ZFAP National and International Consultants. Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, Lusaka.69p.
Consultants' reports
Alejarvi, Pekka (1996). Forest Management Planning and Inventory. ZFAP, Lusaka.46p.
Forster, Robert (?). Forest Economics in Zambia. ZFAP, Lusaka.66p.
Mtonga, Suya B. (1996). The role of women in forestry in Zambia. ZFAP, Lusaka, 39p.
Mwenya, A.N. (1996). Forest Ecosystems Conservation. ZFAP, Lusaka.114p.
Roper, John (?). Role of Non-Governmental Organizations in Forestry Development. ZFAP, Lusaka. 48p.
Richard Woodroofe & Associates with Moses Banda & Company (1996). Study on the Restructuring of thee Forestry Department into a Proposed Forestry Authority. Lusaka, 39p. + annexes
Sibande, S. (1996). Forest Resource Management. ZFAP, Lusaka.46p.
Simamba, B.H. (1996). Forest Legislation. ZFAP, Lusaka. 77p.
Wanchinga, D.M. (?). Forest Institutions. ZFAP, Lusaka. 65p.
Zambia National Forest Policy (1996). ZFAP Secretariat, Lusaka.59p.
Taskforce reports
The Contribution of Forestry to the National Economy. 47p
Ecosystems Conservation. 69p.
Forest Based Industries in Zambia.27p.
Forest Policy and Legislation. 36p.
Forest Resources Management.45p. + annexes
Gender issues in Forestry.20p.
Review of the Current Status of Education and Training, Research and Forestry Extension in
Zambia. 96p.
The Role of Forests in Land Use. 54p.
Soil and Water Conservation. 60p.
The Status of Farm Forest and Agroforestry in Zambia.61p.
The Status of Non-Wood Forest Products in Zambia. 41 p.
Woodfuel Energy in Zambia. 51p.
Other documents
Gender in Development Division (1996). Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women in Zambia. Cabinet Office, Lusaka. 17p.
International Alliance of Women (1993). Seminar on Environment and Development. Zambia Alliance of Women, Lusaka.73p.
Lingen, Annet (1994). "Gender Assessment Study A guide for policy staff. 56p. Special Programme Women and Development, Directorate for International Co-operation, The Netherlands
Siwela, Sheila (?). "Directory of Gender Trainers". 76p. Zambia Association for Research and Development; Lusaka.
Women for Change. Brief. 3p.
Women for Change. Communicating Gender in Rural Area 2p.
Zambia Alliance of Women (1993). Women for a Healthy Planet. Lusaka 58p.
Zambia Association for Research and Development (draft) (1996). "A Gender Profile of Zambia: Comparison of need versus policy". 122p.Souther Africa Research and Documentation Centre.
<section>7</section>
Comments on Zambia forest policy (draft)
Comments on Zambia forest policy (draft)
The new forestry policy represents a significant shift towards recognizing the contributions of various stakeholders in the forestry sector. This shift towards participatory forestry requires retraining and training of forestry personnel in participatory and gender sensitive planning, monitoring and implementation. Strengthening institutional capacity to carry out identified strategies is fundamental to the successful implementation of the new policy. Zambia as a country is in state of transition. As a result socio-economic pressures result in changing gender roles. The Forestry Department needs to be responsive to these changes in the community level programming. These changing roles must be identified as one of the critical factors influencing the choice of forestry objectives. Because women's participation in the management of the forestry sector is known to be out of proportion with their contribution to it, the new policy must also make explicit reference to strategies
that will correct this imbalance. Such strategies would include guaranteeing women access to forestry training in all of its sub-fields, the collection of gender disaggregated information, evaluation of performance based on indicators relating to gender participation and affirmative recruitment policies.
Pg.8: 2.2. Sub-optimal institutional capacity The concern about sub-optimal institutional capacity applies also to initiating and sustaining participatory forestry processes, and to carrying out planning based on gender sensitive information and tools.
Pg. 8: 2.3. Effects of composite land tenures The inequitable access to and control over land resources by womn and men is a serious constraint to the full participation of women in forestry.
The pressures listed in the paragraph have also resulted in fast change in gender roles. As the proportion of female headed household grows in the rural areas, the tasks both women and men carry out are under constant transition. The Forestry Department needs to be responsive to these changes.
Pg. 10: 3.2. Issues in the choice of objectives
Changing gender roles should be listed as one of the critical issues determining the choice of forestry objectives.
Pg. 12: 4.1. Forest Policy Review
I suggest the removal of the word "rational" from all discussion relating to use of forestry. It is a highly subjective adjective and does not contribute to the clarification of the objective.
Pg. 12: 4.2. The Forest Estate
It is important that throughout the policy it is made explicit that people are not seen primarily as a threat to forestry, but as partners in the process of participatory forestry. The policy should seek to rectify current gender imbalances in the forestry sector by indicating that all information collected related to the interaction between people and forestry has to be gender disaggregated. In the same manner the policy should make it explict in each sub-section that training and employment opportunities are intended for both women and men, and that to correct the gender imbalance is a major concern of the policy. The above comments apply to all sectors.
Pg. 21: 4.9. Non-wood forest products The policy correctly states that very little is currently known about this sector in Zambia. It is important that the policy indicates that one of the aspects that is fundamental to our understanding and developing non-wood forestr products is knowing more about the roles of women and men involved in the sector.
pg. 22: Gender Issues
It is a significant improvement on the past policies to have the new policy address gender issues so prominently. It is important that the gender issues should not be seen as pertinent only to women. The policy should recognize the importance of understanding what both women and men do in the forestry sector, what resources they use to carry out these activities and how benefits are accrued.
As there is documented evidence of a significant gender imbalance in the sector, it is correct to also propose women specific strategies. For the purpose of these strategies it is important that women should not be viewed as "depositories" of traditions, but as active and contributing stakeholders in forestry development.
Gender analysis has to be carried out locally as a basis for local level planning, for example village forest joint management plans. This is because gender roles change from geographical location to another and from one ethnic group to another.
Senzitizing NGOs on gender issues is as important as sensitizing all forestry sector partners, including the private sector. However, There are several NGOs in Zambia who at present time can model gender sensitive programming to the forestry sector. It is important that strong partnerships are built between the forestry sector and NGOs so that the Forestry Department can learn from existing gender sensitive and participatory processes.
Pg. 28: 4.15 Forestry Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Planning, monitoring and evaluation will be key to the success of the proposed participatory approach. It requires that also monitoring and evaluation criteria are developed through participatory processes that are gender sensitive. Community based evaluation indicators must be included in the evaluation process. Monitoring of performance of the forestry professionals involved in the initiation and sustaining of participatory forestry is also important. Performance evaluation criteria should be developed to include indicators of involvement and skill in the above mentioned processes.
<section>e</section>
Introduction
Introduction
The consultant has during the assignment in Zambia (7th-21st February 1997) done the following:
o Reviewed relevant gender documentation from ZFAP, the Government and NGOs.
o Edited Volume 3 of the ZFAP main report to identify existing gender gaps and to integrate gender strategies in the ZFAP sub-programmes.
o Read and commented on the Draft National Forestry Policy.
o Provided a framework for analyzing gender issues in ZFAP sub-programmes.
The results were discussed with the representatives of the Government of Zambia and the Food and Agriculture Organization and agreed upon.
