<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
Solving micronutrient malnutrition is an important goal of the international community and was emphasized in the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition adopted at the International Conference on Nutrition in December 1992. Yet to date, most of the efforts to control the three major deficiencies of public health concern worldwide - vitamin A, iron and iodine deficiencies - have used supplementation strategies. Although supplementation is necessary for groups at high risk and as a short-term emergency measure, it fails to recognize the root causes of micronutrient malnutrition and to assist communities and households to adequately feed and nourish themselves in both the near and long term.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations and the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) have collaborated to produce a pair of documents entitled Preventing Micronutrient Malnutrition: A Guide to Food-based Approaches which highlight the value of food-based approaches in controlling micronutrient malnutrition. FAO and ILSI share a commitment to continuing the drive to place food-based strategies for preventing micronutrient deficiencies on the development policy agenda.
This, the shorter document, subtitled Why Policy Makers Should Give Priority to Food-based Strategies, provides an overview of the public health importance of micronutrient malnutrition and how to go about taking action to control the problem. FAO and ILSI envisage the policy-makers document being useful in generating support for taking action to address micronutrient malnutrition.
The longer document, subtitled A Manual for Policy Makers and Programme Planners, presents a more complete description of possible programmatic approaches that can be implemented to address micronutrient malnutrition. It also identifies factors hindering the implementation of these approaches, and attempts to assist policy makers and programmers in overcoming these constraints.
It is hoped that these two documents will serve as the basis for future dialogue and discussion in many forums and will aid in the initiation of an international commitment to the implementation of effective, long-term food-based solutions to the scourge of micronutrient deficiencies.
For more information on these documents including ordering information, contact either of the following two individuals:
Dr. Suzanne S. Harris
ILSI Human Nutrition Institute
1126 Sixteenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036-4810
USA
Fax: 202-659-3617
E-mail: suzie@dc.ilsi.org
Mr. John R. Lupien
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Room C-276
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Fax: 39-6-5225-4593
<title>Preventing micronutrient malnutrition a guide to food-based approaches - Why policy makers should give priority to food-based strategies</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Magnitude, causes and consequences of micronutrient malnutrition
Measures to prevent and control micronutrient malnutrition
Cost of implementing food-based strategies
A unique source of information for policy makers
Introduction
Magnitude, causes and consequences of micronutrient malnutrition
Micronutrient malnutrition is a term used to refer to diseases caused by a dietary deficiency of vitamins or minerals. More than 2 billion people in the world today may be affected by Micronutrient malnutrition. Vitamin A deficiency, iron deficiency anaemia and iodine deficiency disorders are the most common forms of Micronutrient malnutrition. People of all population groups in all regions of the world can be affected by Micronutrient malnutrition (Table 1). Although the most severe problems of Micronutrient malnutrition are found in developing countries, people in developed countries also suffer from various forms of these nutritional problems.
Table 1. Estimated numbers of people (in millions) at risk and affected by the three main forms of micronutrient malnutrition.
Iodine Deficiency Disorders^1
Vitamin A Deficiency^*2
Region
At Risk
Affected(Goitre)
At Risk
Affected(Xerophthalmia)
Iron deficient or Anaemic^3
Africa
Americas
South-East Asia
Europe
Eastern Mediterranean
West Pacific
TOTAL
Estimates for vitamin A deficiency are for children from birth to five years of age.
^1WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD (1994). ^2WHO/UNICEF (1995). ^3WHO (1992).
Micronutrient malnutrition is a major impediment to socioeconomic development and contributes to a vicious circle of underdevelopment, to the detriment of already underprivileged groups. It has long-ranging effects on health, learning ability and productivity. Micronutrient malnutrition leads to high social and public costs, reduced work capacity in populations due to high rates of illness and disability, and tragic loss of human potential. Overcoming Micronutrient malnutrition is a precondition for ensuring rapid and appropriate development.
Poverty, lack of access to a variety of foods, lack of knowledge of optimal dietary practices and high incidence of infectious diseases are some of the factors which lead to Micronutrient malnutrition. Policies and programmes must be developed to assure availability of and access to an adequate variety and quantity of safe, good-quality foods for all people of the world.
Vitamin A deficiency (VAD) primarily affects children; worldwide, some 250 million children are at risk (WHO 1992). It causes night blindness and, eventually, permanent blindness (xerophthalmia). It also contributes to retarded physical growth and impaired resistance to infections, resulting in high rates of sickness and death among young children. Every year, a quarter to half a million children go permanently blind as a result of VAD; two-thirds of these are likely to die. Regular consumption of vitamin A-rich foods such as animal products, orange and yellow fruits and vegetables, dark green edible leaves, and palm oil could prevent VAD.
Anaemia and iron deficiency affect more than 2 billion people in virtually all countries (WHO 1992). Those most affected are women and pre-school-age children (as many as 50 percent of whom may be anaemic), but anaemia is also seen in older children and men. Anaemia in infants and children is associated with retarded physical growth, reduced resistance to infections and slow development of learning abilities. In adults it causes fatigue and reduced work capacity and may cause reproductive impairment.
Blood loss in childbirth is very dangerous for anaemic women and is the main cause of about 20 percent of maternal deaths. Maternal anaemia also leads to foetal growth retardation, low infant birth weight and increased perinatal mortality (death in the first week of life). Foods such as dark green leafy vegetables, legumes and red meat are rich in iron, as are iron-fortified food products. However, because of the low bioavailability of iron in plant foods and the high cost of red meat, prevention and cure of iron deficiency anaemia is not an easy task, even in developed countries.
Iodine deficiency disorder (IDD) is a threat to more than 1.5 billion people who live in areas where the soils are iodine deficient; more than 200 million people have goitre and 20 million suffer mental impairments (resulting in significant reduction in IQ) caused by iodine deficiency (WHO 1992). IDD is the most common cause of preventable mental retardation. In severe cases it leads to deaf-mutism, cretinism and other serious disorders, as well as reproductive impairment, which results in increased rates of miscarriage, stillbirth and birth defects. Some seafoods are good sources of iodine and adding iodine to salt is a common and effective method of preventing IDD.
Despite its link to poverty, not all micronutrient malnutrition will simply disappear as development occurs. Moderate levels of IDD still exist in some high-income European countries which have failed to take adequate measures to eliminate it on a sustainable basis.
Effective methods exist to overcome micronutrient malnutrition, but they require concrete, comprehensive, cost-effective efforts by governments to be successful. The unnecessary human suffering and hindrance to economic development caused by micronutrient malnutrition can be eliminated in large part by improving the nutritional quality of the food supply and by educating people about good dietary practices.
Vitamin A deficiency, often in association with protein-energy malnutrition, principally affects preschool children. It is estimated that almost 250 million children in developing countries are at risk, of whom at least 2.8-3 million are clinically deficient. This Thai fruit vendor's child (see picture) is fortunate to have access to vitamin A-rich mangoes and other micronutrient-rich foods. Pre-school-age children and adolescent girls, along with women of child bearing age, are especially prone to iron deficiency anaemia, which affects over 2000 million people worldwide. Iodine deficiency disorder is also widespread, with 1500 million people in the world at risk.
Thai fruit vendor's child
Measures to prevent and control micronutrient malnutrition
Four main strategies - dietary improvement, including increased production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods; food fortification; supplementation; and global public health and other disease control measures - can be implemented to overcome micronutrient malnutrition. Food-based strategies, which include food production, dietary diversification and food fortification, are the most sustainable approaches to increasing the micronutrient status of populations. These approaches not only prevent micronutrient deficiency problems but also contribute to general malnutrition prevention.
At the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), jointly convened by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) in December 1992, representatives of 159 countries endorsed the World Declaration on Nutrition, pledging "to make all efforts to eliminate before the end of the decade... iodine and vitamin A deficiencies" and "to reduce substantially... other important micronutrient deficiencies, including iron."
Linked to the World Declaration on Nutrition is the Plan of Action for Nutrition, which recommends that governments give priority to food-based strategies to control and prevent micronutrient deficiencies (Exhibit 1). Policy makers and planners have recognized that the short-term supplementation programmes implemented during the last two decades in many developing countries (in which populations were supplied with vitamin A capsules, iron tablets and iodine injections) have not succeeded in solving the problem of micronutrient malnutrition in a sustainable manner.
Exhibit 1. The ICN Plan of Action for Nutrition
The Plan of Action for Nutrition, a document linked to the World Declaration on Nutrition, urges governments to undertake the following strategies to control and prevent specific micronutrient deficiencies:
n "Formulate and implement programmes to correct micronutrient deficiencies and prevent their occurrence, promoting the dissemination of nutrition information and giving priority to breastfeeding, and other sustainable food-based approaches that encourage dietary diversification through the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods, including appropriate traditional foods. Processing and preservation techniques allowing the conservation of micronutrients should be promoted at the community and other levels, particularly when micronutrient-rich foods are available only on a seasonal basis."
n "Ensure that sustainable food-based strategies are given first priority, particularly for populations deficient in vitamin A and iron, favoring locally available foods and taking into account local food habits. Supplementation of intakes with vitamin A, iodine and iron may be required on a short-term basis to reinforce dietary approaches in severely deficient populations, utilizing primary health care services when possible. Supplementation should be directed at the appropriate vulnerable groups, especially women of reproductive age (iodine and iron), infants and young children, the elderly and refugees and displaced persons. Supplementation should be progressively phased out as soon as micronutrient-rich food-based strategies enable adequate consumption of micronutrients."
Although supplementation programmes have an immediate impact in individual cases, they rely on contained external support for supply of supplements, which may make them difficult to sustain in the long term. Additionally, supplementation programmes frequently fail to reach the most severe cases of micronutrient deficiency.
Food-based approaches promote the consumption of foods that are naturally rich in micronutrients or are enriched through fortification. Food-based strategies were often overlooked in the past as governments, researchers, the donor community and health-oriented international agencies sought approaches to overcoming micronutrient malnutrition that had rapid start-up times and produced quick results. Although many lives have been saved and much suffering has been avoided as a result of these efforts, many developing countries now realize that food-based strategies are the only viable, cost-effective and sustainable solution to micronutrient malnutrition (Exhibit 2). Today, many assistance agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and donor organizations provide more-comprehensive programmes to eliminate micronutrient deficiencies, including support for food-based approaches.
Exhibit 2. Reasons for Implementing Food-based Strategies
Micronutrient deficiencies hinder both national economic development and the development of individual human potential. Because children are frequently the victims of this deficiencies, failure to overcome micronutrient malnutrition in a sustainable fashion jeopardizes a nation's future. Reasons for implementing food-based strategies to overcome micronutrient deficiencies include the following: .
1. Food-based strategies
n are preventive, cost-effective, sustainable and income generating;
n are culturally acceptable and feasible to implement;
n promote self-reliance and community participation;
n take into account the crucial role of breastfeeding 9 and the special needs of infants during the critical weaning period;
n foster the development of environmentally sound food production systems; and :
n build alliances among government, consumer groups, the food industry and other relevant organisations to achieve the shared goal of preventing micronutrient malnutrition.
2. Food, fortification, one of the food-based strategies has the potential for wide populations coverage and can involve a combination of micronutrients.
3. Nutrition education as a component of food based strategies emphasizes .
4. Adoption of food-based strategies can make possible redirection of funds previously devoted to curative health care and social welfare to other developmental activities.
A good, varied diet is the reason most of the world's population is free from micronutrient deficiency. The elimination of these deficiencies on a sustainable basis will occur only when the diets of vulnerable groups provide all required nutrients in the proper amounts. Programmes in many countries have demonstrated that comprehensive, well-designed food-based strategies can improve diets of vulnerable groups in a relatively short time and that these improvements can be sustained. Several countries have demonstrated that micronutrient malnutrition can be overcome when government policies and programmes are directed to the goal of increasing production of and access to vitamin- and mineral-rich foods and when associated marketing and educational activities improve consumption of these foods. There are also several instances where fortification of certain staple foods provides micronutrients to large populations in a manner that is fully integrated with prevailing food
production, processing and distribution patterns on a self-sustaining basis.
Cost of implementing food-based strategies
Investment in programmes to prevent micronutrient deficiencies is among the most cost-effective of interventions to improve health, according to the World Bank (1993). A 3-year project in the northeast region of Thailand to promote the production and consumption of vitamin A-rich foods was estimated to have a per-capita cost of US$0.42 (Smitasiri et al. 1993). Pollard (1989) estimated that the cost per mother/child unit of increasing consumption of dark green leafy vegetables in Indonesia was US$0.28.
As food-based approaches are implemented on a larger scale, their per-capita costs are likely to decrease. The Worldview International Foundation's Nutritional Blindness Prevention Programme in Bangladesh is one of the largest food-based programmes to date to have been implemented successfully. This programme to increase both production and consumption of carotene-rich foods in the district of Gaibandah (population 1.9 million) costs only US$0.13 per capita per year (1992 dollars) and had a measurable positive impact on the diet of young children within only 3 years (Greiner and Mitra 1995).
Fortification of staple foods such as flour, salt and oils is also a cost-effective approach. Lotfi et al. (1996) estimated that salt iodisation in several countries costs between US$0.02 and US$0.06 per capita per year. Fortification of sugar with vitamin A in Guatemala costs US$0.29 per capita and iron fortification of wheat flour costs an estimated US$0.02 per capita.
Micronutrient malnutrition usually occurs when diets lack variety. While short-term interventions have a role in providing specific target groups with vitamin and mineral supplements at certain times, only food-based approaches can prevent micronutrient deficiencies in a sustainable manner for most of the population. Shoppers in this market in Kathmandu, Nepal, (see picture) have access to both a variety and an abundance of food products.
Market in Kathmandu, Nepal
A unique source of information for policy makers
FAO and the International Life Sciences Institute have developed a unique manual, Preventing Micronutrient Deficiencies: A Guide to Food-based Approaches, which provides the first comprehensive description of the planning considerations required to implement food-based strategies to overcome micronutrient malnutrition. The manual's purpose is to assist policy makers, programme planners, food industry representatives and community workers to understand, implement and promote food-based strategies in their respective countries.
The solar drying of beta-carotene-rich fruits and vegetables is an effective, inexpensive low-level technology for preserving these sources of vitamin A. This Guinean woman, to ensure uniform drying, Is turning mango slices, which when dried will retain high levels of beta-carotene activity for as long as 6 months. understanding of local conditions. Community participation and the involvement of women are usually key to building support and achieving change that results in nutritional benefits.
Guinean woman turning mango slices
The manual provides technical information on the planning and implementation of food-based approaches and stresses the need to give special attention to the needs of specific vulnerable groups. It suggests a logical sequence of activities to be undertaken to implement a food-based strategy. In addition to providing useful technical information, the manual also gives resource information, including lists of technical publications and organizations that provide technical and financial support to micronutrient programmes A brief overview of the manual follows.
<section>2</section>
Implementing food-based strategies
Improved food production and processing
Improved food storage and preservation
Improved plant selection and breeding
Food fortification
Communication strategies
Implementing food-based strategies
Improved food production and processing
Any programme that increases the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods is likely to have a beneficial effect on the micronutrient status of a population. Existing demand for fruits and vegetables often cannot be met, which results in high consumer prices. For producers, access to water, fertile soils and seed or seedlings of adequate quality may be limiting factors.
Small-scale vegetable and fruit gardens can significantly increase the production of micronutrient-rich foods. To improve micronutrient status, however, gardening projects must lead to increased consumption of the micronutrient-rich foods produced. Thus, gardening projects should be linked to nutrition education programmes Success requires a good
Small animals, poultry and fish can provide excellent food sources of essential micronutrients, including bioavailable iron and vitamin A. Cost constraints and education measures need to be addressed in promoting small livestock and fishery projects. Efficient, large-scale commercial production of fruits and vegetables, oil seeds, palm oil and certain beverages can supply micronutrient-rich foods at reasonable prices. Effective and competitive markets help ensure both low prices for the consumer and fair prices for the producer.
Improved food storage and preservation
Post-harvest losses can be high for micronutrient-rich foods, which tend to be perishable. In commercial trade, improvements in marketing, grading, packaging, transport and cold storage facilities can reduce storage losses. At the household level, practical food processing and preservation methods such as solar drying can be adopted to increase the year-round availability of seasonal micronutrient-rich foods.
Improved plant selection and breeding
Improving the micronutrient content of soils and plant breeding can increase yields and produce plant foods with a higher micronutrient content. Research in gene modification of plant foods to increase the uptake of nutrients holds promising possibilities. Long-term food-based solutions to micronutrient deficiencies could benefit from improvements in the nutritional quality of grains through genetic modification and improved agricultural practices.
Food fortification
In developing countries, food fortification is increasingly recognized as an effective medium- to long-term approach to improving the micronutrient status of large populations. Some studies have shown fortification to be one of the most cost-effective methods of reducing micronutrient deficiencies, although effective monitoring regulation and enforcement are key to the success of fortification programmes
Fortification programmes require careful planning to ensure that appropriate food vehicles and fortificants are selected to enhance micronutrient status in the target population. In areas where there is no centralized processing, fortification in small mills or even household-level fortification might be considered. All fortification programmes must address quality assurance and safety concerns.
Fortification calls for a multisectoral effort involving the participation of government, private industry, NGO's, scientific expert groups and even consumer groups. Advocacy targeted at all of these groups is crucial to the success of a fortification programme.
Communication strategies
Communication techniques have been used for more than two decades to help bring about changes in eating practices. Vitamin A has been the focus of more communication efforts than other micronutrients . Successful programmes from many countries demonstrate the importance of carefully planning communication interventions and of basing interventions on information obtained directly from the target population, for example, mothers and other people who influence food production, food purchasing and child feeding behavior.
Market surveys have found that dark green leafy vegetables are the least costly source of vitamin A in many countries. Programme managers, however, should include other sources, such as fruit, which is more expensive but often more palatable to children. This Singaporean woman has access to a variety of micronutrient-rich fruits and vegetables with which to feed her family.
Singaporean woman
In most countries, important improvements in the micronutrient status of the population can be achieved by changing food behavior at the household level and by protecting positive practices that are eroding because of factors such as urbanization and modernization. When incomes rise, people often reduce breastfeeding, stop gathering wild foods and eat fewer green leafy vegetables activities which are often considered to have low status. The mass media can be a powerful force in helping to preserve positive traditional practices by enhancing their status.
Even when micronutrient-rich foods are available, they may not be consumed in sufficient quantities to prevent deficiencies. Behavior changes to increase consumption of micronutrient-rich foods can be effectively promoted through communication methods. The least disruptive dietary change offers the best chance of success.
<section>3</section>
Planning and coordinating food-based strategies
The planning process
Coordinating food-based strategies
Planning and coordinating food-based strategies
The planning process
In response to the ICN, the World Summit for Children and other international conferences which have highlighted the problem of micronutrient malnutrition, many countries have established mechanisms to plan and implement strategies to address the issue. The planning process will benefit from reviewing health, education and agriculture policies that affect micronutrient status.
Planners must consider the micronutrient needs not only of the general population but also of vulnerable groups which may have special dietary problems and nutritional needs. Vulnerable groups include women of childbearing age, especially when pregnant or lactating, young children and refugees and famine-affected populations. Measures to ensure adequate micronutrient availability and consumption by the population as a whole may be insufficient to meet the needs of these groups. Deficiencies of multiple micronutrients have occurred in epidemic proportions among refugee populations subsisting for long periods of time on limited rations.
Governments should be encouraged to adopt policies that promote the availability of micronutrient-rich foods. For example, horticultural programmes and extension networks can emphasize the production, distribution and marketing of fruits and vegetables. Increasing the capacity to preserve and store surplus micronutrient-rich foods produced during peak seasons encourages increased and improved year-round availability. Parallel to the effort, identification of foods that could be fortified at a central point should be undertaken.
Planners must also take into account the resources available to address food-based strategies. The term "resources" should be interpreted broadly to include laws, policies, and agriculture, health, education, and communication programmes and personnel at both national and community levels. Fortification programmes would involve food industry participation and the development of fortification standards, regulations and monitoring systems. Last but not least, planners need to understand the dietary habits of the target population and the factors that influence people's food choices. Compiling this broad array of information is a crucial step in selecting an appropriate food-based strategy.
Coordinating food-based strategies
The most successful approach is likely to be a combined multisectoral strategy that addresses both increased production (supply) and increased consumption (demand) of micronutrient-rich foods and that also meets the needs of special groups such as children and women of child-bearing age. Nutrition education is essential to enable increased production to lead to increased consumption among vulnerable groups.
The three major micronutrient deficiencies have many causes and potential solutions. However, opportunities exist to coordinate strategies and reduce duplication and costs. Coordination of advocacy efforts can increase the likelihood of reaching policy makers with effective messages. Some assessment and surveillance components can be coordinated. Programmes targeting different deficiencies can hold joint training sessions. There may also be opportunities for combined and intersectoral information, education and communication activities.
At the national level, many types of expertise are required to develop and implement a broad-based strategy to eliminate micronutrient deficiencies. The involvement of many different organizations, all of which share responsibility for a programme, can significantly slow the pace of development and implementation. Inter-sectoral committees under the leadership of the appropriate governmental agency can speed the process.
Representatives of key authorities in the health, agriculture, food industry and education sectors should be permanent members of national micronutrient committees. Representation from the food industry and possibly mining (for salt) authorities should be sought when fortification is discussed. Authorities dealing with laws and food regulations may need to be involved to ensure compliance with food fortification regulations. Authorities responsible for vulnerable groups should also be involved. NGOs can provide valuable practical advice regarding, for example, community participation.
The success of food-based strategies greatly depends on advocacy to obtain both community acceptance and the support of political leaders. When communities are directly involved in assessment, analysis and action decisions, they will tend to accept a strategy which they perceive to be aimed at solving a problem, even if it adds to their workload. Political decision makers need evidence of effectiveness and of community concern for the problem to sustain their own support for programmes
<section>4</section>
Monitoring, surveillance and evaluation
Monitoring, surveillance and evaluation
Programme monitoring is an essential component of a successful food-based strategy. Monitoring techniques must be inexpensive and simple: indicators used should be culturally acceptable, feasible to obtain under field conditions and reasonable in cost. They should also have adequate sensitivity and specificity. The choice of indicators will be determined by local needs and the institutional capacity of the country concerned. Wherever possible, communities should be involved in the monitoring of programmes in which they participate.
<section>5</section>
Summary action plan
Summary action plan
National governments, working closely with the private sector and NGOs as appropriate, have primary responsibility for the development and implementation of programmes to overcome micronutrient deficiencies. Although approaches will vary according to conditions within individual countries, this summary action plan highlights key points that should always be considered in the establishment of programmes to improve micronutrient status.
ACTION PLAN FOR IMPLEMENTING FOOD-BASED STRATEGIES TO ELIMINATE MICRONUTRIENT MALNUTRITION
1. Conduct an in-depth situation analysis.
2. Establish goals and objectives and plan pilot programmes on the basis of the findings of the situation analysis.
3. Implement pilot programmes
4. Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the pilot programmes and plan for large-scale implementation. Modify and retest as required.
5. Use mass media and other communication channels to create awareness of the benefits of food-based strategies among policy makers, programme planners, local government officials and local communities.
6. Implement programmes on the scale necessary to eliminate micronutrient deficiencies as public health problems.
7. Establish monitoring systems and make appropriate adjustments as required to ensure continued effectiveness and sustainability.
8. Continue advocacy, and communication activities on a routine basis.
<section>6</section>
References
References
Greiner T. Mitra SN. 1995 Evaluation of the impact of a food-based approach to solving vitamin A deficiency in Bangladesh. Food and Nutrition Bulletin 16: 193-205.
Lofti M, Mannar MGV, Merx R. et al. 1996. Micronutrient fortification of foods. Current practices, research and opportunities. The Micronutrient Initiative, Ottawa, Canada.
Pollard R.1989. Social marketing of vitamin A: Somata project, West Sumatra province, I