<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
A Field Document is essentially technical in nature. Its primary purpose is to inform the relevant staff of the Government of Zimbabwe, particularly AGRITEX staff, of a methodology or of a process (including, usually, the results of using that methodology/process) that is fairly well tested and could be seriously considered for incorporation into Government methods and processes.
The methodologies, processes and results described have been developed by the Programme team of AGRITEX and FAO personnel. In some cases staff from other Zimbabwean institutions have also been involved. The methodologies/processes should not be seen as new, but rather current ones which have been updated both through the incorporation of modern technologies and also the experience of the Programme's implementation of AGRITEX's development sequence, using a Farming Systems Development/Land Use Planning/Participatory Extension approach, in two pilot areas during 1993. The use of the phrase "fairly well tested" has been necessary because of the unexpectedly short time period available for field operations.
This Field Document is released under the authority of ZIM/91/005: "Programme of Technical Assistance to AGRITEX". It can be quoted with due acknowledgments to the author(s) and FAO/AGRITEX.
Brian B Scoullar
Chief Technical Adviser
February 1994
<title>Gender issues, constraints and potentials in AGRITEX - An Overview</title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms
Acronyms
AEO
Agricultural Extension Officer
AGRITEX
Department Of Agricultural, Technical And Extension Services
AEW
Agricultural Extension Worker
CAEO
Chief Agricultural Extension Officer
CAS
Chief Agricultural Specialist
CORFRE
Committee For On-Farm Research And Extension
DAEO
District Agricultural Extension Officer
DEVAG
Department of Agricultural Development
EW
Extension Worker
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organisation (Of The United Nations)
GTZ
German Technical Aid to Zimbabwe
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
PAE
Principal Agricultural Extension Officer
T & V
Training and Visit System
MCCDWA
Ministry of Community and Cooperative Development and Women's Affairs
MF
Master Farmer
MLARR
Ministry of Lands Agriculture and Rural and Resettlement
NORAD
Norwegian Agency For Development Cooperation
UN
United Nations
WID
Women In Development
ZNFU
Zimbabwe National Farmers Union
<section>2</section>
Executive summary gender issues, constraints and potential in AGRITEX
Executive summary gender issues, constraints and potential in AGRITEX
PURPOSE OF THE ANALYSIS:
The purpose of the analysis was to determine the relevance of gender issues in the delivery of extension and other agricultural related programmes. The study includes discussions, observations and recommendations on specific issues that would require follow-up.
METHODOLOGY USED
The methodology used in the study included field visits to all the provinces (8) and interviews with 140 AGRITEX staff of which 37 were female and 309 farmers, 170 female and 139 male . The focus of the analysis was on the views of field staff and farmers on the gender related factors in agriculture.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The general conclusion of the analysis center on the fact that AGRITEX services suffer from a number of weakness in their programmes for rural women including the following:
a. In Master Farmer training approach: there is a strong focus on the few farmers to the relative neglect of many resource - poor rural families, and among these are mostly women-headed households. From 1982 to 1990 only 33% of the total number of Master Farmers trained at Ordinary level are women against a background of 70% of farmers being women.
b. Misconceptions about and prejudices against women's actual and ideal roles, with the result that they are often excluded from the target audience of agricultural extension education and development programmes. The bee-keeping in Hurungwe Mashonaland East is a case in point were only 10% of the participants are women .
c. A Bender blindness and bias among the majority of AGRITEX staff which is translated into programmes and activities detrimental to women's access to agricultural services. About 80% of the Agricultural Extension Workers are men.
d. There is a lack of feedback on the transfer of technologies that involves a two-way or multi-directional communication between rural women, and extension personnel.
e. Inappropriate extension methodology for working with rural women.
f. "A farmer is a farmer", concept that characterises AGRITEX's view of its clientele is not grounded in a true understanding of the gender socio-economic conditions of the target group. The extension service and training is not gender-neutral. It impacts on male and female farmers differently.
g. AGRITEX has the potential to promote and enhance women's role in agriculture by increasing their decision making capacities and ability to participate in agricultural committees through training in leadership .
h. Women in the AGRITEX profession encounter a number of structural difficulties partly due to their multiple roles (reproductive and productive roles) that complicate their placement and result in frequent application for transfers. This also affects-their promotion to more senior posts.
i. The monitoring and evaluation of AGRITEX activities and programmes lacks a gender perspectives. AGRITEX has therefore been unable to increase benefits to women farmers, or reduce negative impacts on women, policies on women are usually done on ad hoc basis without the basis of hard data. There are no set standards to measure the effectiveness of extension.
j. There are information gaps with regards to gender and sociological aspects of the rural communities. The implication of this lack of knowledge on technology transfer is not appreciated. Needs of the farmers are overlooked. Related to this is the creation of a centrist tradition; the distancing of some officials within the profession from the culture and life of the rural farmers, and the assumption that a purely technical approach will provide all the answers. The socio-economic surveys currently being done in preparation for the execution of development projects lacks a gender and sociological perspective. The surveys lack a broader perspective towards the socio-economic situation of most communal farmers.
k. Despite women's predominant role in marketing very little has been done to help them in their marketing activities, either by way of organising them or suggesting better marketing strategies.
RECOMMENDATIONS
a. There is a need to improve statistical concepts and methods in AGRITEX aimed at gender specific data collection and analysis; to speed up collection of reliable comprehensive and unbiased data and to develop a set of Women in Development indicators and integrate them into an overall sectoral set of indicators.
b. The training of AGRITEX staff to have a gender appreciation and improve the way they work and programme activities for farmers is an urgent matter that should be addressed.
c. The instructional material produced for extensionists should be reoriented to include a stronger focus on rural women.
d. For women to be adequately served by agricultural extension, the extension message must be made more relevant to their needs; relevant to the crops they grow, the livestock they raise and the farming systems and time allocation contexts within which they work.
e. Since women are the majority of farmers there should an impact assessment from a gender perspective whenever a technology or project is being introduced to rural farmers.
- In technology development and transfer there is need to direct it towards the end-user. New technology it has been found may increase women's workload, decrease the range of production of food crops, cause changes in the division of labour between men and women or benefit male farmers more than female farmers.
- There is need for information on the effects of cash cropping on nutritional status and energy expenditure in the various types of farming systems.
f. The incorporation of a gender and sociological perspective in the framework of agricultural extension programming is a necessity. Achieving this goal requires AGRITEX staff to acquire a new set of conceptual and analytical perspectives and skills in order to deal explicitly, effectively and efficiently with women related issues in the spectrum of the agricultural projects in which they are involved.
Strengths of AGRITEX
- AGRITEX major strength lies in its philosophy, which reads, " To satisfy the agricultural extension, technical, and regulatory services needs of all farmers and other agencies". (AGRITEX 1982)
- It is one organisation that is widespread on the ground ant has potential to reach every farmer. Following the policy of expanding the extension services provided to small-holler farmers, in some districts the extension worker-farmer ratio is on average 1:700.
- AGRITEX has highly qualified and technically competent staff at all levels.
- AGRITEX has the potential to influence policy on matters relating to agriculture, because of its central role in one of the most important sectors of the Zimbabwean economy.
Lessons Learned
The analysis shows that AGRITEX's extension programmes lack an appreciation of gender and sociological issues which are critical to bridging the knowledge gap between the extension agent and its clientele. This is evidenced in the lack of gender disaggregated data to support or reject any of the issues raised in the analysis. The analysis therefore concludes that AGRITEX staff at all levels require a reorientation to a sociological and gender sensitised approach and issues raised concerning women farmers, irrigation schemes, and women in the AGRITEX profession will have to be addressed. This would also mean that incorporation of the gender perspective will not be the job of one person that is the WID specialist, but that of EWs, AEOs, DAEOs, CAEOs up to the Directorate
<section>3</section>
1.0 Introduction
1. 1 Objectives
1.2 Methodological Considerations
1.3 Background
1.0 Introduction
One of the actions to be taken by the WID Specialist envisaged in the project ZIM/91/005 is the establishment of database on WID to facilitate compilation, retrieval and dissemination of data for the other subject matter specialists . A first step towards the development of this data base is the subject of this study which was made by way of a constraint analysis. The initial observations will help to establish the framework for a data base on gender related issues in agriculture.
When we consider that the major agency that informs, trains and provides advisory service to the rural people is AGRITEX there is a need to examine the extent to which women farmers are included in the extension audience. There is a need to review the experiences of AGRITEX programmes with rural farmers from a gender perspective, to gain some insight into the constraints and possible solutions to the identified problems.
During the UN Decade for Women, studies and reports confirmed the major contribution of women in food production and agricultural work. Gender barriers inhibiting women from benefiting from agricultural development programmes have also been documented (FAO 1987). This has been acknowledged by most of the development community, namely the World Bank, FAO and a host of others, and a number of projects now actively seek ways to include women in the extension process. This shift to a gender approach has been primarily due to the overiding attention by development agencies to the need for socio-economic policies to take into account the women's role and the impact of these policies on women.
The incorporation of gender issues and analysis in agricultural extension programmes is a fairly recent phenomena resulting largely from the interaction of two fields; farming systems development and women in development (Feldstein and Poats 1990). Throughout its development the WID component has always been seen as a critique to the mainstream approaches to development, with little or nothing to offer in the development of extension methodologies, except maybe in the creation of women's only projects. With the development of gender analysis methodologies, WID has become pan of the mainstream approaches to the development of extension. The point of departure for WID programme of action in ZIM 91/005 will be that of offering critical support role to the strengthening of AGRITEX extension methodologies through taking into account the gender perspective.
This approach focuses on gender differences (that is socially and culturally determined differences between men and women) primarily in the division of labour in production or income earning activities and their access to and control over resources and assets.
1. 1 Objectives
The overall objective of the consultative meeting with AGRITEX staff and its clientele was to have an overview of the agricultural extension programmes and its effectiveness in meeting the smallholder farmers' needs, from a gender perspective.
One of the immediate objectives was for the WID Specialist to initiate dialogue with field staff and begin to sensitise them on the need to take into account gender issues in their daily operations.
Secondly, to talk to male and female farmers and hear their views with regards to the extension delivery system, and its impact on their daily lives.
1.2 Methodological Considerations
The study was largely a qualitative analysis designed to identify areas of concern from a gender and sociological perspectives. The identified areas of concern would in turn require follow up and detailed quantitative analysis.
The methodology for the study was unstructured and therefore not uniform. This was by design as the importance of the study was in the establishment of dialogue between the AGRITEX staff, the farmers and the WID specialist.
The discussion concentrated on the main areas of AGRITEX operations in terms of the services it offers; namely Crop Production, Animal Production, Conservation, Irrigation, Land Use Planning, Veld and Pastures, Farm Management, Agricultural Mechanisation, Horticulture and Forestry. Particular attention was paid with regards to gender issues as they relate to any of these specialist areas.
All the eight provinces were visited, and 309 farmers of which 170 were female and 139 were men and AGRITEX staff, (103 male and 37 female) were interviewed. For details on the AGRITEX staff that were interviewed see Appendix l below.
1.3 Background
1.3.1 Review of other studies
Agriculture in the Small Scale Resettlement and Communal Areas is largely a female activity. Most women in Zimbabwe (86%) live in rural areas and it is estimated that women account for 70% of the total agricultural labour (World Bank 1991).
According to Zwart (1990), female-headed households account for approximately 40% of tote households in Communal Areas because of the extent of male migration. In addition to providing the bulk of the labour on the family plots women supplement household income with earnings from off-farm sources. Women provide 60% of casual labour within agriculture and the majority of labour in the rural informal sector (Zwart 1990). Women are largely responsible for food, crop production and labour intensive tasks on other crops as well as fuel collection, child care and other domestic tasks. Despite this central importance in the rural production system, women have limited access to many factors of production. Further, this reliance on female labour results in severe labour constraints during certain periods of agricultural season. Therefore development of technology systems that will relieve the burden of women would make a significant contribution to improving the productivity of the
total farm system.
Recent etudes by World Bank (1991), Zwart (1990), and FAO (1990) indicate that the extension contact with women farmers is not in proportion to the contribution women make to the term production system. A sharper focus on women is needed in extension. The labour of women farmers may be statistically significant but their lack of access to resources, credit and training appears not to be visible (Mertens 1989, Truscott 1988, Zwart 1990 and World Bank Report 1991).
As farmers and farm managers, women face the constraints most producers in the Communal and Resettlement face including insufficient land, both quantitative and qualitative, and lack of farm implements lack of draft power and transport, and marketing problems. Women have a greater difficulty than men gaining access to land. Lack if access to land also inhibits women's access to institutional credit.
In addition, extension and research are often geared toward a male clientele. These policies tend to marginalise women as agricultural producers. Lack of resources and pressure on time and energies put enormous constraints on the ability of women to maintain their productivity, much less improve it (Zwart 1990; and Truscott 1988).
The World Bank (1991 p3) review into the agricultural sector list the following constraints as hindering agricultural growth in Zimbabwe: land policy, pricing and marketing policy and technology, credit availability, forestry, household food security, and wildlife. The above constraints have an impact on both male and female farmers, but the women's problems are compounded by the socio-cultural environment in which women operate.
In the Zimbabwean agricultural sector, development; projects have not taken adequate account of women's responsibilities, participation and priorities in their specific local conditions to determine factors constraining them in the achievement of the objectives of the programmes. In addition women's access to development projects is more limited owing to cultural traditional and sociological factors (Truscott 1988 and Zwart 1990). In particular, the "head of the family" concept which is used as the basis for allocation of resources in the rural area has historically ignored both the existence of female-headed households and the rights of married women to a joint share of resources (Munro 1988).
In general available FAO (1990) and World Bank (1990), studies show that the improvement of household food security and nutritional levels is associated with women's access to income and their role in households decisions on expenditure.
The creation of the Ministry of Community Development and Women's Affairs in 1982, according to Chengu 1992* (personal communication), may have had a negative impact on the development of an integrated or mainstream approach to gender issues in the various other government departments. Most of the highly technical department such as AGRITEX remained conservative dealing only with technical issues and assuming that gender issues were being dealt with by the Ministry of Community Development and Women's Affairs. Though, one can attribute the isolation of women's projects to the approach in the women in development at that point in time which advocated mostly for a design of projects exclusively for women (or a WID project in jargon) or to include a WID component in a larger project. Contrary to the new approach now of designing a gender-sensitive mainstream project which integrates women throughout all relevant components. After examining the matter for 16 years, most
development people who address gender issues feel that the latter approach is more effective (FAO 1990).
[ *Chengu is a former deputy secretary in the Ministry of Lands Agriculture and Water development. ]
An attempt at strengthening the role of women in agriculture was made through an FAO project ZIM/007 (1984-1991) entitled "Strengthening Women's role and Work in Rural Development" In its terminal report (1991) the project highlighted the following. "There was a lack of capacity within the development services which had prevented the provision of adequate and appropriate services to re-organise women's groups and led to women having poor access to technical advice, management systems and funds. In parallel to this rural women were poorly equipped with tools, suffered because of inadequate transport and access to inputs and lacked security of tenure to land" (FAO 1991).
The project ZIM/007 "Strengthening Women's Role and Work in Rural Development" was a pilot project in Mashonaland West started in 1984 under the Ministry of Community and Cooperative Development and Women's Affairs . The aim of the project was to investigate ways of removing constraints and gaining more effective participation of women in agriculture. The revised project (1986) emphasised the development of market-oriented field agriculture, as a way of providing the necessary experience for women and groups to advance into income generating activities and micro-enterprise of various kinds.
The training component of the project was relevant in terms of training women on how to plan, budget, keep records, and having an appreciation of group dynamics. The project, however had the inherent weakness of creating unnecessary hostilities at both the household and professional level because it treated women's issues as if they were separate from the rest of the community. A visit to the Mashonaland West province, the pilot area for the project revealed no evidence of the continuity of the programme .
AGRITEX is currently implementing a Norad funded programme, with the objective of "Strengthening AGRITEX capacity to reach women farmers", in eight districts with eight control districts. The project started operation in July 1992. An implementing planning workshop was held and AGRITEX staff involved in the project participated. A baseline study was undertaken and the results indicated that, " 10% of women cultivators regularly attend extension meetings hence AGRITEX extension is only reaching 5.3% of women agricultural active population" (Hakutangwi 1993, p3).
At the inception of the project, it was realised that AGRITEX lacked personnel who were conversant with gender and agricultural development approaches. Following this, four officers were sent for a three- month training in women and agricultural development. (Hakutangwi 1993, p1)
The project ZIM/91/005, a programme approach to strengthen AGRITEX extension programmes has a WID section, and this study is part of its action programme. Past and present experiences of AGRITEX with respect to WID issues will be incorporated in the WID programme of action.
1.3.2 AGRITEX Policy
AGRITEX objective is, "to implement the agricultural policy of government through the revision of agricultural technical and extension services, which stimulates the adoption of proven agricultural practices leading to increased, sustained and profitable production." (AGRITEX 1982). The target for AGRITEX is all farmers and their agencies. The rationale behind AGRITEX service being to feed the nation, generate foreign currency, and improve the quality of life of the rural population.
The Government Agricultural Policy advocates for the following:
- growth with equity
- fair distribution of land ownership
- reduction in poverty
- increase in both land and labour in all forms of agriculture
- increase in employment
- self-sufficiency and food security
- integration of the two agricultural sectors commercial and peasant
- promotion of regional and agricultural development
- development of human resources in the rural areas to the full potential (MLARR 1986)
The policy statements seem to cover all issues but what becomes an issue is the approach offered by AGRITEX, in translating these policy statements into practice.
The review which follows is made against the background of Government's Agricultural policy and AGRITEX objectives.
<section>4</section>
2.0 Review of AGRITEX programmes
2.1 Planning
2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation
2.3 Training
2.4 Soil, Water Conservation
2.5 Animal Production
2.6 Irrigation
2.7 Crop Production
2.8 Marketing of Crops
2.0 Review of AGRITEX programmes
2.1 Planning
2.1.1 Gender issues have not really been taken into account in the design of land use plans. Model B schemes is an example where cropping programmes did not take into account women's other household duties. The design of Model B schemes expected women to contribute an equal number of labour units as men to the cropping programme, but they are unable to do so because of other household duties. It should however be noted that resettlement planning is not the sole responsibility of AGRITEX, but is done in conjunction with other ministries.
Attempts at raising the women's dimension issues in land use plans have been made by the Chief Agricultural Planning Specialist who happens to be female. Efforts are being made to incorporate the interests and needs of people in the planning process. In some cases communal area people have been consulted with regards to the setting up and positioning of certain infrastructure such as wells and gates in grazing schemes.
Some officers involved in planning are undergoing training in Diagnostic and Design Surveys to facilitate the inclusion of socio-economic issues in the land use planning process. AGRITEX undertakes baseline and socio-economic surveys. AGRITEX has no capacity however to follow up the sociological issues and formulate strategies to deal with them. The department does not employ sociologists or social scientists to handle sociological issues in planning, monitoring and evaluation of its agricultural extension programmes.
Some AGRITEX field staff have come to realise that in dealing with farmers one should not overlook the socio-cultural issues in the adoption of technologies by farmers. There is need to look at the household as a unit of analysis in terms of production. This is part of the farming systems development approach envisaged in ZIM/91/005 to assist AGRITEX in utilising the approach.
The statement "Scientific principles operate the same irrespective of gender does not always hold true" (Feldstein and Poats, 1990). In rural communities major sociological and political blockages keep the poor women, and various other poor groups, from participating in formal extension programmes.
AGRITEX offers farm plans as a free service to farmers. Land use planning however is ahead of implementation due to limited financial resources. This is more pronounced in the case of the communal area reorganisation.
Requests for land sub-division in the small and large-scale sector is said to come mostly from widows. One of the reasons normally cited is that the women will be unable to cope in running large farms. The reasons however could be many, for example in the commercial farming areas, the women is hardly involved in the day-to-day running of the farm. In the small-scale sector for example EWs said that male farmers are reluctant to have their wives and to some extent children learn fanning operations, for fear of becoming redundant. One unfortunate consequence of this tendency occurred in Chitomborwizi small-scale farming community where male farmers perished in a bus disaster and the widows, and children are failing to cope. Matebeleland South province AGRITEX officials have made similar observations as EWs. There may be other reasons for widows to request for land subdivision which require follow-up. For instance, it might be that women fail to run the farms because there will
be pressure from debtors, to make them repay debts incurred by the husband when alive. Inability to manage may be due to lack of agricultural training. It could be the pressure being exerted by other inheritors such as sons or husband's brothers. The lack of exposure to farm operations when the husband is alive is a critical issue.
2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation
It is the responsibility of every branch within AGRITEX to monitor and evaluate its own programmes and activities. The Monitoring and Evaluation unit has undertaken the evaluation of the following extension strategies; (i) T and V systems, (ii) farmer and EW contact, (iii) radio listening groups, and (iv) farm and work studies.
AGRITEX's monitoring and evaluation unit or any other unit, does not collect data disaggregated by gender. Constraints that pertain to certain categories of farmers are not determined. Information required to prescribe solutions to ease constraints to adoption of technology and increase women's farm productivity are not there. There is need for gender disaggregate data to determine the overall effectiveness of the programmes that AGRITEX offers.
The breakdown of data on gender is important to the determination of the contribution that women are making or may make in the development efforts within the rural economy. It is essential for programme evaluation and advocacy of agricultural activities that require policy change.
Data disaggregation on gender lines is also important in establishing the number of women and men who are living in absolute poverty, the extent to which sex biases contribute to such conditions and to devise ways and means whereby the conditions that contribute to such situations may be alleviated.
Gender specific data also provide the sort of information which assist decision-makers in the determination of policy, planners in the development of plans and field staff in the implementation of such plans. This is important in the light of the contributions that women can make in decision-making in planning and implementation of agricultural activities that affect them most.
The production, analysis and dissemination of meaningful gender-based data will help critically assess some of the beliefs which have developed concerning women's contribution to agricultural production and their contact with extension staff. The information to be obtained in the process must serve to increase the visibility of women as they benefit from and participate in agricultural programmes. Finally it provides the rationale and means for understanding gender roles and intra-household dynamics as they affect farm production and it will contribute to improved planning of extension.
2.3 Training
Agricultural information is offered through the mass media and in-service training. From the overall training needs of field staff what has been observed to be lacking is the Agro-Home economics component.
Agro-Home Economics as an aspect of extension training is seen as necessary in terms of the information gap that seems to exist with regards to the nutrition value of certain crops. It is seen as important insofar as it seeks to demonstrate how to economise by growing of certain food crops which are essential as basic food crops.
Agro-Home Economics would also form part of the EW training so they can in turn advise farmers and answer some of the farmers basic questions related to certain crops. The Ministry of Health and Child Welfare though responsible for supplementary feeding programmes and setting up of nutrition gardens also rely on AGRITEX's EWs' advice for growing certain crops.
The Agro-home economics component is also being considered as a necessary component for training EWs. It will enable EWs to advise and answer farmer questions with regards to economic, nutritious and basic food crops. An agro-home economics manual has already been written.
An urgent need to train all levels of staff in AGRITEX on gender awareness, together with the development of gender training manuals was identified at the NORAD-funded workshop held early this year. The workshop was held to discuss baseline results from the pilot districts where the programme ZIM/023 Women's Extension Programme AGRITEX/NORAD is being implemented.
2.4 Soil, Water Conservation
Some of the approaches devised for soil and water conservation were designed long back and have not been revised. Some of the approaches have proved unpopular to farmers, because of the huge labour demands required in the construction. For example, farmers have appreciated the need to have contour ridges in their fields, but some do not construct them Those who have done so, have reduced the width of the contours. Poor farmers, elderly people and women find it difficult to dig contours. Economically they find it difficult to hire labour to dig the contours.
2.5 Animal Production
The focus on animal production has been with the big livestock such as cattle. The rationale being that cattle are highly valued both for economic and socio-cultural reasons. Markets for large livestock are also developed in comparison with the small livestock. Women do participate in schemes such as small-scale dairy and fattening schemes, however the extent of their participating is not d