<title>Preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines</title>
<section>1</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
The overall purpose of the consultation was to establish the scientific basis for developing and using food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG) to improve the food consumption patterns and nutritional wellbeing of individuals and populations. Such guidelines are needed in virtually all countries given the role that food consumption and dietary practices play in nutrition-related disorders, whether of deficiency or excess. Formerly, most national dietary guidelines were nutrient-based and their use met with only moderate success. This report demonstrates how national authorities can change the traditional focus from nutrients to locally available foods.
The specific purposes of the consultation were to:
o review the scientific evidence and epidemiology of diet-related health problems, including noncommunicable diseases and other forms of malnutrition;
o consider recommended nutrient intakes, and dietary assessment methodologies relative to the development of food-based dietary guidelines;
o develop recommendations for national dietary guidelines and their application.
Food-based dietary guidelines were among the priority considerations at the International Conference on Nutrition, which was convened by FAO and WHO in Rome in 1992. The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition adopted at the Conference included goals for the elimination or substantial reduction of famine and famine-related deaths, chronic malnutrition, micronutrient malnutrition, and diet-related communicable and noncommunicable disease. Where this last category is concerned promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles was highlighted as an appropriate strategy.
The Consultation recommended that dietary guidelines be based on, and aim to improve, current dietary practices and prevailing diet-related public health problems, rather than be based on nutrient requirements and recommended intake levels. Selected recommendations for nutrient intakes were also reviewed. It was proposed that desirable nutrient intakes generally be expressed in terms of nutrient density per 1000 kcal in the diet, since all family members tend to consume similar diets and nutrient intakes of individuals are thus proportional to the energy each consumes. A summary of selected reference intakes is provided in Annex 3.
The development and implementation of food-based dietary guidelines should be undertaken by an interdisciplinary and intersectoral working group or technical committee. Culturally appropriate modes of presentation of the main messages should be sought, pre-tested and disseminated. Food-based guidelines should be developed in each country; guidelines suitable for one country cannot be expected to be wholly appropriate for others. Different guidelines may also be required for different geographic or socioeconomic groups within the same country. The main steps in their development might include:
o Forming a working group or committee
o Reviewing food consumption patterns
o Drawing conclusions as to the diet/health linkages and main problem areas
o Identifying relevant key national policies (health, agriculture, education, environment, social welfare, women, population)
o Determining the critical health, food or nutrition issues to be targeted by FBDG
o Defining the content and target groups for FBDG
o Ensuring the socioeconomic feasibility and cultural appropriateness of FBDG
o Defining the purpose, goals and targets of the FBDG
o Translating the FBDG into main messages
o Assessing appropriateness/credibility of FBDG and how they are perceived by a test group
o Monitoring changes in people's diet and nutritional status and any concurrent socioeconomic changes.
The report includes a summary of dietary assessment methodologies-- national food supply data, household food consumption data, and individual consumption data--which are appropriate for drawing up, and monitoring the use and impact of dietary guidelines. For the last, five methods are presented: food records, 24-hour dietary recall, food frequency questionnaires, diet histories, and food-habit questionnaires. Methods of analysis and computation of nutrient intakes including computer software are described, as is the method of presentation of data on consumption of particular foods and food groups.
The scientific basis for food-based dietary guidelines and the requirements for energy, nutrients (macronutrients and micronutrients), and related non-nutrient food components are presented in greater detail in technical annexes. Examples of the food groups and dietary guidelines used in different countries, and some comments on their respective advantages and disadvantages, are also given.
The consultation recommended that FAO and WHO should collaborate with governments in developing, implementing and monitoring food-based dietary guidelines; identified areas requiring further research, together with an overall review and updating of existing international documentation on recommended dietary allowances and nutrient intakes; and stressed the need for more adequate information on food consumption patterns.
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
The International Conference on Nutrition, convened by FAO/WHO in Rome, 1992, aimed basically at identifying and encouraging the adoption of strategies and actions to improve nutritional wellbeing and food consumption throughout the world. It adopted the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition which includes among its goals (para. 19 of the Declaration):
To make all efforts to eliminate before the end of this decade:
o famine and famine-related deaths;
o starvation and nutritional deficiency diseases in communities affected by natural and man-made disasters;
o iodine and vitamin A deficiencies;
and to reduce substantially within this decade:
o starvation and widespread chronic hunger;
o undernutrition, especially among children, women and the aged;
o other important micronutrient deficiencies, including iron;
o diet-related communicable and noncommunicable diseases;
o social and other impediments to optimal breast-feeding;
o inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene, including unsafe drinking-water.
The Plan of Action includes among its strategies "promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles", and calls upon governments "on the basis of energy and nutrient recommendations, to provide advice to the public by disseminating, through use of mass media and other appropriate means, qualitative and/or quantitative dietary guidelines relevant for different age groups and lifestyles and appropriate for the country's population" (para. 45 d).
In pursuance of these goals and strategies, WHO and FAO jointly convened in Nicosia, Cyprus, from 2 to 7 March 1995, an Expert Consultation on "preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines." Participants in the consultation (Annex 1) included 22 experts from countries in all regions of the world. The consultation was hosted by the Government of Cyprus and the WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
Purpose and procedure of the consultation
The specific objectives of the consultation were to review the scientific evidence and epidemiology of diet-related health problems, including noncommunicable diseases (NCD) and other forms of malnutrition; to review existing literature on recommended nutrient intakes (RNI) and develop a synthesis of current nutrient recommendations, applicable to food-based guidelines"; to review relevant dietary assessment methodologies; to review existing national dietary guidelines and their use in countries; and to make recommendations for the development and implementation of FBDG.
The consultation was opened by H.E. Mr Manolis Christophides, Minister of Health of the Government of Cyprus. The elected office-bearers were:
Chairman, Dr M.J. Gibney; Vice-Chairman, Dr R. Uauy; Rapporteurs - Dr S. Dagher, Dr B.O. Schneeman. The programme of work of the consultation is given in Annex 2. The initial two days were spent in plenary session, with presentations and discussions on each of the foregoing themes. Thereafter most of the work was done in four working and drafting groups, which also met together each day to share progress and ensure appropriate interaction between the various groups. The consultation was marked by intensive cooperative efforts among all participants, the work being done in delightful surroundings with the warm and generous hospitality of the Cyprus authorities.
References
1 FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition. World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition, FAO Rome 1992.
<section>3</section>
Chapter one - Introduction
Chapter one - Introduction
The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition, which was adopted by 159 governments at the International Conference on Nutrition in Rome in December 1992, committed the international and national communities to the nutrition goals stated in the preface.
The Declaration and Plan of Action recognized that the attainment of these goals required plans of action at the national level appropriate to the cultural context of each nation. That is, it recognized the need for each nation to identify public health issues related to local dietary patterns and to adopt local strategies for their resolution. The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition is notable for the absence of numerical targets for food and nutrient intakes, and it marks a move in the thinking of nutritionists away from policies dictated by numbers and towards policies dictated by prevailing public health issues. The Declaration and Plan of Action also call for the dissemination of nutrition information through "sustainable food-based approaches that encourage dietary diversification through the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods, including appropriate traditional foods".
The concept of disseminating information through food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG) is inherently sensible since consumers think in terms of foods rather than of nutrients. Equally, the concept of FBDG can take account of considerable epidemiological data linking specific food consumption patterns with low incidence of certain diseases while not requiring a complete understanding of the biological mechanisms responsible for such a protective property. For example, Sir James Lind, the Surgeon-General in charge of health policy for the British Navy in 1700, knew that sailors on long sea voyages did not develop an affliction known as scurvy if sufficient limes were kept aboard the fleet and the sailors were encouraged to eat them regularly. This food-based dietary guideline successfully addressed a specific health issue in the complete absence of any biochemical understanding. In the modern era, we observe a low incidence of certain diseases in specific communities with
particular eating habits and, while we rightfully search for an explanation of biochemical mechanisms, dietary recommendations based on these food patterns are warranted. An example is the association of high fruit and vegetable consumption with reduced risk of certain NCD and the emerging awareness that several components of these foods and the diets containing them contribute to lower risk.
There is no doubt that, as our knowledge of mechanisms improves, opportunities in food technology will allow for alterations to be made to nutrient and non-nutrient intake within prevailing food consumption patterns. We already recognize direct associations between single nutrients and single conditions (e.g. iron and anaemia, folic acid and neural tube defects, and certain saturated fatty acids and risk of cardiovascular disease) which make it possible for the nutritional properties of existing food supplies to be enhanced. Advances in food technology permit the production of both nutrient-fortified foods and products with reduced salt and saturated fat content. Progress in biotechnology and genetic engineering will play an increasing role in this area in the future. Nonetheless, FBDG remain a valid strategy for public health nutrition.
The purpose of this document is to establish the scientific basis and recommended process for the development and evaluation of FBDG in various regions of the world. Dietary guidelines differ from dietary goals and from recommended dietary intakes or recommended dietary allowances (see box for explanation).
o Recommended nutrient intakes (RNI) are also called recommended dietary allowances (RDA), recommended dietary intakes (RDI), dietary reference values (DRY) or population reference intakes in different countries. They are authoritative, quantitative estimates of human requirements for essential nutrients, usually set out with different amounts (in weight/day) considered to be adequate to meet the known nutrient needs of practically all healthy persons.
o Dietary guidelines are sets of advisory statements that give dietary advice for the population to promote overall nutritional wellbeing and relate to all diet-related conditions. They have usually been expressed in technical nutritional terms, but some guidelines have been expressed as food groups. Dietary guidelines differ from RNI in that the advice is more provisional' being based on a variety of information, including indirect evidence about the complex relationship of food components with health and with diseases--some of which have long incubation periods. Dietary guidelines are broad targets for which people can aim while RNI indicate what should be consumed on the average every day.
o Dietary goals are intended to emphasize the future-looking character of dietary guidelines. Dietary goals can be used for planning at the national level rather than as advice for individuals and are expressed in terms of national average intakes.
o Dietary or nutritional targets are the nutritional expression of a set of feasible national health targets fore country. They should be expressed in terms which make monitoring possible.
Development of dietary goals reflects analysis of the health status of the population and determination of goals that will improve the overall health of the population and reduce the risk of disease. Dietary goals may vary among sub-populations of a region due to the prevalence of over- or undernutrition.
The term "food based dietary guidelines" is used in this report to mean the expression of the principles of nutrition education mostly as foods. They are intended for use by individual members of the general public. Where they cannot be expressed entirely as foods they are written in ordinary language. They avoid as far as possible the technical terms of nutritional science.
In addition to FBDG in any country, a set of dietary guidelines expressed in scientific terms may also exist, with quantitative recommendations of nutrients and food components, available for use and reference by policy-makers and health care professionals.
Adopting RNI and dietary goals for a population may form part of the process for development of dietary guidelines, which are the recommended strategies for the population to achieve nutritional well-being. If guidelines are derived from nutrient targets or dietary goals, they should be translated into "food-based guidelines" in order to be adopted by the population. Dietary guidelines represent the practical way to reach the nutritional goals for a population. They take into account the customary dietary pattern and indicate what aspects should be modified. They consider the ecological setting, socioeconomic and cultural factors, and the biological and physical environment in which the population lives.
FBDG will vary among population groups. Hence it is important for each region or country to recognize that more than one dietary pattern is consistent with health and to develop food-based strategies that are appropriate for the local region. Food and diet are not the only components of a healthy lifestyle. Although this document focuses on diet, bodies responsible for developing dietary guidelines are encouraged to integrate these messages with other policies related to health (e.g. smoking, physical activity, alcohol consumption).
Governments and affiliated organizations should find this document helpful for initiating or improving their process of developing FBDG appropriate to their region. The consultation recommends that this document be reviewed periodically (initially in 5 years' time) in the light of the experience of agencies who use the document.
Some of the key points underlying the thinking behind this document are that:
o Public health issues should determine the direction and relevance of dietary guidelines.
o FBDG are developed in a specific sociocultural context, and need to reflect relevant social, economic, agricultural and environmental factors affecting food availability and eating patterns.
o Dietary guidelines need to reflect food patterns rather than numerical goals.
o Dietary guidelines need to be positive and encourage enjoyment of appropriate dietary intakes.
o A wide range of dietary patterns can be consistent with good health.
<section>4</section>
Chapter two - Scientific considerations in the development of food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG)
2.1 Rationale
2.2 Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
2.2.1 Nutrition science: physiology and pathophysiology related to food components.
2.2.2 Food science and technology
2.2.3 Educational, behavioural and social sciences
2.2.4 Agricultural and environmental sciences
2.3 Scientific evidence for the relationship between food, nutrients and health
2.4 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
2.4.1 Food patterns
2.4.2 Food variety indices
2.4.3 Nutrient requirements and recommendations
2.4.4 Use of nutrient densities in establishing and evaluating dietary guidelines
2.5 Reorientation from nutrients to foods in setting food-based dietary guidelines
References
Chapter two - Scientific considerations in the development of food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG)
2.1 Rationale
There is good scientific evidence that dietary patterns, i.e. a daily combination of foods and beverages, have specific health or disease outcomes. For example, a diet may be apparently adequate in all other ways but still be deficient in vitamin A or iron, and this may lead to xerophthalmia or anaemia. Conversely a diet high in saturated fat and energy is known, on a population basis, to lead to an increased likelihood of coronary heart disease.
The reasons for developing and using FBDG are many, and often surprisingly self-evident.
1. Foods make up diets; foods are more than just a collection of nutrients.
2. Nutrients interact differently when presented as foods.
3. Methods of food processing, preparation and cooking influence the nutritional value of foods.
4. There is already good evidence from studies (animal, clinical and epidemiological) that specific dietary patterns are associated with a reduced risk of specific diseases. Diets rich in fruits and vegetables are associated with various positive outcomes such as reduced incidence of lung cancer (1). Science has not been able to identify completely the specific nutrients involved. The protective effect could be due to a single nutrient, a combination of nutrients or non-nutrients, or the replacement of some other food in the diet when fruits and vegetables are consumed in large amounts (2).
5. Scientific evidence has not yet identified the potential health outcomes of some non-nutrient food components, hence the increasing attention being paid to flavonoids, phyto-oestrogens etc. If the focus is on a single nutrient, people may not appreciate the benefits of the ingestion of these compounds in foods.
6. Some food components may have biological functions that science has not yet identified.
7. Foods and diets have cultural, ethnic, social and family aspects that individual nutrients themselves do not have.
8. For certain micronutrients, evidence suggests that intake higher than present nutritional recommendations may help to lower the risk of noncommunicable diseases. FBDG can encourage dietary patterns that include these nutrients.
FBDG need to take into account: food/health patterns; the relative comprehensiveness of the foodbased versus the nutrient-based approach; the practicality of suggested goals; nutrition labelling directing the consumer to an over-simplified view of foods; and shifting paradigms of the nutritional basis of disease and health (the biological effects of food and food patterns can be greater than the sum of its parts).
2.2 Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
FBDG need to be based on sound scientific principles and knowledge of local conditions. A summary of the four main areas of science relevant to the development of FBDG is provided below, with a more detailed description in Annex 3.
2.2.1 Nutrition science: physiology and pathophysiology related to food components.
The study of energy balance and metabolism, and of macro- and micronutrient physiology, is well-established and has now evolved to take account of non-nutrient components of food of biological significance.
As far as energy is concerned, the next generation of FBDG can take account of both the lower limits of energy intake and the ways that energy balance can be achieved without recourse to food restriction, but with the emphasis placed on strategies to achieve energy balance either by decreasing the energy density of the diet or increasing energy expenditure. With this approach, concerns about both chronic energy deficit and excess body fat can be addressed through FBDG by encouraging the use of foods of appropriate energy density.
Micronutrients are now recognized as important in communicable disease (improving host defences), classical deficiency disorders and NCD. Therefore, the formulation of FBDG in all food cultures with varying health patterns merits consideration of non-energy nutrients.
Food chemistry is extraordinarily complex, and it is becoming clearer that health states previously not regarded as nutrition-related may actually be determined by the intake of non-nutrient substances contained in foods, for example, certain flavonoids from plants and phyto-oestrogens from certain legumes. Therefore, it is essential that dietary guidelines be based on foods and not simply on nutrients, taking into account that sound scientific evidence about foods should be the foundation of recommendations.
2.2.2 Food science and technology
Food science and technology is creating a new framework for FBDG. This is principally in the areas of:
o Food physico-chemistry
o Methods of food storage and preservation
o Changes in food preparation
o Opportunities for use of formula foods where energy intake is low or regular food cannot be eaten
o Nutrient restoration and fortification of foods
o The development of health-focused designer and functional foods.
2.2.3 Educational, behavioural and social sciences
Both the practicality of FBDG and their consequences require analysis through these sciences. However, even though a substantial knowledge base exists in these areas, it is not commonly utilized by nutrition and food policy-makers. For example, FBDG that neglect basic methods of promoting behaviour change may be scientifically sound but totally ineffective for improving dietary intakes. Some of the major areas of concern are set out in Annex 3.
2.2.4 Agricultural and environmental sciences
The scientific basis of FBDG is inclusive of these disciplines. There is evidence that even existing dietary guidelines in developed countries, such as Australia and the USA, cannot be easily achieved in the short term without increased fruit and vegetable production. Even more difficult may be the pressure on world fish supply because of increasing appreciation of the importance of long chain omega-3 fatty acids from fish in the human diet. The need for sustainable food production using existing natural resources is becoming more and more apparent.
2.3 Scientific evidence for the relationship between food, nutrients and health
No single food other than breast milk for infants provides all the required nutrients. A range of nutrients is needed in amounts that change throughout life for optimal growth, health and avoidance of disease. The varied diets that people eat made up of many different foods have proved over the ages to be able to provide adequate nutrients in a variety of national patterns and combinations.
Many countries have adopted RDI, which are customarily defined as the intake of energy and specific nutrients necessary to satisfy the basic requirements of a group of healthy individuals. While the criteria to estimate requirements have changed over time, the three main methods of investigation still involve a clinical approach, studying the typical consumption of healthy populations, and looking at functional indicators of nutritional status. A detailed analysis of the relative merits of each is beyond the scope of this document, but additional information may be found in the references (3,4).
More recently the concept of "optimal nutrient intake" has evolved and is influencing both scientists and the public alike. The question of ''optimal for what?" is usually answered by the suggestion that diet or specific nutrients can lay the basis for improved physical and mental performance or for longer and healthier life. This concept is too broad. The preferred approach is to define clearly the function that is of interest in relation to the intake of a specific nutrient or a given food. The selected function should be of relevance to health or disease prevention.
A growing body of scientific evidence supports the relationships between food patterns and health. These relationships are derived from several types of studies:
o Epidemiological which examine population-based data to associate disease patterns or health outcomes with food patterns. These studies can be prospective or retrospective. Several factors determine the strength of the associations concluded from epidemiology, including the consistency, strength, specificity and biological plausibility of the association. Epidemiological observations are, in principle, not sufficient to confirm cause and effect relationships between individual nutrients and health outcomes; however, they do provide valuable information about the food patterns to be considered in FBDG.
o Clinical research which is designed to determine whether dietary modification or supplementation with selected nutrients can intervene in the disease process or modify one or more risk factors for disease. These studies confirm that the foods or nutrients in question do contribute to the health or disease outcomes of interest. The research is typically conducted in individuals who are known to be at risk for disease and, although the findings may be relevant to the general population, it is important to keep the limitations in mind when extrapolating from these studies to the general population (for example, trying to draw general conclusions from very low-fat diets in atherosclerotic regression studies).
o Experimental studies which are designed to determine the effect of foods and food components on cell metabolism or physiology, and to understand the basic mechanism by which specific nutrients modify disease. These studies are essential to establish the plausibility of the diet-health relationship; however, they are often conducted in animal models and it can be difficult to extrapolate from one species to another.
An example of the need for integrating epidemiological, clinical and experimental data is the recent evidence associating a lower relative risk of age-related blindness due to macular degeneration with the consumption of dark-green leafy vegetables, particularly spinach and collard (5). While it may be that zeaxanthin and lutein components in these foods are protective against macular degeneration, establishing this relationship will require extensive experimental and clinical research. In the meantime an increased intake of dark-green leafy vegetables is a justifiable food-based dietary guideline, especially in view of other support for this recommendation.
2.4 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
Dietary patterns vary in different geographical areas and socioeconomic groups, and also over time. Such variation depends on agricultural practices, climatic, ecological, cultural and socioeconomic factors which determine the foods that people demand or expect and that are generally available.
Given the variety of food combinations that can provide a healthful diet, it is impossible to define the ranges of intake for all foods that could be combined to provide a nutritionally adequate diet. Although a large set of food combinations that are compatible with nutritional adequacy could be identified, they could hardly be extrapolated to cover every different ecological and social setting. An alternate approach to defining the nutritional adequacy of diets has therefore evolved, based on a scientific understanding of the biochemical and physiological basis of human nutritional requirements in health and disease. This approach has permitted the definition of essential nutrients and the establishment of RNI.
FBDG as an instrument and expression of food and nutrition policy should be based directly upon diet and disease relationships of particular relevance to the individual country. The priorities in addressing the dietary guidelines will depend on whether the relevant public health concerns are related to dietary insufficiency or excess.
Four possible approaches are useful in assessing the nutritional quality of diets for the development and evaluation of FBDG:
2.4.1 Food patterns
Assessing adherence to a particular food pattern usually associated with a favourable health outcome is one way of evaluating the nutritional soundness of an envisaged dietary guidelines approach. This reference is most likely to concern a traditional food pattern of people with longevity, low morbidity and low perinatal and infant mortality rates (e.g. Scandinavian, Japanese, Mediterranean) through tradition or through cultural adaptation. In most of these populations, other factors such as health care, educational system, safe water and socioeconomic development also play important roles in the favourable health outcomes. Negative effects following changes in dietary patterns might also indicate food patterns to be avoided.
Tracking health indices in populations in accordance with food intake patterns has, so far, been the most available evidence on which to base FBDG. Some of the examples are given in Annex 3.
2.4.2 Food variety indices
While the value of increased food variety in either ensuring essential nutrient adequacy or decreasing the risk of food toxicity (health-adverse factors in food are generally diluted where the foods eaten are varied) has been understood for some time (6), using food variety as a predictor of health outcome is a relatively recent approach (7,8). However, enough evidence is available to justify promoting food variety through FBDG as a technique to reduce morbidity and mortality while awaiting further scientific studies on how exactly it operates.
In deriving indices of food variety, decisions are required about both the categories of foods and the time over which variety in food choices is achieved.
2.4.3 Nutrient requirements and recommendations
These have been the subject of both FAO/WHO technical reports (1, 9-16) which are currently being updated, and many countries have established their own recommended requirements. The numbers vary somewhat for the different nutrients although the implications of these differences for the establishment of dietary guidelines are small. Countries that have the technical capacity may develop their own RN I, otherwise the review of existing recommendations can be used to define which are most suited to the given national reality. FBDG should be structured to enable the population to meet RNI that are critical for diet-related public health problems.
The meeting recommended that FAO/WHO undertake the review of existing reports for all relevant nutrients (since the last time this task was completed was in 1974).
2.4.4 Use of nutrient densities in establishing and evaluating dietary guidelines
Using nutrient densities to evaluate dietary quality involves expressing existing RNI values per unit of energy (usually 1000 kcal) provided by the diet. The conditi