<section>e</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
This set of instructional materials on working with rural women (Course Design, the Trainer's Manual and the Participants' Workbook) was prepared by Ester Bonitatibus and Jonathan Cook based on the original text by Marilee Karl and field testing organized by Diana Tempelman, Women-In-Development Officer, Africa Region, with the help of Charlotte Anokwa and Felix Y. M. Fiadjoe, Legon University, Accra, Ghana. William I. Lindley, Senior Officer for Agricultural Education in the Extension, Education and Communication Service coordinated the activity and provided substantive and editorial inputs. This is a near-final draft of the publication. Readers and users are cordially invited to send suggestions and comments to the coordinator using the following internet address: William.Lindley@fao.org or by post to: T. E. Contado, Chief, Agricultural Education, Extension, Education and Communication Service; Research, Extension and Training Division; FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome, Italy.
The designations employed and the presentations of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Extension, Education and Communication Service (SDRE)
Research, Extension and Training Division (SDR)
Sustainable Development Department (SD)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, along with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
© FAO 1996
<title>Improving extension work with rural women</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
Although women play a major role in food production in many countries of the world, agricultural information is not effectively reaching and benefiting these key persons in the food security chain. There is a recognized need to improve agricultural extension work with rural women.
A significant problem is that in many courses of study, in-service training and education in extension methodology there is insufficient examination and discussion of the roles of rural men and women in agricultural production and rural development. Too little time allocated to gender analysis and a participatory approach aimed at solving the problem of how extension work can effectively be carried out with rural women.
This instructional unit is intended to help fill the gap in the lack of gender-sensitive materials available for pre-service and in-service training in extension methodology for extension and community development workers. The modules are designed so that they can be adapted and used at various levels and in a number of formal and non-formal educational settings: education at the intermediate (technical) and higher levels, induction training at the start of employment, in-service education or on-the-job training and short refresher courses and workshops.
These materials were developed by the Agricultural Extension, Education and Communication Service as a follow-up to the project, "Improving the Level of Agricultural Extension Service Support for Rural Women", which was financed jointly by FAO, Denmark, The Netherlands, Norway and the Arab Gulf Fund. The first phase of the activities consisted of carrying out five case studies in Kenya, Malawi, Sierra Leone, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The second part of the original project was a workshop which brought together participants from the case study countries as well as representatives from the agencies which supported the project.
Workshop participants identified gender analysis, training and problem solving as weak links in extension staff understanding of the roles that women play in agricultural production, harvesting, processing, storage and marketing. Ensuring that men and women benefit equally from extension services was seen as a critical issue. It was further found that the methodology portion of the extension education curricula did not contain sufficient reference to improving extension work with women. Trainers cited a lack of instructional materials as a problem related to more effective teaching and learning.
This instructional package has been divided into three major parts. The Trainer's Guide, Course Design and Learners' Workbook have been prepared for use in a three-ring notebook so that teachers and group leaders will be able to insert location-specific materials and supplementary teaching aids. The pages are numbered only within each module to allow for more convenience in adding location-specific supplementary reference materials. A Learners' Workbook has been developed to make sure students and/or in-service trainees become involved in completing exercises related to real-life situations and so they will have a record of the work done. The unit on Course Design has been prepared in an effort to provide a theoretical framework and additional background information for both the teacher and the learner. It is also important to note that while these materials place an emphasis on improving extension work with rural women, they are, in general terms, a rather comprehensive set
of instructional materials on extension methodology. These materials were developed with the intention that they could be used in a variety of settings where extension methodology is taught or discussed.
This is a near-final draft of the publication. The intent is to translate it into multiple languages for further field testing, eventual revision and additional printing. Readers and users are invited to send suggestions and comments to the coordinator using the following Internet address: William.Lindley@fao.org or by post to: T. E. Contado, Chief, Agricultural Education, Extension, Education and Communication Service; Research, Extension and Training Division; FAO; Viale delle Terme di Caracalla; 00100 Rome; Italy.
Stein W. Bie, Director
Research, Extension and Training Division
Sustainable Development Department
<section>2</section>
Trainer's guide: Improving extension work with rural women
Introduction
Module 1 The need to work with women
Introduction and module aim
Training objectives
Key points
Section 1: Women in agriculture and rural development
Reference information
Teaching Strategy
Section 2: Barriers to women's involvement in extension
Reference Information
Teaching Strategy
Section 3: Reaching women farmers: The difficulties faced by extension services
Reference Information
Teaching Strategy
Additional readings
Module 1 Annexes
Module 2 Analysing women's activities
Introduction and module aim
Training objectives
Key points
Section 1: What information is needed
Reference Information
Teaching strategy
Section 2: Gender and situation analysis
Reference information
Teaching strategy
Additional Readings
Module 2 Annexes
Module 3: Developing appropriate packages
Introduction and module aim
Training objectives
Key points
Section 1 Technical content of extension packages
Reference information
Teaching strategy
Section 2 Access to credit
Reference information
Teaching strategy
Section 3 Developing extension packages appropriate for rural women
Reference information
Teaching Strategy
Additional Readings
Module 3 Annexes
Module 4 Working with rural women in practice
Introduction and module aim
Training Objectives
Key Points
Section 1 Contacting rural women
Reference information
Teaching Strategy
Section 2 Time and location of extension activities
Reference information
Teaching Strategy
Section 3 Communication methods
Reference information
Teaching strategy
Section 4 Women's groups
Reference information
Teaching strategy
Additional readings
Module 4 Annexes
Trainer's guide: Improving extension work with rural women
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Rome 1996
Improving extension work with rural women
Introduction
Why a Focus on Women
The role of women in agriculture and in rural development is increasingly recognized both at international and national level. There is a growing awareness of the need to reach women farmers and to fully involve them in development programmes. However, extension services still face difficulties in effectively communicating and working with women. Among the reasons for this is the lack of adequate training material addressing the issue of working with rural women.
Awareness of the need for specific training material on the issue is the first step. However, while much existing literature on extension mentions the need for such information on how to work with rural women, very rarely are any specific examples or information given on how this can be done.
By bringing together examples and practical information, this manual aims to fill this gap by providing field extension workers with a series of practical ideas on how to effectively conduct extension activities with women.
Objectives of the Manual
The manual is intended for use in training field extension agents and rural development workers working at the village level and it assumes a general knowledge of basic extension principles and methods.
The overall objective of this training manual is to assist field extension workers in working more effectively with women farmers. In particular, the manual aims to provide training materials and information that could enhance field workers capabilities to:
o identify needs, priorities, constraints and opportunities heed by rural women;
o ensure that extension packages meet specific gender requirements;
o contact and communicate effectively with rural women.
How to Use the Manual
This manual is intended for the trainer who will conduct or adapt the course. An accompanying participant's manual follows the same structure and brings together introductory notes, exercises and handouts which should be given to trainees. The participant's manual is in a loose leaf format and only the introductory notes on each module should be given to trainees in advance. Exercises and case studies should be given out at the beginning of each session as needed. Not all material may be needed for the trainees and the trainer should use his/her discretion as to what material should be used for a specific course.
Throughout the course, participants will develop a personal plan to improve their effectiveness in incorporating women in their extension activities. This will be an individual exercise developed in their own time and presented at the end of the course.
Time should be allocated at the end of each module for general discussion on how to incorporate the issues raised in participants' action plans.
An annex on Course Design (based on the information presented in the manual) is included to assist trainers in developing a course, which meets the specific local requirements. It covers needs assessment, revision of the course structure and objectives as well as adaptation of examples and selection of training methods.
How Is the Manual Structured?
The manual is divided into four modules:
Module 1: The Need to Work with Women
This introductory section is designed to ensure that trainees are properly aware of the significant role women play in agricultural and rural development and sets the scene for the main body of the course. It leads trainees to a fuller understanding of the constraints and problems faced by women, as well as of the reasons why women have so far had only limited access to extension activities. It should stimulate discussion among participants, giving them opportunities to analyse stereotypes and assumptions which may have limited their awareness of the importance of effectively reaching women farmers.
Module 2: Analysing Women's Role
This module covers issues related to analysing the situation of women in the specific area in which field workers operate. It begins with considerations about the kind of information that could be useful for planning effective extension activities. It then looks at the tools and methods available to collect this information and how to go about gathering the information required. A section on how to analyse the data collected and how to identify the areas relevant to extension planning concludes the module.
Module 3: Developing Appropriate Packages
Module three aims to assist extension workers to use the information they have gained about the needs, constraints and opportunities of rural women choosing extension packages which are relevant and appropriate to women's specific situation. Problems and issues identified in the previous module are used here in assisting extension staff to develop ways to overcome them. The module analyses the technological aspects of the extension package as well as issues such as credit, which often play a key role in farmers' decisions on whether or not to adopt a technology.
Module 4: Working with Rural Women in Practice
The final module considers practical issues which could facilitate women's participation in extension activities. The information collected about women is now used to plan the timing and location of extension programmes. Extension methods and training materials are reviewed with special reference to gender implications. The module also looks at the role of women groups and ways to work with them for extension activities.
Symbols and icons
The following are used throughout the text for easy identification of the information presented:
training objectives of the module
key points analysed in the module
reference readings
example
outline of suggested teaching strategy
training activities
role play
additional readings
space left for the user's own notes.
Module 1 The need to work with women
The need to work with women
Introduction and module aim
This module aims at helping course participants understand the complexity of rural women's work. the variety of tasks they perform in agriculture, rural development and household management and the implications for their involvement in extension activities. Through discussions, exercises and case studies, participants will identify stereotypes and assumptions which may have limited their awareness of the importance of women's involvement in agriculture and rural development. They will look at problems and constraints that women farmers face with the objective of becoming better aware of issues which may hinder their participation in extension activities and access to information.
Since creating or strengthening this awareness involves helping participants to analyse their assumptions and sometimes to revise their present beliefs and attitudes, the structure of this module includes a high component of group discussion. Background material included in the module has been kept very short, and handouts mainly consists of a few tables and graphs with data about women's activities throughout the world.
The success of the module cannot be judged only on participants' ability to memorize some of the key points presented. The module will rather have achieved its goals if it has had an impact on participants' perceptions and understanding of the importance of the work of rural women in agriculture and rural development.
The Module is divided into three sections:
o Women in Agriculture and Rural Development;
o Barriers to Women's Involvement in Extension;
o Reaching Women Farmers: Difficulties Faced by Extension Services.
Training objectives
By the end of the module participants will:
o have a clear understanding of the importance and complexity of the work of women farmers;
o be able to describe the main problems women farmers face which have limited their participation in extension activities in their area.
Students will be asked to fill in a questionnaire at the beginning of the first module. They will be given the same questionnaire to fill in at the end of the module, and the variation looked at to assess any change of attitudes. An example of such a questionnaire is given as Annex 1.1 at the end of this module
Key points
Unless, at the end of the module, participants have developed or enhanced their awareness of the need to involve women in extension activities in a more effective and meaningful way, the motivation needed for the rest of the course may be affected. More importantly, it would not bring about the expected change in behaviour needed for translating into action what is learnt during the course.
The more participants have the opportunity to analyse their perceptions and attitudes regarding women's role in agriculture, the more receptive they will be to the course content and the more likely they will be to implement what they have learned. Since this is mostly a self-learning process the trainer should try to provide as much additional local information on the topic as possible, as well as to present the topic from different angles to stimulate discussion.
It is therefore suggested that preconceptions, stereotypes and doubts that participants may have at this stage be extensively discussed during this session.
Key points examined by this module are:
o roles played by women in agricultural production and rural development;
o problems faced by women farmers which hinder their participation in extension activities;
o reasons for the limited success which extension services have had in reaching rural women;
o aspects to consider in improving rural women's participation in extension activities.
Section 1: Women in agriculture and rural development
Women in agriculture and rural development
This section aims to stimulate discussion among participants about their perceptions regarding women's involvement in agriculture. Their estimates are then compared with statistical data from throughout the world. Discussion about the gap between these figures and the participants' estimates should aim to bring to the surface any misconceptions and stereotypes held by the participants. To make the section more useful and relevant to the participants' own situation, the trainer should provide, wherever possible, data related to the local situation (national figures or district ones).
Reference information
Estimates show that women represent more than half of the labour required to produce the food consumed in developing countries.
In Sub-Saharan Africa the figure is higher, reaching three-quarters of the total labour. More specifically, African women perform most of the work related to some agricultural tasks, e.g. hoeing, weeding, storage operations and processing.
While in Africa women and men typically farm separate plots, in Asia and Latin America, they tend to work together on the family farm. Throughout Asia women's involvement in agriculture is very significant and it is estimated that they contribute between 10 and 50 percent of total agricultural labour. Women play an important role in peasant agriculture also in Latin America, where their total share of agricultural labour is around 25 percent, with a much higher contribution to tasks such as harvesting, processing and other post harvest operations.
Women farmers belong, generally, to the small farmer category. They are faced with all the problems common to small farmers. In addition, the cultural, social and economic conditions of women in general, and women farmers in particular, mean that there are a number of specific problems related only to women working in agriculture.
It is important to stress that women farmers cannot be considered to be a homogeneous category, sharing exactly the same sort of problems and facing the same constraints. While it is possible to draw out some common principles which allow a broad definition of the condition of "woman farmer", it needs to be recognized that there is considerable diversity also. Women, as with men, include young, old, disabled and able bodied, married and single, poor and relatively wealthy, from minority and majority groups, connected with influential power groups and the relatively powerless. For example, young unmarried women farmers may need to be considered and addressed by extension services differently to older or married women. An approach which treats all women farmers as the same, can end up as inappropriate as those which assume that farmers as a whole are all the same.
Despite the significance of women's role in agricultural development, evidence throughout developing countries shows that women's farming productivity and efficiency levels often remain very low. Among the key reasons for this is the lack of technical advice they receive on production and marketing, cultural practices, skills and technology. Extension services frequently fail to provide adequate information to women farmers through failing to recognize their specific needs. Women farmers face specific constraints not faced by men. In addition to their productive tasks they are frequently over burdened with household responsibilities which they cannot delegate; they are often less educated than men and have a more limited access to resources such as credit If an extension programme deals effectively with these constraints, it will be easier for women farmers to get involved in its activities.
Teaching Strategy
Questionnaire
Distribute the questionnaire (Annex 1.1) to participants and ask them to complete it. Do not explain the purpose of the questionnaire at this stage. Collect the completed questionnaires before starting the section.
Women's Role in Agricultural Production
Ask participants to write, on the table provided for the exercise, what they think the following figures are:
o percentage of men and women involved in agriculture in the world (i.e.: out of 100 men, how many are involved in agricultural activities, and out of 100 women how many are involved in agriculture);
o percentage of men and women involved in agriculture in your region.
If you have figures of these percentages in your country or district, ask participants to estimate them and to add the figures to their list.
Once everybody has completed their estimates, ask each participant to read out their figures and note them all on the flip chart There will normally be quite a range of figures, reflecting individual perceptions of what the role of women in agriculture could be.
Add to the list the official statistics as listed in Table 1.1, presenting these percentages for men and women on a world scale, within your region as well as in other regions of the developing world. Also add the official figures for your country/district, if available.
If the estimates are very different from the official statistics, start a discussion by asking participants what could be the reasons for their over or underestimates. It may also be interesting to ask participants who came up with estimates fairly different from each other, to describe the reasons for their choice of figures and to encourage a discussion from this point.
Gender Related Responsibilities
Participants should now be asked to mention the main agricultural and household tasks. Write these on a flip chart. For each task ask them what is the share of responsibility men have and the share that women have in their area.
Task
Men
Women
Show any local or national official figures available and compare them with participants' perceptions.
You may also wish to show participants Table 1.2: How the work is divided in Africa (percentage of total labour in hours) and Table 1.3: Labour Distribution in a District of Pakistan, which stress that, although women's role is always very significant, labour distribution is highly location specific.
The discussion should explore differences among participants' perceptions (and, when available, between these and official statistics) and reasons behind the possible discrepancies. The following issues could also be raised in discussion:
o Looking at the lists, how do the main tasks of men and women complement each other?
o Where should extension services place their attention: tasks played by men, those played by women or both?
o What would be the effect of concentrating the extension efforts on only one of the three lists?
Female Headed Household
In many rural areas of the world, an increasing number of men are moving to the towns or to other countries in search of better paid jobs. One result of this migration is that the number of female headed households is growing.
Ask the group for their views on the likely effects of this on:
o agricultural production;
o the work of rural women;
o what implications this would have for extension activities.
Section 2: Barriers to women's involvement in extension
Barriers
This section provides participants with an opportunity to discuss their perceptions of the traditional, social and institutional factors which may limit women's participation in extension. The issues outlined in this section cover a range of problems not all of which will necessarily be present or require action in all countries. Problems will vary from area to area, and it will be only after a detailed assessment of the situation (Module 2) that participants will know which are the specific problems of rural women in their area.
These problems and their implications for extension will be looked at in detail in the following sections. The purpose of this section is to raise or increase awareness of the constraints to women's involvement.
Reference Information
Both men and women farmers, especially the poorer ones, face a number of problems or constraints which affect their ability to participate in and benefit from extension activities to improve agricultural production and the well-being of the rural household.
Extension workers need to be aware of social and institutional factors that create barriers for women's involvement in extension and adequately address them in planning extension activities.
Land
Land
Women's rights to land vary widely throughout the world. In some areas religious laws forbid female land ownership. Even when civil law gives women the right to inherit land, local customs may rule otherwise. In Sub-Saharan Africa, where women have the main responsibility for household food production, they are generally limited to use of the land, but not ownership, and even this use needs the consent of a male relative. Some resettlement and irrigation projects have actually worsened women's rights to land by providing formal titles to men only. Lack of ownership reduces the likelihood that women will invest much time or resources in the land they work, or adopt long term farming practices such as tree planting.
Women farmers also generally farm smaller plots of land than men, both in absolute terms and in relation to household size. They also tend to be allocated poorer land, the quality of which deteriorates even further as it is intensively cultivated.
Land reform programmes often fail to recognize women as potential beneficiaries. A review of 13 programmes in Latin America found that the majority had insignificant numbers of female beneficiaries or had not even considered women as a beneficiary category. Even when female heads of households are included as potential beneficiaries, they may have lower land allocations than male household heads, as happened in a project in El Salvador,
If property rights to cultivable land are only given to men, women may have few incentives to adopt sustainable farming practices. This gender bias will be particularly important in cases where sustainable natural resource management requires labour-intensive systems, such as tree planting. Indeed, a number of studies in Africa find that women farmers are less likely than men to plant tree crops such as coffee and cocoa.
Lack of Equipment and Appropriate Technology
Female farmers generally own fewer tools than men. New technology has also often been developed without consideration of women's needs. Recently, however, international research efforts have developed a number of machines specifically aimed at work women tend to do. These new machines include micro rice mills, direct seeding equipment, transplanters, and threshing machines developed by the International Rice Research Institute, and cassava processing equipment developed by International Institute for Tropical Agriculture.
Labour saving equipment, however, has a different effect on smallholders looking for labour saving devices than on hired labourers. For women who farm their own plots, new technologies may reduce drudgery and increase productivity; but for female hired labourers, labour saving devices may mean the loss of employment and income. Also, where decisions about investment in equipment are made mainly by husbands, investment in labour saving technologies for women is often a low priority.
Do Agricultural Technologies Help or Hurt Rural Women?
The distribution of the costs and benefits of technology adoption depends on the specific cultural and social characteristics of a particular location. In one area in the Philippines. the introduction of a mechanical thresher relieved both men and women of threshing and substantially speeded the threshing process. As a result, rice farmers were able to grow a second crop of rice, which in turn led to increased employment for women in transplanting, weeding and harvesting. The benefits substantially outweighed the small cost of reduced opportunities for manual labour in threshing.
In Bangladesh, however, the substitution of a mechanical rice mill for a traditional threshing implement had a negative effect on poor and landless women who had previously earned income by providing hand-pounding services. The negative effect resulted from cultural restrictions on women's leaving their homestead for alternative employment.
Lack of Access to Credit
Women farmers often face additional obstacles to obtaining credit and consequently are less able to purchase inputs. Statistics show that women have less access to credit than men, despite the generally better loan repayment rates.
Requirements for obtaining credit differ from place to place. Property that is acceptable as collateral (guarantee of repayment), especially land, is usually held by men, and formal financial institutions often do not accept the types of valuables which are held by women (such as jewellery). Women may also not be able to afford the time involved in obtaining credit. In rural Kenya, distance to a bank affects much more the chances of obtaining credit for women than it does for men.
Women's lower educational levels relative to men's, and their lack of familiarity with loan procedures may also limit their possibilities of obtaining credit from male credit officers or moneylenders.
Since the early 1980s, a number of alternatives to the formal sector have given women access to credit and financial services. Most programmes do not heavily subsidize interest rates, and they link repayment to future lending. Successful programmes:
o reduce transaction costs;
o charge commercial interest rates;
o establish deposit facilities;
o target poor clients;
o develop income generating skills;
o strengthen existing local institutions such as (women) farmers groups;
o emphasize the provision of financial services rather than business training.
Lower Levels of Education
School
In the early 1980s, average literacy rates for men in developing countries were over 50 percent, while for women they were 30 percent or less. The gap continues to be largest in rural areas, where educational levels are generally lower, despite the significant social benefits shown in educating women (see Table 1.4: Illiteracy Rates by Region and Gender). This gap has serious implications for agricultural productivity and incomes. Better educated farmers are more likely to adopt new technologies and to have access to extension services. For example, a study of coffee, a high value crop, in Kenya, found that increasing the primary education of women farmers not only led them to plant coffee trees more readily, but also increased the adoption of coffee by other women farmers, who are more likely to copy women than men farmers.
Teaching Strategy
Common Constraints Faced by Rural Women
Ask participants to get together in small groups (maximum 5 people each) and ask them to:
o list the most common problems heed by women farmers in their area which could directly affect women's pa