<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
The following case study explores the lessons learned at the nexus of agricultural planning, community participation, and gender concerns during the implementation of two inter-linked projects aimed at improving livestock production in Afghanistan from 1994 - 1997. The two projects are the "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004)"^1 and "Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan (TCP/AFG/4553)".
^1The new project phase continues under UNDP-funded "Sustainable Livestock Development for Food Security (AFG/96/007). Also AHPIM= PIHAM.
This case study is one of a series of background papers being prepared for a "Workshop on Gender and Participation in Agricultural Development Planning - Harvesting Best Practices" to be held in Rome in December of 1997. The Workshop will provide the opportunity to bring together nationals from a number of countries where FAO has tried to assist institutions and communities to support planning processes which are participatory and that address the different needs and priorities of rural women and men. The objectives of this workshop are to:
· compare and share experiences from different countries and thereby build capacity among institutions and organisations working in the agricultural sector to use participatory and gender sensitive approaches in agricultural planning;
· from this shared experience, potentially develop a framework or model for gender-responsive participatory agricultural development planning;
· share what was learned from this field experience with interested FAO technical divisions and explore linkages with complementary FAO programmes, such as the Special Programme for Food Security (SPSF) and the Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Programme (SEAGA).
It is hoped that this case study will be of interest to others working on programmes and projects particularly those in Afghanistan - which seek effective ways to include rural women, their experience and their priorities in agricultural planning processes in a context where their participation and mobility have been severely restricted for the past year or so.
<title>Gender and participation in agricultural development planning: lessons from Afghanistan</title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
AHPIM
Animal Health and Production Improvement Module
BVW
Basic Veterinary Worker
CTA
Chief Technical Adviser
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
IP
Implementing Partner
LID
Livestock in Development
M1..5
Module 1,2,3,4,5 - PIHAM
NGO
Non- Governmental Organisation
OPS
United Nations Office for Project Services
PIHAM
Reconfigured acronym "AHPIM" in concordance with local needs
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
RP
Replication Phase
TOT
Training of Trainers
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNV
United Nations Volunteer
VFU
Veterinary Field Unit
WP
Women's Program
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
I. Introduction
"One day, there were two children in a village talking to one another. 'Who are those people? Are they doctors? ' 'No, they are not. They are PIHAM people. ' 'What is PIHAM?' 'It is the programme of these people. It means they are continuously coming and going, coming and going'^i
This case study talks about the opportunities that can be created as an agricultural development project moves increasingly towards "bottom-up" participatory processes of needs identification, causal analysis, problem-solving, and monitoring. At the same time it indicates that even a handful of gender-responsive participatory appraisal tools, used effectively in training, has the potential to positively alter planning processes and project implementation. It is the story of one project's experiences with participatory approaches and the implications they had -- not only for the villager/technician relationship, but also for the project management and staff in terms of planning and monitoring -- that is recounted here.
In 1994, UNDP amalgamated two separate livestock/veterinary projects in Afghanistan under the execution of FAO. The subsequent project, "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004) moved from a prior focus of rehabilitation to one of sustainable agricultural development and emphasised the active participation of the community in the development process. Activities included animal health and veterinary services; introduction of improved fodder and nutrition, and breeding and poultry development. These activities supported the rebuilding of Afghanistan's self-reliance and production capacities to produce livestock and livestock products backed by self-supporting veterinary services.
The livestock project recognised the need for all objectives to benefit both rural women and men and to involve women directly in the implementation of activities. However, for socio-cultural reasons, the Women's Programme of the project has to a great extent conducted its activities apart from the more "mainstream" project activities. More recently, political reasons have forced an even greater gender-differentiated implementation of activities -- training women and men together is now impossible within the borders of Afghanistan. In Taliban-controlled areas, women are generally prevented from going to offices, making both training and monitoring difficult. However, in terms of approach, the "women's" and "men's" activities have come closer to one another, exchanging lessons and experiences to strengthen each "programme".
In response to the need for more participatory approaches to implementation in the livestock project, FAO developed a sub-project entitled "Promotion of Farmers' Participation Through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan (TCP/AFG/4553)"^ii in 1995. This project was founded on a generic programme developed by FAO and was based on the experiences of using participatory approaches elsewhere in Asia.^iii Project staff, together with consultants from Livestock in Development (LID), undertook a concentrated process of methodology modification, field-testing, and replication, to arrive at an appropriate participatory approach for use in Afghanistan. Thus PIHAM^iv was born.
Through a process of participatory training and fieldwork that aimed to change the attitudes of male and female project staff, particularly in the Veterinary Field Units (VFUs), towards farmers and increase their capacity to use participatory assessment and monitoring tools, the project and its sub-activities took a positive turn. Neither the project nor the approach were specifically labelled "gender-responsive". However, the introduction of PIHAM to the livestock project highlighted the gender-differentiated roles and responsibilities in livestock management, and thus the importance of considering gender disaggregated information in problem-solving and monitoring.
The participatory approaches used not only improved staff responses to farmers' needs, but importantly highlighted, perhaps for the first time, the magnitude to which rural women are involved in livestock production systems. This in turn had implications for the kind of information that was gathered. Project staff recognised that without the inclusion of both women* and men's knowledge about their animals, effective responses to livestock production constraints were unlikely.
This case study looks at the lessons learned during the introduction of PIHAM and its impact on the overall livestock project and the Women's Programme component. In order to set the stage and understand the project's efforts to be more participatory and gender-responsive, the following section provides some background on the sociopolitical situation in Afghanistan as well as the difficult "gender" context in which this effort, together with all other rehabilitation and development efforts, have struggled to work. Section three discusses how the projects were set up. This followed by a brief description of how the projects were implemented in the field. As in the other studies in this series, the fifth section of the paper analyses the lessons learned from implementation, especially the strengths and weaknesses of the approaches used in terms of six "challenges" that were inherent to or emerged during the process: the entry point, i.e. determining where to start and the
implications that had for how to structure and support the process.
· the tools and methods that were used and how they worked in terms of learning about and documenting gender issues in agriculture and facilitating the participation of men and women in agricultural development planning.
· gender information, i.e. a brief analysis of the major findings from the GA/PRA and the impact this new information had.
· capacity building, i.e. whose capacities were enhanced and what strategies and methods worked best to accomplish that task.
· linkages, i.e. how did the projects promote linkages with on-going planning processes.
· institutionalisation, i.e. what changes did or should take place in order to create a more enabling environment for gender-responsive, participatory approaches to agricultural development planning.
The case study finally proposes considerations for those wishing to support gender-responsive participatory processes in agricultural planning, particularly in situations where it is difficult for both female and male technical staff to meet directly with rural women It points to the fact that the knowledge and experience, as well as the needs and priorities of different household/community members must somehow be incorporated in planning. Otherwise, gender, and other socio-economically differentiated barriers to planning processes can have significantly negative consequences for the overall effectiveness of livestock interventions -- from the grassroots level up to the policy level.
The preparation of this case study does not constitute a formal evaluation. Rather, it is a "story" of lessons learned, based on a review of project documentation and discussions with project staff in July 1997. Part of the case study team travelled to Jalalabad and surrounding villages to observe an in-process PIHAM training session for male initiators, and to visit rural women who have been working with project staff using PIHAM approaches to monitor changes in their livestock production.
<section>3</section>
II. Background on Afghanistan
Historical context
The contribution of livestock to development in Afghanistan
Gender issues in Afghanistan
II. Background on Afghanistan
"It is... important to continue to focus on interventions that rebuild mechanisms for people's participation in rehabilitation and development and which provide an incentive to disengage from conflict;...for people to meet peacefully and discuss points of common interest rather than issues that divide; and to ensure that the concerns of the most disadvantaged are adequately taken care of: "^v
Historical context
With its infrastructure and social capital gravely diminished and its governance systems fractured, Afghanistan remains a country in crisis. The loss of jobs and export earnings, together with a lack of national economic management and revenue generation capacities, has crippled the formal national economy. Almost twenty years of war have led to the spiralling reduction in the country's social and economic status.^vi In 1996, UNDP's Human Development Report placed Afghanistan 169 out of 175 countries in the Human Development Index.^vii
Before the war began, Afghanistan had been classed as one of the world's least developed countries. However in 1978, it was self-sufficient in grain for the first time since the early 1900s.^viii Roads, dams, and formal irrigation systems were being developed to support large-scale agriculture; and a network of government training institutions, departments, and offices supported small-holder farmers.
In 1992, the war reached a climax, leaving about one third of the population (6 million people) either internally displaced or in refugee camps outside the country. Significant reductions in agricultural production left the country in dire need of food and other assistance. Agricultural systems had been devastated; infrastructure had deteriorated, and government extension services were drastically reduced.
Over the years, however, due to the efforts of several United Nations agencies and other donors (particularly European Union) and NGO-supported activities, agricultural production has started to make a recovery. By 1995, these efforts had achieved great results. Between two and three million refugees returned to their farms, the country's food supply increased, and much of the farm land was back in production.
A formal government no longer functions in Afghanistan. In its absence, the UN provides a sense of direction in the reconstruction and development of the country. The lack of a central government has created several constraints to rehabilitating the country's capacities. However, opportunities have been grasped wherever, and whenever possible. Most notably, development organizations and others have worked directly with communities and NGOs to plan and implement activities. Still, the lack of infrastructure and extension services continues to frustrate efforts to institutionalise lessons reamed.
The contribution of livestock to development in Afghanistan
At least three quarters of the population live in rural areas, and about 85 per cent are estimated to depend on agriculture for their livelihood. It makes sense then, that agricultural development, including livestock development, can have a profound influence on developing peace and stability in Afghanistan. The basic ingredients for the development of livestock production are still present in the country -- land, water, adapted indigenous breeds, and hard working and enterprising women and men farmers.
It is estimated that about eight million hectares of agricultural land are cultivated each year in Afghanistan, a third of which is rainfed, the rest under irrigation. The country is characterised by 11 agro-ecological zones, with five percent covering irrigated areas^ix.
The potential social and economic contribution of livestock to agricultural development, household food security and income generation in Afghanistan is vast. Livestock production has always been an integral part of smallholder farming systems throughout the country, providing food, farm power, income, wool, Karakal pelts, and leather. Currently, livestock production contributes to the following^x:
· a source of regular income, however small, through sale of milk eggs, small stock and services;
· employment opportunities in areas where family labour may have little or no other opportunity;
· opportunities for on-farm "value added" processing and downstream marketing of animal products;
· a "buffer" or stabilising effect using risk aversion through combinations of different crops and animal species at the farm level;
· a viable utilisation of marginal areas that have few, if any, alternative uses;
· short-term assets that can be readily liquidated, especially smaller species such as sheep, goats and fowl, for the purchase of food, agricultural inputs, the payment of school fees, and social obligations;
· Ionger-term capital reserve;
· source of protein and important micro-nutrients;
· manure as fuel and building material;
· inputs for crop production: draught animal power, manure, working capital; and finally,
· transport services.
Gender issues in Afghanistan
According to an earlier UN report^xi, life expectancy and literacy rates of Afghan women are among the lowest in the world. Years of conflict and the resulting massive displacement of the Afghan population disrupted family structures and further increased the burden of women^2.
^2It is estimated that there are more than a million widows in Afghanistan.
For "religious and cultural reasons", many Afghan women were historically denied access to education and employment outside the home.^xii More recently, Afghan women have further been denied access to education and employment by Taliban authorities, despite the efforts of UN organisation to convince local authorities to "reverse these discriminatory policies." Afghanistan is a signatory to both the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights and has ratified the latter. Yet, recent political developments have further eroded the overall situation of women in Afghanistan in terms of mobility and access to services. The Secretary General of the UN^xiii recently noted that in cities under Taliban control, women's situation has worsened.
The recent restrictions on women have adversely affected the ability of the UN and other donors active in rehabilitation and development efforts in Afghanistan to deliver their programmes to those in need. This rings true to the rural population and to the negative implications of these restrictions for the agricultural sector, where women are so very active.
Over the past year, Taliban decisions have made it increasingly difficult for women to work outside the home, and for others to work with women. This can have serious implications for livestock production efforts. If women are not " present", their knowledge and experience cannot contribute to solving livestock problems. It is important to remember, however, that the extent to which Taliban restrictions affect women differs from region to region and even between urban and rural areas. Also in more general terms, some observers have noted cases whereby the Taliban authorities have had to back down in the face of strong popular protest, particularly in rural areas.^xiv
The restricted movement of women in Afghanistan has added constraints to UN-based (and other) planners trying to respond to development needs in areas already pressured by years of conflict. The question of how to most effectively collect and integrate socio-economic and gender-disaggregated information from village households in order to most adequately plan livestock interventions in communities and beyond has become increasingly difficult to answer. Restrictions on women's movement have made it all but impossible for Afghan women to work outside the home, other than in the human health sector. This has tested the capacities of agricultural planners, including veterinarians and livestock production specialists, to most effectively plan and implement agricultural programmes.
At the time of writing this case study, the UN Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, at the request of the Secretary General, had established an inter-agency group to assess the situation in Afghanistan. Ironically, efforts to bar women's "public" participation in Afghanistan has in some way heightened the visibility of women in the eyes of those operating within the UN/donor community, perhaps more so than in other countries.
<section>4</section>
III. Project design
Animal health and livestock production programme in Afghanistan (AGF/93/004)
Animal health and production improvement module - PIHAM (TCP/AFG/4553)
III. Project design
"I understand this is a good programme. If a minister writes a programme while sitting behind the table it will not be implemented, but if if is designed in the field, if will be implemented "^xv
Animal health and livestock production programme in Afghanistan (AGF/93/004)
Almost all government institutions in Afghanistan, including the Veterinary Department, had effectively ceased functioning as a result of the war. In mid-1994, UNDP amalgamated two livestock programmes and established a single FAO executed programme, "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004) ".^3 The aim of the project was to "restore and improve the productive capacity of the national livestock composite owned by smallholder farmers and nomadic and semi-nomadic pastoralists."
^3FAO had a "sister" project to the livestock programme, entitled, "Integrated Crops and Food Production in Afghanistan (AFG/94/002)". This project has recently begun a new phase.
The project identified rural women as a key beneficiary group and recognised their capacities as animal production and health "specialists". In turn, it considered development activities that were deemed "appropriate" for their participation. The operation of Veterinary Field Units (VFUs) by women was seen to be unrealistic given their restricted movement in the districts. However, the project felt that women farmers could act as Basic Veterinary Workers (BVWs) in their village, supporting disease investigation and diagnosis and possibly earn a supplementary income. BVW training for women attempted to "avoid old pattern(s)"of only men talking to men about the problems of rehabilitation, and to involve women in animal health and livestock production activities."^xvi
The project set training targets of 60-80 additional paravets and 200-250 Basic Veterinary Workers, including at least 75 women. Poultry breeding farms, hatcheries, and chicken rearing facilities were to be established to facilitate, among other things, the hand out of two month old chicks to women participating in poultry management training. The BVW training together with the poultry management courses were collectively referred to as "the Women's Programme".
Animal health and production improvement module - PIHAM (TCP/AFG/4553)
Generally speaking, the delivery of animal health services in Afghanistan had improved through FAO and other UN, bilateral, and NGO assistance using a package of animal health services against "an historically accepted repertoire of animal diseases"^xvii It is said that mortality was reduced in young (26%) and adult (43%) animals.^xviii However, one study suggested that the relative impact on mortality of vaccinations versus parasite prevention versus clinical treatment had not been considered.^xix The project assumed that anti-parasite treatments accounted for the majority of benefits. In addition, it was thought that poor animal management and nutrition as well as reproductive inefficiency and neo-natal mortality posed considerable constraints to improving livestock productivity.^xx If this were the case, the project extension services would have to change their approach.
Additionally, the livestock project identified several constraints to self-sustaining Veterinary Field Units. The greatest constraint was felt to be the poor relationship between the veterinary staff and the farmers. Poor VFU-farrner relationships not only limited the ability of veterinarians to work effectively on a cost-recovery basis, but also hindered attempts to improve overall small-holder livestock production. To some extent, it appeared that veterinary staff were not aware of the livestock problems faced by farmers^xxi. There was clearly the need for a training programme, previously omitted from the project, to promote the principles of farmers' participation in identifying their own needs and local decision-making, as well as in building closer farmer-veterinary staff relationships.
The project looked to examples elsewhere in Asia for possible appropriate methodologies for changing its extension approach. As a result, AHPIM (later changed to PIHAM) was adapted and tested for use in Afghanistan.
Diagram 1: Foundations or "Pillars" of PIHAM
PIHAM is a herd health and production programme that aims to improve the quality and delivery of livestock services in Afghanistan.^xxii It promotes the use of participatory approaches that are based on gaining greater understanding of, and formulating appropriate responses to, farmers' identified needs. Through this approach, it facilitates the process of identification of animal health and husbandry constraints, the planning and implementation of interventions, and the monitoring of results by farmers and local veterinary teams.
The participatory approaches used in PIHAM are developed on three foundations, or "pillars" (see Diagram 1 above). One of the key strengths of PIHAM is the recognition of the need to maintain continuous contact between farmer and VFU staff to build farmer confidence and facilitate the collection of information essential for responding to the needs of farmers. From other experiences, it was recognised that as the relationship between the two improves, so does the potential to respond to the problems identified by farmers.
Since its inception, PIHAM has acted as one of the key "vehicles for change" for the livestock project and its sub-activities, including the Women* Programme, driving the processes of exchange, reflection, analysis, and correction. Through the encouragement of participatory methodologies, it has created a "safe space" necessary for all project staff from the lowest to highest levels to discuss problems and share successes, both across horizontal and vertical organisational levels.
<section>5</section>
IV. Project implementation
IV. Project implementation
The purpose of this section is to describe the events that took place during the implementation of the overall project and in the Women's Programme component that led to significant changes in the way interventions were planned and implemented. The process of implementation was a move away from a more top-down, centrist approach to one based on the identified needs of communities and grassroots workers. The project's introduction of more participatory training, information gathering and monitoring methodologies through PIHAM had clear impacts for VFU and project staff in terms of highlighting farmers' roles in, and knowledge of, livestock production. Most importantly, this change of approach was instrumental in bringing to the attention of both project staff and to villagers themselves, the critical role which women play in the management of livestock.
While the overall project considered both rural women and men as beneficiaries, for the most part activities were organised and conducted along gender-disaggregated lines. This was earlier due to the overall socio-cultural conditions, but more recently, due to the political decisions in Afghanistan. However, while activities were conducted separately, key events occurred that drew them closer together in terms of approach. This provided the opportunity for greater discussion of the different roles and responsibilities, as well as the different knowledge of rural women and men in livestock production systems.
Women's Programme Initiated: In 1995, the project prioritised the training of rural women under the National Assistant Manager, Training of Rural Women (TRW) who was supported by a female United Nations Volunteer (UNV). Compared to other project activities, the Women's Programme was conducted on a smaller scale in terms of villagers reached, due in part to the limited number of staff. The team developed and planned month-long Basic Veterinary Worker training courses for women, provided field support to women Veterinary Workers, and developed other training and participatory opportunities for women in the context of the overall programme. The content of the BVW training was the same as that for male BVWs. In late 1996, the FAO Women's Programme conducted week-long poultry production and animal husbandry training continuing from earlier UN efforts. In 1997, the Women's Programme lost the UNV, but gained two women initiators from the PIHAM programme, bringing the staff to
three.
Development of PIHAM: When the livestock project was initially designed, the absence of technical assistance to promote stronger veterinary staff-farmer relationships as well as farmer participation in needs identification and decision-making was identified. While project staff had had some exposure to participatory methodologies, they were not necessarily using these optimally in their work with farmers. In response, PIHAM was developed and introduced as a FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project (TCP/AFG/4553) in 1996 to reorient the interaction between livestock owners and community animal health workers associated with the project.
PIHAM Pilot Phase - Need for Women trainees identified: The pilot phase for PIHAM was conducted between March 1996 and January 1997. During the pilot phase, twelve initiators, both veterinarians and agriculturalists, were trained to implement and make modifications to PIHAM. In the initial stages of PIHAM, the livestock project identified ten male trainees, or "initiators" in PIHAM terms, from Veterinary Field Units and the old government extension service to participate in the first PIHAM training. However, while conducting the first PIHAM module, the initiators and project management recognised the need to train women to "complete the circle" of information essential to providing better services to communities. Two weeks into the first module, two women "initiators" joined PIHAM.
PIHAM Pilot Phase - Modules 1-5 Conducted: Over the duration of the pilot phase, the women and men initiators undertook training in participatory appraisal and monitoring approaches. They also carried out field work with farmers in six locations. The training session broke down into five modules followed by fieldwork and monitoring and evaluation (reflection and correction).
Module 1: Situation Awareness
Module 2: Monitoring Key Indicators
Module 3: Analysis of Key Indicators, identification of problems
Module 4: Cause of problems, finding solutions, feedback
Module 5: Impact of PIHAM, evaluation of the pilot phase
Modification of Women's Programme Poultry/Husbandry: The involvement of women veterinary staff in the PIHAM training had a positive impact on the Women's Programme, particularly in raising the capacity of female staff to use participatory appraisal and monitoring approaches. After the training, they began to modify course training material, making it much more participatory and practical, and so more meaningful to illiterate village women. Staff also subsequently modified the content of the poultry training course to focus on the use of materials and feeds that were inexpensive and available locally. The process of revision continues to date, changing according to needs identified with village women.
One-day workshop on PIHAM for UN agencies working in Afghanistan: In March, 1997 the FAO livestock project held a one-day workshop for other UN agencies working in Afghanistan. At the workshop, FAO shared the experiences of using the PIHAM approach and the participatory methodologies associated with it. This was a key event for raising the awareness elsewhere of the need for participatory responses to rehabilitation and development challenges.^4
4 All UN agencies working in Afghanistan are well aware of the need to incorporate gender-responsive approaches in their work. To what extent they are able to is another matter.
Two-day workshop to review Women's Programme: In early 1997, as the ever-increasing restrictions on women's mobility began to affect the project, a two day workshop was held between the PIHAM trainer, the three female staff of the Women's Programme, and two management-level staff. The workshop was held to review the existing objectives and activities, identify major issues affecting the Programme, and plan and focus activities over the short term, in preparation for an overall programme review proposed for October/November, 1997.
Over the short term it was felt that it would be important for the two new female staff (ex-PIHAM) to familiarise themselves with the existing programme and to identify areas for modification. It was also seen as an opportune moment for PIHAM's participatory approaches to feed into the Women's Programme. In follow-up to what was reamed from the PIHAM training, the team agreed that the programme should begin the process of identifying specific needs for (rural) women concerning livestock services. It was felt that a participatory assessment should identify to what extent the Basic Veterinary Worker training and poultry training met the specific needs of women farmers and also highlight areas needing attention.
Training of Trainers/Replication Phase: PIHAM has now moved into its Replication Phase where the original initiators, fresh from their Training of Trainers course, are now training other male VFU staff throughout the country in PIHAM approaches. The Training of Trainers course covered the principles of adult learn