<title>The impact of HIV/AIDS on rural households/communities and the need for multisectoral prevention and mitigation strategies to combat the epidemic in rural areas</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
Recent data suggest that the HIV/AIDS epidemic is continuing to evolve. It is estimated that over 90 percent of the close to 30 million people who are thought to have been infected worldwide with the virus since the start of the epidemic live in developing countries. With around 14 million HIV-infected adults and children as of late 1996, sub-Saharan Africa is the region hardest hit. This represents around 65 percent of the world total. Of the 8 500 new infections that occur daily worldwide, 50 percent are in sub-Saharan Africa. It is estimated that around 5 million adults and 1.4 million children worldwide have already died since the start of the global epidemic. (For the end 1996 global estimates, see Annex I.)
In each country the details of the epidemic vary, having its own distinct origin, geographic patterns of dispersion and particular population subgroups affected. At present, reliable comprehensive statistics for HIV/AIDS infections do not exist; however, those that do exist are alarming. If the current epidemic trends continue through the end of this decade, it is estimated that between 30 and 40 million adults will have been infected with HIV by the year 2000. Of these, about 60 percent will be in sub-Saharan Africa.
Over 50 percent of new HIV infections occur in women. This is alarming since women carry the main burden of care of family members with HIV/AIDS. In countries where young people account for 60 percent of all new infections, infected young women outnumber their infected male peers by a ratio of 2 to 1. UNAIDS estimates that close to 8 million women in sub-Saharan Africa (out of 10 million women infected worldwide) are HIV-positive.
HIV/AIDS is no longer restricted to cities. The disease is now spreading with alarming speed into rural areas and affects the farming population, especially people in their most productive years (ages 15 to 45). However, there is also some evidence of stabilization in HIV infection rates in certain areas of East and Central Africa. In one rural district of southwest Uganda, the percentage of those aged 13 and above acquiring HIV infection each year declined from 7.5 percent in 1989-1990 to 4.5 percent in 1993. This is attributed to success in changing sexual behaviour.
Although interrelations between the epidemic and overall development have been acknowledged, the linkages to agriculture have received less attention because the epidemic was perceived as being largely urban. The existing evidence of the spread of the epidemic to rural areas was often overlooked because of poor data, the irregular patterns of spread and lower prevalence than in urban areas. A lesson that should be drawn from this epidemic of global dimension is that technical assistance agencies, including FAO, should combine their efforts to improve the existing mitigation and prevention strategies to manage the impact of the epidemic on agricultural production and food security and combat the disease in rural areas.
While prime concern was aimed at eastern Africa in assessing the socio-economic impact of HIV/AIDS on rural households and their production systems, little is known about the impact of the epidemic on agriculture and rural societies in West Africa. FAO is currently carrying out a UNDP-funded TSS-1 project "The Effect of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems and Rural Livelihoods in Western Africa (Côte d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso)" which focuses on the pastoral population, rural migrants, nutritional implications, etc.
A previous paper, "The Impact of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic on Agricultural Production and Productivity and the Role of Extension Services in Combating the Disease in Rural Areas (Especially in Africa)", explores the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on agricultural production systems and highlights the consequences for agricultural extension programmes in rural areas affected by the disease. The present paper follows up on the issues presented in the previous paper and focuses on the impact of the epidemic on rural households/communities and the need for immediate, medium-term and long-term strategies to control and combat the disease and to mitigate its consequences in rural areas.
For this purpose, selected study findings on the impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production systems and rural household food security will be reiterated and fundamental problems and major challenges for agricultural extension, including HIV/AIDS-related farmer education and training programmes, will be highlighted. In addition, possible directions and actions to strengthen agricultural extension programmes are proposed, especially with regard to farmer education and training activities.
The immediate and medium-term response of agricultural extension programmes to the effects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic could focus on a reorientation of extension programmes with an emphasis on problem-solving activities for affected households and communities (focusing on training and extension activities for women, orphans and youth) and on the initiation of collective efforts to strengthen community and group organization in support of traditional coping mechanisms to mitigate the effect of the disease. In addition, systematic, location-specific surveys could collect relevant information on the actual impact of the disease on rural households and extension programmes.
A long-term strategy to strengthen extension programmes in countries affected by HIV/AIDS could include a systematic approach to improve research inputs for the development of less labour-intensive crops and production methods. Furthermore, priority should be given to the integration of gender issues into extension programmes and an effort made to improve women's participation in extension activities. In addition, assistance (including appropriate legal support for HIV/AIDS widows) could be provided to vulnerable groups/communities through multidisciplinary HIV/AIDS programmes. Ministries of agriculture and their outreach programmes will have to play a key role in addressing the special needs of rural households/communities in such multidisciplinary HIV/AIDS programmes, which could be launched as integral part of a poverty alleviation Program me in HIV/AIDS-affected areas.
<section>2</section>
2. The impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production: effects at the household level
2. The impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production: effects at the household level
The detrimental impact that HIV/AIDS may have on rural households' productive capacity has been explored in studies in eastern Africa. The earlier paper (quoted above) suggests that the effects of HIV/AIDS are felt on two key farm production parameters. First, household labour quality and quantity are reduced, initially in terms of productivity when the HIV-infected person is ill, and later the supply of household labour falls with the death of that person. Moreover, the probability that more than one adult per family is infected is high, given the heterosexual nature of HIV transmission in Africa. A compounding factor is that infection rates are higher among women, who account for 70 percent of the agricultural labour force and 80 percent of food production. In addition, other household members will devote productive time to caring for the sick persons and traditional mourning customs, which can last as long as 40 days for some family members, can adversely affect labour
availability.
The second factor of household agricultural production that HIV/AIDS will affect is the availability of disposable cash income. During episodes of illness, household financial resources may be diverted to pay for medical treatment and eventually to meet funeral costs. Such resources may otherwise be used to purchase agricultural inputs, such as occasional extra labour or other complementary inputs (e.g. new seeds or plants, fertilizer, pesticides, etc.). Family assets (e.g. livestock) might be sold off.
If a household becomes unable to either supply such labour internally or hire temporary workers, the composition of crops may be gradually altered, shifting from cash to subsistence crops in some cases. The key constraint will be during periods of peak labour demand, usually in planting and harvesting seasons. Given the nature of the rural labour market, these are also times when wages or opportunity costs are highest. Another response to labour shortages may be to reduce the area under cultivation. Furthermore, it is likely that livestock production may also be less intensive and that the farming quality will be affected with weeding and pruning activities curtailed. The shift from high labour-intensive crops to low labour-intensive crops will stop vegetable cultivation resulting in a less varied and less nutritious diet.
Labour-intensive farming systems with a low level of mechanization and agricultural input are particularly vulnerable to the impact of the disease. Some of the effects of labour shortage in full impact communities in Eastern Africa are:
· reduction in the acreage of land under cultivation;
· delay in farming operations such as tillage, planting and weeding;
· reduction in the ability to control crop pests;
· decline in crop yields;
· loss of soil fertility;
· shift from labour-intensive crops (e.g. banana) to less labour-intensive crops (such as cassava and sweet potatoes);
· shift from cash-oriented production to subsistence production;
· reduction in the range of crops per household;
· decline in livestock production;
· loss of agricultural knowledge and management skills.
The results and findings of FAO's activities carried out in eastern Africa reveal that the impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production systems and rural livelihood cannot be generalized, even within one country, and must be disaggregated into spatial and temporal dimensions. Studies conducted in Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia have shown that HIV/AIDS follows a different pattern in each village and district. Geographic and ethnic factors, religion, gender, age, marriage customs and agro-ecological conditions play a role in the pattern and impact of HIV/AIDS and in people's perception of the disease. Communities can be grouped in pre-impact (infections exist, but the impact of the disease is not visible), early impact (visible impact, but community coping mechanisms still work) and full-impact communities (high prevalence of HIV/AIDS-related morbidity and mortality, traditional coping strategies do not work any more). This differentiation is important for
the planning and implementation of location-specific intervention strategies.
<section>3</section>
3. The impact of HIV/AIDS on traditional coping mechanisms in rural economies
3. The impact of HIV/AIDS on traditional coping mechanisms in rural economies
The economic and social consequences of the disease directly affect the rural family. In the absence of functioning medical care systems in African countries, medical costs and caring for sick family members must be borne entirely by the nuclear family or by the extended family network. In addition to the medical costs, which include the cost of drugs and traditional medical treatment, funeral expenses of family members are a heavy burden on the family budget. Funeral costs appear to be even higher than medical expenses in some settings.
Farmers have developed mechanisms to cope with the impacts of HIV/AIDS on their rural livelihood strategies. Traditionally, in emergency situations caused by natural disasters and in hardship situations, the extended family network has developed successful coping mechanisms, which are still operational in pre-impact and early impact communities. However, the rise of HIV/AIDS related morbidity and mortality in full-impact communities, where the impact of the disease already leads to the breakdown of the nuclear families, the traditional coping mechanisms are strained to the breaking point.
Traditional coping mechanisms are based mainly on returns to labour at the farm and/or family unit. Even the contribution of child labour may be increased (with children, particularly girls, withdrawn from school) as the family struggles to maintain the current cropping patterns. But, as a family becomes more impoverished, it may have little choice but to produce for its own consumption needs. Even then, family nutrition levels could be gradually compromised. It is not uncommon in full-impact districts/communities to observe entire families of children with elderly grandparents as their only form of support.
Since HIV/AIDS is above all a sexually transmitted disease, very often more than one family member is affected and dies. As a result, the entire assets and savings of many families, which are generally meagre before the onset of the disease, may be completely spent, leaving the surviving family members without means of support. A study in Uganda has shown that the burden of the socio-economic impact of HIV/AIDS is disproportionately affecting rural women. In the districts studied, more households were found to be headed by AIDS widows than by AIDS widowers. Widows with dependent children became entrenched in poverty as a result of the socio-economic pressures related to HIV/AIDS. Widows lost access to land, labour, inputs, credit and support services. HIV/AIDS stigmatization compounded their situation further, as assistance from the extended family and the community, their main safety net, was severed. The extent to which malnutrition rates in affected households rises
depends on the type of coping mechanisms, household resource constraints, socio-cultural context and emotional stress. As the ability to produce and accumulate food and income decreases, the household falls into a downward spiral of increasing dependency ratios, poorer nutrition and health, increasing expenditure of resources (time and money) on health problems, more food shortages, decreasing household viability, and increasing reliance on support from extended family and the wider community. The effects of HIV/AIDS on rural households, and the likely impact of the disease on farmers' health and the nutrition of farm families, is depicted in Table 1. The complexity of the impact of the disease on agricultural production and household food security requires a multisectoral response that should include agricultural extension, primary health care, education and appropriate non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Furthermore, it has been observed that the decline in farm income caused by a decline in cropping intensity and livestock production, which is accompanied by an increase in medical expenses and funeral costs, can lead to the breakdown of the nuclear family and the traditional support system. The interlinkages between the increase of HIV/AIDS-related mortality and morbidity, the lack of farm inputs and labour force, the deterioration of household economy and the impact on education, health and the social system, which eventually lead to a breakdown of the traditional coping mechanisms, are presented in Table 2 on page 9.
The Joint United Nations Program me on AIDS (UNAIDS), which is the UN System's main advocate for the global response to the epidemic, is dedicated to preventing the transmission of HIV, reducing the suffering caused by HIV/AIDS, and countering the epidemic's impact on individuals, households, communities and societies. UNAIDS brings together at country level the many and varied technical and operational strengths of its cosponsoring agencies to enhance the quality of assistance to national responses to AIDS. UNAIDS can thus assist in strengthening traditional coping mechanisms by, first of all, ensuring effective and coordinated support by the UN System to the national HIV/AIDS Program me UNAIDS provides technical support, training and monitoring to ensure that all national actors have access to information on international best practices and, in turn, to ensure that their country experiences help shape the global policies and programmes. It is to be noted that UNAIDS does
not fund projects except under specific circumstances. UNFPA CSTs, UNFPA Country Representatives, FAO regional, subregional and country offices should collaborate with UNAIDS at regional and country levels to promote a multisectoral response to the epidemic.
Table 1 The impact of HIV/AIDS on the food and nutrition situation of rural households
<section>4</section>
4. The impact of HIV/AIDS on the extension service
4.1. Immediate and medium-term extension activities/strategies to alleviate the consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic
4.2. Long-term strategy to strengthen extension programmes
4.3. Multisectoral HIV/AIDS control programmes with a focus on sustainable agricultural and rural development
4.3.1. Operational framework
(a) Policy adjustments
(b) HIV/AIDS-related database
(c) Strategic framework and action plan
4.3.2. Implementation and resource mobilization
4. The impact of HIV/AIDS on the extension service
Agricultural extension is one of the central institutions dealing with human resource development and technology transfer to farmers and rural households in most countries in the world. As agricultural development in a country moves forward, the knowledge and technology needs of farmers and farm households continue to increase. In countries where farm households have low levels of literacy and more traditional farming systems, extension programmes will generally be more educationally focused, aiming primarily at human resource development in rural areas. These extension systems, often functioning as integrated agricultural and rural development programmes, help farmers form organizations/associations, such as commodity groups and cooperatives, and promote the use of government services and improved technology.
Table 2 The Impact of HIV/AIDS on Traditional Coping Mechanisms in Rural Economies
Some extension systems may expand their human resource development focus to include rural youth, child development, nutrition and household management programmes. Broad-based extension systems that include agriculture, population education, environment, home economics, rural youth, gender and community development components are essentially designed to improve the welfare of rural households and communities rather than achieve more limited agricultural production and technology transfer objectives.
Participants at FAO's 1989 Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension recognized that economic pressure is forcing extension in many countries to justify itself on more immediate economic criteria that are closely related to technology transfer and increasing agricultural productivity, thus ignoring extension's traditional role in human resource development. They pointed out that pursuing an extension system that is narrowly focused on technology transfer risks promoting growth without equity. Unless the educational and technology needs of all major groups of farmers are effectively addressed, the long-term consequences will likely lead to a small proportion of very productive commercial farmers and the vast majority of rural people being left behind at the subsistence level in conditions of pervasive rural poverty thus jeopardizing the success of population programmes. The socio-economic impact of HIV/AIDS on rural households requires a broad-based agricultural and rural
development concept that is based on a more balanced approach to extension that takes the specific HIV/AIDS-related needs of different rural groups into consideration.
An FAO-sponsored survey of 207 agricultural extension organizations in 113 countries revealed that an estimated US$ 6 billion was spent in 1988 on extension activities worldwide. The survey results indicated that there are approximately 600 000 extension workers for 1.2 billion farmers worldwide. Based on the survey results, it is estimated that in 1988 approximately 58 percent of extension resources (including time) worldwide were directed towards commercial farmers, including specialized producers of cash crops and export commodities. Only 22 percent of extension resources were directed towards subsistence farmers and 7 percent towards rural youth and young farmers. The proportion of female extension workers in 1988 worldwide was estimated to be about 16 percent, and yet only about 5 percent of extension resources had been directed towards women farmers. It is unlikely that these trends have changed substantially in recent years. It should, however, be noted that
structural adjustment programmes have resulted in drastic reductions in extension budgets and staff and created an institutional vacuum in some countries.
As recommended in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, in addition to the need of increasing food production, the need for policies conducive to investment in human resource development, research and infrastructure for achieving food security is recognized, with a focus on the alleviation of poverty among the rural poor. The World Food Summit Plan of Action stressed the importance of giving special attention to providing agricultural development services, including education, extension and training, to disadvantaged groups -- small farmers, rural women and youth. In view of the detrimental impact of HIV/AIDS on rural economies, agricultural planning authorities need to place this concept at the contra of their concerns and efforts.
Agricultural extension is in transition worldwide. Governments and international agencies are advancing structural, financial and managerial strategies to improve extension programmes. Decentralization, cost-sharing, cost-recovery, participation of stakeholders in development initiatives and the decisions and resources that affect them -- these are some of the elements in extension's current transition.
Given the problems and challenges mentioned earlier, priority should be given to improving and strengthening extension services, especially through farmer education and training, to meet the challenges of ensuring sustainable agricultural and rural development in HIV/AIDS-affected rural areas. Fundamental policy changes and new strategic directions or approaches are urgently required to increase the efficiency of providing relevant agricultural extension and training programmes to farm families, focusing on small-scale and resource-poor farm households, and especially targeting rural women and youth. The following suggestions for improving extension activities only provide general directions for action. Each farmer education/training activity has specific goals, problems or needs. An appropriate extension strategy will have to be developed based on the results and findings of location-specific assessment surveys, cultural context analysis and the needs of the respective
target beneficiaries.
4.1. Immediate and medium-term extension activities/strategies to alleviate the consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic
The impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production systems and the decline of agricultural knowledge and management skills, as well as the disproportionate impact of the disease on rural women, which cumulatively lead to the loss of rural household food security, the deterioration of traditional coping mechanisms and dwindling of family and community resources, does have a direct impact on the performance of extension services. However, there is little precise information on how the impact of HIV/AIDS is affecting the performance of agricultural extension services in specific locations.
Hence, there is an urgent need for appropriate location-specific assessment surveys, which could provide precise quantitative and qualitative information on the scope of the impact of the disease on agricultural production, rural households and the work and coverage of extension services. Such surveys should also collect information on how HIV/AIDS related morbidity and mortality affects the availability of trained staff and the coverage of extension services. In addition, precise information is needed on the legal aspects involved in HIV/AIDS-related mortality and the implications on land rights and inheritance laws for widows and orphans. Furthermore, data on the specific implications of HIV/AIDS on small-scale and/or landless farmers and women, as well as on the availability of household labour, savings, cash and other socio-economic data need to be collected. The assessment of the current status, likely future development and prospective demographic, social and economic
impact of HIV/AIDS in a specific rural district/community needs to be undertaken in a joint effort with all agencies and selected NGOs represented in the respective district/community. A limited rapid rural assessment survey could meet the immediate needs focusing on the impact of HIV/AIDS on households, communities, health facilities, traditional healers, traditional coping mechanisms and survivor assistance programmes.
The results and findings of such location-specific surveys need to be analysed and used as inputs for the design of problem-solving, action-oriented interventions and for the planning of appropriate extension strategies, including development of adequate training programmes and training support materials; empowerment of women by providing relevant training and extension advice; strengthening of traditional coping mechanisms; and the promotion of cost-effective survivor assistance programmes for orphans, widows/widowers and elderly farmers. FAO's Agricultural Extension and Education Service (SDRE) envisages possible studies and training activities related to the HIV/AIDS pandemic with a focus on its implications/consequences on agricultural extension programmes. For more details on these activities, see Annex 2 (4).
In view of the devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on rural economies and farm families, extension interventions cannot focus any longer only on the technical aspects of agricultural production and livestock development. Frequently, the extension service is the only government agency represented in rural areas and the extension workers are the only rural resource persons who can assist rural families in alleviating the socio-economic consequences of the disease. However, agricultural extension staff need to be guided and trained to utilize their community organization skills to assist the most vulnerable groups in affected communities to pool their expertise and knowledge and reinforce their confidence. They should also assist affected rural communities in undertaking on-farm as well as off-farm income-generating activities and facilitate self-help associations to provide immediate assistance and support to HIV/AIDS widows/widowers and orphans.
One of the immediate and medium-term means of increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of agricultural extension programmes to meet the challenges and to alleviate the consequences of HIV/AIDS is through the application of improved and innovative extension methods. FAO/SDRE's field experiences in the last decade have demonstrated the importance of extension methodologies that rely on strategic planning applications and participatory approaches that can minimize inputs or resources and maximise outputs or results. A Strategic Extension Campaign (SEC) methodology developed by FAO/SDRE has been introduced in Africa, the Near East, Asia and Latin America. This methodology emphasizes the importance of people's participation (i.e.. intended beneficiaries such as field extension workers and small farmers) in strategic planning, systematic management and field implementation of agricultural extension and training programmes. Its extension strategies and messages are specifically
developed and tailored based on the results of a participatory problem identification process on the causes or reasons of farmers' non-adoption, or inappropriate practices, of a given recommended agricultural technology or innovation.
The SEC technology transfer and application approach is needs-based, demand-driven, and has a problem-solving orientation. The SEC methodology has been developed to focus on specific issues related to a given agricultural technology recommendation. Basic concepts and principles of SEC have been used in the efforts to integrate population education and environment issues/concerns into agricultural extension activities in selected FAO member countries. Most of the important principles and techniques employed in planning, implementing and managing SEC activities would be applicable to developing and implementing problem-solving extension activities to mitigate the consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic an) to support the Ministry of Agriculture's policies, strategies and priority programmes. The SEC methodology is useful to agricultural extension services and to small farmers because it:
· advocates a participatory planning approach;
· is needs-based and demand-driven;
· uses strategic planning and integrated systems approach;
· considers the human and behavioural dimensions;
· has a problem-solving orientation;
· employs a cost-effective multimedia approach;
· provides specific extension support materials and training;
· has built-in process documentation and evaluation procedures;
· is applicable to other extension programmes.
There is a need to promote more egalitarian gender relationships in families and communities. All reproductive health (RH) programmes should specifically include a HIV/AIDS prevention strategy. Because RH programmes have traditionally targeted mainly women, the strategy should be designed to increasingly address men. Men's relative authority in all ranges of life, from personal relationships to making national policy, needs to be openly discussed. Strategies for encouraging and enabling men to channel their power constructively at these various levels should be developed and factors inhibiting this should be identified. Lessons learned from the perspective of male motivation for population and family planning programmes should be taken into consideration for reproductive health promotion and multisectoral programmes of HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation.
Agricultural extension can assist farm households and specific target beneficiaries most affected by HIV/AIDS to become organized into functional groups and/or community organizations, such as commodity groups, cooperatives, farmers clubs, etc., that will directly serve their immediate needs. Such group segmentation of target beneficiaries can increase the effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of agricultural extension and reproductive health advice, including appropriate training by developing demand-driven, needs-based and problem-solving extension and reproductive health activities.
4.2. Long-term strategy to strengthen extension programmes
In full-impact communities, where HIV/AIDS-related morbidity and mortality are already high, extension programmes may have to be revised based on the actual impact of the disease on agricultural production systems, rural households and food security. Specific target groups such as widows/widowers, orphans and elderly farmers will have to be given special attention. As part of the long-term strategy for rural development in the presence of HIV/AIDS research linkages and research inputs could be directed towards the development of less labour-intensive crops and production methods bearing in mind the minimum nutritional value required. Research has to correspond more closely to the needs of farm households with fewer working adults.
Farm support services could be strengthened to ensure that technical advice, credit and forms of labour substitution are available. The development of appropriate technologies to reduce the time spent on water and fuel collection, for example, could be critical in releasing more labour for agricultural tasks. Research into the maintenance and creation of income-generating opportunities in rural areas as alternatives to agriculture, particularly for those for whom the physical effort of farming is no longer feasible, is also essential. A good socio-cultural assessment of these communities will allow to devise mechanisms to alleviate the impact of the spread of the disease on the social fabric of rural communities. Traditional household and village structures that normally play a critical role in family welfare and resource management are under strain. Research could be 