<title>A synthesis report of the Africa Region - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: a synthesis report of the Africa </title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
ABS
Agricultural Bank of Sudan
AGRITEX
Department of Agricultural Technical and Extension Services (Zimbabwe)
CEDAW
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
CETA
Collèges d'enseignement technique agricole (agricultural technical secondary schools - Congo)
CMA
Centres des métiers agricoles (agricultural training centres - Congo)
GVF
Groupe de travail féminin (women's working group - Burkina Faso)
GVM
Groupe de travail homme (men's working group - Burkina Faso)
GVM
Groupe de travail mixte (mixed working group - Burkina Faso)
MARA
Ministere de l'Agriculture et des Ressources Animales (Burkina Faso)
MAWRD
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development (Namibia)
MDR
Ministère du Développement Rural (Ministry of Rural Development - Benin)
MDRE
Ministère du Développement Rural et de l'Environnement (Ministry of Rural Development and the Environment - Mauritania)
MET
Ministère de l'Environnement et du Tourisme (Ministry of the Environment and Tourism - Burkina Faso)
MLAWD
Ministry of Lands, Agricultural and Water Development (Zimbabwe)
MLGURD
Ministry of Local Government, Urban and Rural Development (Zimbabwe)
NASCUZ
National Association of Cooperative Savings and Credit Unions (Zimbabwe)
NNFU
Namibia National Farmers Union
NGOs
Non-governmental organizations
RPAWANE
Regional Programme of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East
SPAFR
Service de Promotion des Activités Féminines Rurales (Service for the Promotion of Women's Rural Activities - Benin)
WID
Women in development
<section>2</section>
Methodology
Methodology
The methodology employed in the synthesis report is a comparative analysis of the quantitative and qualitative data provided in the nine sectoral reports ^2 on women in agriculture and rural development, prepared within the context of FAO's Programme of Assistance in Support of Rural Women in Preparation for the Fourth World Conference on Women. The data is supported, when available, by additional documentation on the African region, for which the sources are indicated. As the individual sectoral reports reference the data provided in terms of source and year, for the purpose of this synthesis report, national source references are not repeated. A complete list of references, including the national sectoral reports, can be found in the Bibliography.
(^2 Benin, Burkina Faso, the Congo, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Sudan, Tanzania and Zimbabwe.)
The preparation of the national sectoral reports represents an innovative exercise in compiling national statistical data on rural women in order to provide an overview of their situation and the constraints they face in each particular country. The reports are equally useful in that they identify gaps in the collection of data disaggregated by gender and thus where further work in this area is required.
However, the present report has several limitations, including variations in the quantity and quality of the information provided as well as the availability of data and the consistency of definitions used, especially over a given period of time. In particular, measuring women's participation in the labour force continues to be problematic all over the world. In Africa, although several countries have taken important steps to include unpaid family workers in the definition of the economically active, others continue to define the economically active as those who earn a cash income. The latter definition excludes a large number of women working in the agricultural sector, and especially in subsistence farming. As the definition of the economically active population varied among the countries examined, there were limitations to the comparability of the data at the regional level.
It is also important to note that the sectoral reports were prepared within a limited amount of time and resources, and therefore the information presented was that which was readily available at the national level. Given these constraints, data may have been omitted on the differences among women within a country as a thorough analysis of all available statistical indicators was not always feasible.
Moreover, given the lack of data disaggregated by gender at the national level, the information included in the sectoral reports may have only covered one aspect or institution and is thus only indicative of a particular situation. For example, in terms of rural women's access to credit, several countries have gender disaggregated data for only one institution. While such data is helpful in gaining an understanding of women's access to credit, a more thorough analysis is required for policy making and planning purposes.
In addition, it is necessary to be cautious when making generalizations about the situation of rural women at the regional level as it often differs not only among countries but also within a country, depending upon the socio-economic and ethnic groups to which women belong and to environmental and other factors characteristic of a particular area.
Despite these limitations, the synthesis report attempts to provide a general picture of the situation of rural women in Africa, focusing on the similarities among countries and identifying those countries which vary strongly from the norm. Overall, the analysis is essentially qualitative given the constraints and limitations mentioned above.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Introduction
A wide variety of literature is available on the importance of agriculture to economic development in Africa and on the critical role that rural women play within this sector. Increasing attention is also being given to the role of smallholder subsistence agriculture in ensuring the food security of the continent, as 73% of the rural population consists of smallholder farmers (IFAD, 1993:6). In Sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture accounts for approximately 21% of the continent's GDP and women contribute 60-80% of the labour used to produce food both for household consumption and for sale.
The importance of agriculture to the national economies in Africa and as a source of employment, emerged from the data provided in the sectoral reports, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Importance of Agriculture to the National Economies.
Country
Contribution of Agriculture to GDP
Population employed/involved in agriculture (percent)
Benin
Burkina Faso
Congo
Mauritania
Morocco
Namibia
Sudan
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
71^a
^a The definition of the population employed/involved in agriculture varied among the reports. While some countries cited official national figures of the economically active population, which in some cases excluded subsistence farmers, others gave estimates of the proportion 'involved' or 'dependent upon' agriculture which may include subsistence farmers.
UNDP, 1994,
The agricultural sector contributes from a low of 8% of GDP in the Congo to a high of 50 % in Tanzania, and employs from 40 % of the population in Morocco to 85 % in Burkina Faso and Tanzania. In other countries such as the Congo, Namibia and Zimbabwe, where the contribution of the agricultural sector to GDP is small, the sector still plays an extremely important role as a source of employment.
The important role of smallholder subsistence farmers in Africa, of which the majority are women, was highlighted in many countries. In Benin, 95 % of the agricultural economy is assured by small farmers using subsistence techniques. In Morocco, smallholder farmers account for 69% of all farmers (FAO, 1993:17). In Namibia, 90% of the population in communal farming areas (which covers approximately 41% of the country's land area and is composed of smallholder subsistence farmes) are directly dependent on subsistence agriculture for a living. In Tanzania, smallholders contribute approximately 80% of the value of marketed surplus and 75% of export earnings (IFAD, 1993:6). In Zimbabwe, the communal land sector (in which smallholder farming is practiced) occupies 42 % of all land and accounts for 80% of the female population.
Women's critical role in agricultural production, and especially in subsistence agriculture, as well as in livestock raising and food processing, was also emphasized in the reports and is shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Role of Women in Agriculture
Benin
70% of the female population live in rural areas, where they carry out 60-80% of the agricultural work and furnish up to 44% of the work necessary for household subsistence.
Burkina Faso
Women constitute 48% of the labourers in the agricultural sector.
Congo
Women account for 73% of those economically active in agriculture and produce more than 80% of the food crops.
Mauritania
Despite data gaps, it is estimated that women cover 45% of the needs in rural areas (further details not specified)
Morocco
Approximately 57% of the female population participates in agricultural activities, with greater involvement in animal (68%) as opposed to vegetable production (46%). Studies have indicated that the proportion of agricultural work carried out by men, women and children is 42%, 45% and 14% respectively.
Namibia
Data from the 1991 census reveals that women account for 59% of those engaged in skilled and subsistence agriculture work, ^a and that women continue to shoulder the primary responsibility for food production and preparation.
Sudan
In the traditional sector, women constitute 80% of the farmers. Women farmers represent approximately 49% of the farmers in the irrigated sector and 57% in the traditional sector. 30% of the food in the country is produced by women.
Tanzania
98% of the rural women defined as economically active are engaged in agriculture and produce a substantial share of the food crops for both household consumption and for export
Zimbabwe
Women constitute 61% of the farmers in the Communal areas and comprise at least 70% of the labour force in these areas.
^a It was noted that this estimate is considered low as the 1991 census included the subsistence farming sector for the first time.
Estimates of women's contribution to the production of food crops range from 30% in the Sudan to 80% in the Congo, while their proportion of the economically active labour force in agriculture ranges from 48% in Burkina Faso to 73% in the Congo and 80% in the traditional sector in Sudan.
The data provided for the nine countries supports a common trend throughout Africa - smallholder subsistence farmers, and especially women farmers, substantially contribute to national agricultural production and food security and women farmers are primarily responsible for food crops.
Given the critical importance of the agricultural sector to the national economies, and in view of the important productive role of women within this sector, economic development and food security are affected by the degree of commitment shown by governments to the agricultural sector and to rural women. As will be emphasized throughout the report, gender disaggregated statistics that accurately illustrate the nature and role of women's involvement in agriculture are indispensable in gaining this commitment and for the formulation of successful policies, programmes and projects in the agricultural sector.
The National Context
In Africa, several regional trends have had an impact on women's productive role in agriculture, forestry and fisheries, including: (1) structural adjustment policies adopted by many governments over the last ten years, in the face of global recession, decreased commodity prices and growing foreign debt; (2) population pressure and environmental degradation; (3) high rates of male rural-to-urban migration in search of income earning employment opportunities; and, (4) increased attention to the importance of women in national agricultural plans and policies.
(1) The impact of structural adjustment programmes on rural women. Increasing attention has been paid to the impact of structural adjustment policies on rural women in Africa and empirical evidence is emerging which indicates that the impact has largely been negative. In the sectoral reports in which explicit attention was paid to economic reforms and structural adjustment policies (Burkina Faso, Congo, Morocco, Tanzania, Zimbabwe), the negative impacts on rural women were emphasized.
Under structural adjustment programmes, large scale farming and commercial crop production are promoted, based on the assumption that productivity improvements are easier to obtain in the export as opposed to subsistence or locally-traded crops sector, and that the increase in income stemming from export production will ensure national food security (Joekes, 1991). As a consequence, resources (land, labour, and inputs, including research) have been reallocated from subsistence production to the production of export crops. The implications of this shift are many, especially for women who are concentrated in the subsistence sector and whose ability to move into export crops is limited by various constraints, including: (a) time (double burden of productive and reproductive tasks); (b) systemic (low access to credit, technological packages and marketing information); and, (c) socio-cultural (traditional responsibility for feeding and care of the household). Women's already
limited access to resources is further constrained given the low priority afforded to the subsistence farming sector. Rising prices for basic food products, commodities and agricultural often encourages women to remain at the subsistence level to cover more of the households food needs.
At the same time, reduced government involvement in such areas as marketing and pricing for subsistence agriculture leaves farmers responsible for areas in which they have no previous experience or training. For example, in Zimbabwe, the parastatal marketing boards no longer enjoy Government financial support and subsidies have been removed. Thus marketing facilities, collection depots and assured producer controlled prices are no longer in place and women now have to develop marketing skills, source their own markets and meet all costs. ^3
(^3 A similar phenomenon occurred in the Congo and Benin, with the disengagement of the State from production and marketing activities in the late 1980s.)
In addition, structural adjustment policies generally involve reduced government expenditures on social services such as education, health and rural infrastructure (water and energy supplies) which means further demands are made on women's time and energy to make up for shortfalls in these areas.
(2) Population pressure and environmental degradation. A second trend with implications for rural women is the high population growth experienced in Africa, coupled with unequal allocation of resources and inheritance laws which result in land parcelling and contribute to environmental degradation as the growing pressure on the land pushes farmers (and especially rural women) to overexploit wood, water and other resources in order to meet household requirements. Such over exploitation may result in serious and irreversible environmental degradation including deforestation, long-term erosion, decreased soil fertility, and desertification, which limits the development of agriculture in most areas of sub-Saharan Africa. In Burkina Faso, Sudan, Morocco, Tanzania and Benin, the rural population faces increased incidence of soil degradation and/or desertification.
In Zimbabwe and Namibia, environmental degradation (deforestation, water deficiencies, soil erosion and loss of biodiversity) has been hastened by the policies introduced under colonial and white rule which allocated the poorest land to black farmers. As the population pressure on the fragile land base increases, land units per household have decreased and, to compensate, unsuitable land is cleared for agriculture, causing soil erosion, decreased fertility and productivity. Wetlands have also been lost, resulting in food and water shortages during periods of droughts, when these areas would have previously served as a source of water.
The implications of environmental damage in rural areas is particularly serious for women who are generally found on the most marginal land and have the primary responsibility for providing household subsistence. These women rarely have alternative income-generating employment opportunities. In Zimbabwe, for example, the highest percentage of women farmers is found in the semi-arid lands with marginal agricultural potential. Surveys suggest that the percentage of women with their own land allotment, as opposed to those providing agricultural labour on a male relative's land, increases as the agricultural potential of the land decreases.
(3) Male rural-to-urban migration. Pressure on the countryside from the rapidly growing population and low returns from agriculture have contributed to an Africa-wide phenomenon of growing male rural-to-urban denigration. While such migration can increase remittances to rural areas and strengthen market linkages between urban and rural areas, it leaves rural women increasingly responsible for farming and for meeting their households' immediate needs. In Burkina Faso, Morocco, Mauritania, the Congo and Zimbabwe, women have taken over the tasks formerly carried out by men in addition to those for which they are traditionally responsible. In the Congo and Sudan, the number of women headed-households has increased dramatically. In other countries such as Namibia and Zimbabwe, male migration, coupled with the almost complete female domination of the traditional farming sector, is a legacy of colonialism which encouraged rural men to provide cheap labour for mines, large white-run
commercial farms, fishing enterprises and urban businesses.
(4) Recognition of women's role in agriculture. More encouragingly, throughout Africa many countries have introduced new legislation and programmes to assist small farmers in the traditional sector and pay special attention to women's needs. In Burkina Faso, a national action plan has been prepared to increase women's access to agricultural services, to end discrimination in land allocation, and to create a fund for women's income generating activities. In the Sudan, the ten year strategy targeting the agricultural sector emphasizes food production and food security and explicitly recognizes the critical role of women within this sector. In addition, the Three Year Women in Development Programme, 1993-96 aims to establish legislation and institutions that will increase women's access to productive resources including land, irrigation, credit, technology, extension services and training. Zimbabwe has implemented similar programmes designed to address women's and farmer's
needs, especially in terms of lessening the negative effects of the policy reform programme and drought, and addressing environmental and land tenure concerns.
<section>4</section>
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the early 1980s
Changes since the early 1980s
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making at all levels
Members and office bearers of agricultural/rural organizations
Women in decision-making positions in ministries and government bodies
Women's representation in local power structures
Gender relations in decision-making in farming activities
Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of women
National machineries and WID units/focal points
Role of NGOs
Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's rights
Poverty
Factors contributing to poverty in rural areas
Consequences of rural poverty
Inequality in women's access to, and participation in, the definition of economic structures and the productive process itself
Rural land ownership
Women 's access to credit
Extension services and agricultural training
Agricultural training and education
Gender composition of extension departments
Gender composition of extension service recipients
Data gaps in assessing women's access to land, credit and agricultural extension services
Inequality in access to employment
Division of labour by gender
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the early 1980s
In the early 1980s, while the population grew rapidly, food production and agricultural incomes decreased in many African countries. Government allocations to agriculture declined in many countries as the global recession resulted in a renewed preoccupation with growth as opposed to equity concerns. Against this background, the situation of rural women was characterized by overwork, low productivity, little access to credit, land, training, and the use of rudimentary technology. In many countries (Tanzania, Benin, Mauritania, Namibia, Zimbabwe) the diminishing capacity of agriculture to provide for household subsistence increased the workload shouldered by women as men withdrew their labour from agriculture. Women had to increasingly make up for the family's food deficit by working as casual hired labour on larger farms, or by starting up income generating activities in addition to continuing their farming activities.
At the same time, government interventions did little to address the plight of rural women as, in most countries, the agricultural sector continued to be neglected. Women's low participation in national and regional policy-making, their invisibility in national statistics and their low participation in extension services (with the exception of home economics programmes) has meant that those issues of most concern to women have been neglected in the design and implementation of many development policies and programmer. When women were targeted as beneficiaries, it was generally in their reproductive capacity or as targets of welfare interventions. Small, dispersed "women-specific" projects, or project components focusing on their productive role in agriculture, remained isolated from national agricultural planning and policies. In some countries such as Benin, while the government paid increasing attention to the economic role of women, the programmes developed were far from
addressing the main concerns of women as they were neither involved in policy making decisions nor were they directly consulted to articulate their needs.
In some countries, despite legislative and tenure changes in favour of smallholders, women continued to be placed in a disadvantaged position in terms of access to land. As the amount of land cultivated per person declined in the face of increased population pressure and decreased areas of growth for arable and permanent crops, women's access to land was only rarely addressed and thus their benefits from land reforms were few (FAO, 1988:3). Without land, women were generally excluded from agricultural cooperatives as membership was often based on land ownership.
Emphasis on commercial agriculture and export crops also restricted access to credit and other services for the traditional farming sector, where most of the farmers are women. Extension research and services focused on export or cash crops and sophisticated farm mechanization; issues which were not relevant to women's subsistence needs. In Namibia, where black women are the majority of producers in the subsistence sector (communal areas), government institutions and resources focused on the commercial sector, and in those cases in which government interventions did reach the communal areas, they targeted elite farmers and were of little benefit to women.
In those countries in which traditional models of production co-existed with state run farms and/or cooperatives, women were responsible for a variety of tasks. For example, in Benin, rural women provided labour to the families commercial plots, were responsible for household food production and processing, and also had to work in the cooperative structures set up by the State in addition to their household tasks. In countries following a capitalist model, women worked just as hard, contributing labour to the household commercial plot, farming their own plot for subsistence, processing and preparing food for the family, and covering a variety of household and community needs, including health and child care.
It was during this period, however, due in part to the recommendations coming out of the first two world conferences on women (Mexico City in 1975 and Copenhagen in 1980) and the UN Decade for Women, that issues concerning women were put on the international agenda and governments, including those in Africa, began to establish bodies responsible for the promotion of women's interests. These bodies promoted an awareness of women's issues, including those of rural women, and encouraged research on their agricultural and other roles. They also served as advocates for changes in national policies and legislation affecting women's rights to land and inheritance, employment conditions, and wage rates.
In Africa, the creation of national women's machineries was a critically important step in ensuring that women's needs and constraints were put on the national policy agenda. However, their technical weaknesses, frequent location in the Ministries of Social Affairs (or in the women's branch of the revolutionary party in the countries following a socialist development model), urban bias, and their lack of influence in the technical ministries meant that their direct impact on rural women was negligible, and that interventions designed by them often focused on smaller income generating projects which did not adequately address women's needs for assistance concomitant with their agricultural production responsibilities (FAO, 1990b:5). The general isolation of the machineries from the planning ministries also meant that women's needs and potentials were not given adequate attention in the development of national strategies and plans.
Changes since the early 1980s
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making at all levels
Members and office bearers of agricultural/rural organizations
In the nine countries examined, as throughout Africa in general, while women are present in greater and lesser degrees in agricultural/rural organizations, they tend to comprise a low proportion of the membership and are often not represented in the higher levels of leadership. In addition to the socio-cultural factors which often limit women's participation in these organizations, other constraints include women's limited time and energy, limited formal land ownership and rights to land resources (which is often used as a criteria for membership), and the commercial bias of many of the organizations and subsequent neglect of those issues of concern to women farmers. In some countries, women's groups and cooperatives have been set up to balance their lack of representation in existing rural organizations (Congo, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia and Zimbabwe) while, in others, NGOs have played an increasingly important role in seeing that rural women's needs are addressed
(Morocco).
Table 3 summarizes information regarding female membership in agricultural and rural organizations including cooperatives, credit and farming which remains quite low. Their membership in pre-cooperatives and cooperatives ranges from 6% in Morocco to 44% in Tanzania. Women's membership in credit institutions ranges from a low of 15% in Tanzania to a high of 63% in Zimbabwe, and their membership in farmers organizations ranges from 2% in the Sudan to 75% in Zimbabwe.
Table 3: Women's Participation in Rural Organizations (percent)
Country
Pre-cooperatives and Cooperatives
Credit Associations
Farmers Associations
Members
Officers ^a
Members
Officers
Members
Officers
Benin
12^b
Burkina Faso
20^c
6^d
Mauritania
Morocco
Namibia
Sudan
Tanzania
44^e
Zimbabwe
^a Office bearers, board members and supervisory committee members
^b 12% of supervisory committee members and 14% of administrative council members are women
^c Pre-cooperatives
^d Cooperatives
^e Data is for Zanzibar
While women's membership is most often limited by their lack of formal land ownership, many rural organizations emphasize the interests of male members and do not sufficiently concern themselves with the needs of rural women. For instance, the Namibia National Farmers Union was established in 1992 to provide a voice and organizational base for communal farmers, and women comprise 30-60% of affiliate associations. However, its activities stress marketing and surplus production for the commercial farming sector rather than subsistence production and food processing.
Women's participation as office holders in these organizations tends to be even more limited. The most striking example is in Zimbabwe, where despite the fact that women constitute 75% of the members in the Zimbabwe Farmers Unions, only 5 % of the officers are women. The largest number of women decision makers are found in the Sudan, where 14% of the office holders in agricultural graduates cooperatives are women.
Several countries reported a growth since the early 1980s in women's participation in rural organizations and in the number of women-only pre-cooperatives and cooperatives. In Benin, women's membership in pre-cooperatives grew from practically no women in 1980 to 4.6% in 1985 and to 12% in 1992. In Burkina Faso, while women represented only 9% of all members in village working groups in 1981, by 1992 women's village groups accounted for 20% of the total. In Mauritania, the female cooperative movement grew from 15 cooperatives in 1982 to more than 500 together with mixed cooperatives in 1993. In the Sudan, women's cooperatives increased from 14 in 1980/81 to 50 in 1992/93, although membership in these cooperatives includes both women and men. In Zanzibar, female membership in cooperative agricultural organizations increased from 21% in 1985 to 44% in 1993.
Statistics on women's participation in the different types of organizations were unavailable in many countries. As the work of these institutions is important for rural development, more information needs to be collected on women's participation in such institutions in order to identify and address the constraints women face in accessing these resources. Research should also be conducted in countries where women's participation is increasing to identify the factors behind such growth and to evaluate their replicability elsewhere.
Women in decision-making positions in ministries and government bodies
In Africa, few women hold policy making positions at the national level, and those that do tend to be concentrated in social ministries such as education and health. Only rarely do women hold such positions technical ministries such as agriculture, which has many implications for the policies generated there. While one's biological sex does not necessarily determine one's sensitivity to gender, it has been shown that increased female participation has an impact on policies in regard to the importance given to women's issues and concerns.
Overall, as illustrated in Table 4, women hold an extremely low number of decision making positions in the Ministries dealing with agriculture and rural development. Women's representation is highest in Namibia in the Ministry of Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation, and in the Ministry of Regional and Local Government and Housing, with 22 and 25% women decision-makers respectively. Women hold the fewest decision-making positions in Zimbabwe's Ministry of Lands, Agricultural and Water Development (0.1 and 0.3% respectively for the Departments of Tsetse Control and Water Development).
Women's representation is also low in governmental or parastatal committees which address complex legal and political issues. In Namibia, the two commissions of relevance for rural women include the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland and the Commission of Inquiry into Traditional Leadership. The former has only one woman while the latter has none. In addition, of the seven members of the National Task Force on Agricultural Policy, only one is a woman. In Zimbabwe, in the parastatal Agricultural Development Authority, women account for only 6% of the policy-makers.
Table 4: Female Decision-makers In Ministries and/or Technical Staff (percent)
Country and Ministry
Percent Female
BENIN
Ministry of Rural Development
BURKINA FASO
CONGO
MAURITANIA
Ministry of Fishing and the Maritime Economy
Ministry of Rural Development and the Environment
MOROCCO
Ministry of Agricultu