<title>Male involvement in reproductive health: Incorporating gender throughout the life cycle</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Introduction
I. Introduction
In the last few years more attention has been focusing on the issue of male involvement^1 in reproductive health, and as its importance is acknowledged, more programmes are trying to incorporate it as one of their components. However, existing programmes tend to share potentially problematic aspects: first, male components are usually limited to male methods of family planning, only one element of reproductive health. Second, they tend to address men only, in a similar way as the old programmes addressed women only without taking into account their gender relations. A focus on men only is as inadequate as a focus on women only because it fails to take into account the way in which many decisions are made and the context that influences them. Third, they tend to be grounded on a negative premise, men's irresponsibility, rather than a positive one of promotion of men's rights. Fourth, by viewing men as a route for women's well-being they instrumentalize men and fail to address
men's needs.
^1 The language of "male responsibility" and "male involvement" has been recently criticised as judgmental, for it suggests that men are irresponsible or uninvolved. Moreover, at the macro level, men are sometimes seen as being too involved in reproductive health, for in many places they are in charge of making the important decisions regarding policy and the provision of services (Verme, Wegner and Jerzowski, 1996). A suggestion that it would be more appropriate to use the phrase "men as partners", for it is considered more neutral and evokes more balanced roles has been dismissed as trying to ascribe universality to a western concept.
These problematic aspects emanate from:
· A female bias in the gender literature, and the consequent lack of knowledge of the male side of gender The gender literature tends to be by women on women.
· The traditional inability to set up programmes on the understanding of gender relations, disregarding the power relations and the gender roles that influence decision-making related to reproductive health.
· The way in which programmes were traditionally institutionalized, through the maternal and child health (MCH) facility of the Ministry of Health, that focused on women (and children, in the traditional dyed) and barred men from access to services and from exercising a number of responsibilities in the area of reproductive health of their wives and health of their children.
· Commonly held myths and erroneous assumptions about men's views of family planning, sexuality and health.
· The lack of data to understand male perspectives and the extent of their involvement in reproductive health issues. The surveys most relied upon for reproductive health (RH) programmes usually ask questions only of women, assuming that they are the ones who make the decisions regarding reproduction and that the men are either not involved or marginally involved.
While it is commonly agreed that programmes that aim to improve both women's and men's reproductive health should incorporate men, it is important to keep in mind a potential danger for women: when not adequately focused, the result of the programme may be the translation of the locus of control from women to men in reproductive health issues, with the consequent loss of women's autonomy in an area that is seen by many as one of the few in which women can effectively exercise decision-making.
Given that the aim of the programmes is to improve the reproductive health of both women and men, better programmes have to develop concrete strategies to understand and incorporate the male perspective and male needs in the same way as attention is given to women's perspectives and needs. In order to avoid a shift in the locus of control, programmes should aim to incorporate adequate male involvement, not only more involvement. Thus programmes should be based on the understanding of gender dynamics, on how decisions are made and implemented, on the changing needs of both genders and their interaction. Much more needs to be known about the relations between men and women in the particular contexts where programmes will be set up in order to make an effective change. This knowledge will aid in the definition of what is meant by adequate involvement (it can be defined from the point of view of the women, the men or the programme).
Two issues merit consideration regarding the resources needed to cater to men's reproductive health needs: in the first place, the more services are set up based on an understanding of the underlying gender relations, the more they will benefit both women and men. When adequately set up, services for men will not only address their own needs, but will contribute to relieve women of one of their many burdens. Thus, services for men do not compete with the already scanty resources available for women's services. Secondly, as discussed in this paper, services for men are not necessarily expensive.
The focus on men in this paper does not mean that a gender approach is not used. Conversely, the emphasis on women in much of the gender literature has left male perspectives as the missing link to a true gender approach. Far from arguing that the focus should be on men and women separately, we argue for the need to base our strategies, be they oriented to men or to women, on the analysis of gender interactions and needs. This paper is meant to help strengthen a component of a broader and more comprehensive gender approach.
In this paper our aim is to look into the socio-cultural aspects that shape male perspectives, based on the socially-embedded gender relations in the different stages of the life cycle, and to use this knowledge to suggest ways to increase men's involvement in reproductive health issues and to improve services. Within this context, information, education and communication (IEC) and advocacy strategies are also suggested. Finally, some recommendations are given for helping UNFPA Country Programmes better address male involvement in reproductive health.
ICPD and male involvement
The ICPD devoted an entire section of its Programme of Action to male involvement and responsibility (Chapter IV, section C). In brief, it calls for an understanding of men's and women's joint responsibilities, so that they become equal partners in public and private life, and to encourage and enable men to take responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behaviour. This is to be achieved through the following actions:
- The promotion and encouragement, by Governments, of the equal participation of women and men in all areas of family and household responsibilities, including family planning, child-rearing and housework.
- The emphasis of men's shared responsibility and the promotion of their active involvement in responsible parenthood, sexual and reproductive behaviour, including family planning; prenatal, maternal and child health; prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV; prevention of unwanted and high-risk pregnancies; shared control and contribution to family income, children's education, health and nutrition; and recognition and promotion of the equal value of children of both sexes.
- Ensuring that children receive appropriate financial support from their parents by, among other measures, enforcing child- support laws.
- The promotion of the full involvement of men in family life arid the full integration of women in community life.
In other sections of the PoA, mention is made of the need to develop new methods for regulation of fertility for men and to carry out special research on factors inhibiting male participation in family planning in order to enhance their involvement and responsibility in this aspect (12.14.). Also, chapter 7 states the need to develop innovative programmes on RH information, counselIing and services for men and adolescents such that they `both educate and enable men to share more equally in family planning and in domestic and child-rearing responsibilities and to accept the major responsibility for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases." (7.8). Young men should also be educated to "respect women's self-determination and to share responsibility with women in matters of sexuality and reproduction" (7.41)
<section>2</section>
II. Gender and the life cycle approach to reproductive health
II. Gender and the life cycle approach to reproductive health
As previously mentioned, there are serious shortcomings in the reproductive health field because of the lack of knowledge concerning gender from the male perspective. In the broadest terms this means that only one side of gender relations has been investigated, and that virtually all of our theories and applications are to some extent suspect, undoubtedly biased, and will need to be re-thought and amended at some time in the future when data on male perspectives is available. The implications of this lack of male gender theory are significant for the applied fields of population and reproductive health which depend, in part, on the social science literature for theoretical constructs, methodological tools and other applications for the allocation of resources and the design of effective programmes and services.
Given the aforementioned dilemma, there is a need to develop a practical methodological tool for initiating discussion on the topic and beginning to fill in the gaps in our knowledge. In order to facilitate this process, we suggest the utilization of a life cycle approach to examining the hierarchical gender system and its implications for sexuality and reproductive health. The life cycle is a common feature of all human populations and provides a useful format for incorporating interdisciplinary perspectives, including the elusive socio-cultural context. Moreover, the format can be effectively utilized to generate participatory discussions (with colleagues or informants) in settings where little is known about male perspectives.
The life cycle approach has been very useful in the understanding of the prevalence and incidence of stage-wise discriminatory health and education practices affecting women. The assessment by juxtaposition of the male-specific aspects of the life cycle with those of the female can highlight the key issues, characteristics and roles of each gender, thus leading to a pertinent analysis of the actual, ascribed and prescribed roles of each gender, thereby helping to identify significant areas of intervention. A revision of the existent socio-cultural research studies and literature on the issue of gender will permit a fresh look at the main gaps in knowledge, notions, myths, stereotypes and prejudices relating to men that affect male reproductive health motivations and behaviours.
Our general purpose at this initial stage is to suggest basic questions, including raising a series of interrelated issues concerning the confluence of socio-cultural, political-economic, and health factors in order to link them with male involvement programmes.
The Socio-cultural Approach: Holistic Perspectives
Socio-cultural research is based upon a holistic interdisciplinary methodology for examination of specific questions and hypotheses. In the broadest sense, socio-cultural research is based upon investigation of a problem(s) in the larger social, political-economic, and environmental context. The major aim of the approach is to come to a deeper understanding of multi causality as it is reflected in social processes. While no study can effectively incorporate all possible aspects of the holistic context, it is essential to identity a few: key dimensions for investigation. In the present case, we are interested in identifying and understanding the evolution of male gender perspectives on sexuality and reproductive health. Our examination will include political-economic, social-structural and cultural, and socio-medical dimensions.
Examining the Gender System: Male and Female Intersections
In order to analyse the hierarchical gender system in any given society one must begin with a basic assessment of social structure, that is, the major characteristics of social organization that govern social relations. The type and organization of the social structure have major implications for the gender system. Gender perspectives (including those concerning reproductive health and sexuality) are embedded in this larger structure. It is thus necessary to identify the salient characteristics of social structure for each region (or sub-group of interest) and assess its implications for the gender system. For example, in many parts of South Asia, the social structure is patrilineal, and is based upon male descent, authority, and power. As such, all children are born into the kinship group of their father, while females leave the group upon marriage and join the kin group of their respective husbands. Adult males are ascribed formal financial responsibility for their parents
(and anyone residing in the parental household) as well as their own households. Accordingly, males are the sole heirs to property (primarily land) upon the death of their father or other male relatives. (In the rare occasions of divorce, the children remain with their father, and mothers must return to their parental household without financial compensation or sometimes rights of visitation with the children). Polygamy is socially sanctioned although generally only affordable by more prosperous households.
The asymmetrical social and economic structure outlined above has major implications for sex preference of children, cost and value of males and females to the household, capital investment in males and females (medical treatment, education, nutrition), socialization processes, and many other aspects of behaviour. In the exercise that follows, we will begin to identify some of the major characteristics of social structure and their implications for the gender system, especially regarding male perspectives on reproductive health. Our example will focus on assessing what is currently known/not known at various stages of the life cycle for the case of South Asia. It is not meant to be a comprehensive exercise, but an illustration of the way in which the socio-cultural context can be linked to reproductive health services to improve them.
During an internal workshop of the CST Harare, a preliminary version of this paper was presented. A working group composed of UNFPA Country Representatives and CST advisers reviewed the following matrix from a southern African perspective. In terms of the female adolescent, the group proposed focussing on the topic of the declining age of menarche in southern Africa. The group stressed that virginity is not always highly valued in all societies and that first sexual encounters are often associated with rape, incestuous relationships, as well as with confusion and physical and psychological pain. Sugar daddies are a consequence of the economic situation, as well as young daughters being forced into prostitution. Although there is shame associated with menstruation, there are also positive rituals for it associated with womanhood. There are many female-headed households and even child-headed households. The notion of delayed marriage is being replaced by a pre-marital
relationship. The implications these facts have for reproductive health programmes are that promotion of responsible sexual and reproductive behaviour should be addressed within a broader sociopolitical context. It should be recognised that particularly for adolescents, economic survival and empowerment have major influences on their behaviour. The information, education and communication (IEC) strategies applied need to be more sensitive to how masculinity is defined. The examples provided for this region differ significantly from those in this document, which is additional evidence of the need to emphasise the socio-cultural approach.
For purposes of the current exercise, the South Asian model will be examined throughout four basic stages of the life cycle: Infancy and Childhood; Adolescence; Adulthood; and Older Ages. In order to conduct a similar exercise in other regions, it will be necessary to analyse the four life cycle stages according to the socio-cultural context which affects the way they are defined.
SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND THE GENDER SYSTEM: IMPLICATIONS FOR RH AND SEXUALITY THROUGHOUT DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE LIFE CYCLE
INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
Socialization processes which inculcate ideas of male power and authority and female subordination
FEMALE
MALE
Sex selection via testing for the purpose of eliminating female foetuses.
Preferential treatment with respect to investment of household resources for food, medical treatment, education, etc.
Neglect and induced morbidity and mortality (including infanticide) to eliminate female infants in situations of economic crisis.
Socialization processes whereby males are taught that daughters are less valuable than sons to the household and thus may be treated dismissively.
Differential allocation of food and medical treatment with implications for morbidity (including stunting and RH problems) and mortality.
Concepts of manhood which emphasize male dominance, power, authority, and entitlements are inculcated.
Concepts of womanhood that emphasize a secondary, subsequent and supportive, rather than a leadership role.
Formal economic responsibilities for the household in adult life are firmly ingrained.
Differential allocation of educational resources with implications for empowerment.
Rites of passage ceremonies with implications for health, RH, and socialization into male roles as prescribed in the social structure.
Rites of passage ceremonies with implications for health, RH, and socialization into female roles as prescribed in the social structure.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
More in-depth knowledge of male perspectives on socialization processes during childhood (including rite of passage ceremonies); concepts of manhood and their inculcation in childhood; male perspectives on the differential treatment and roles of girls and boys.
Formulation of appropriate curricula and material in formal and non-formal education programmes, including the evaluation of existing curricula and pedagogical material, teacher and health worker training, counselling, parental/family involvement, etc.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop an Advocacy/IEC strategy directed to both parents and children, to promote the value of the girl-child, the value of education for her, to promote the value and importance of sharing life roles and responsibilities based on each individual's comparative advantage, the importance of equal care and nourishment for both genders
ADOLESCENCE
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
1. Transition from childhood to young adulthood (physical and social).
2. Increasingly delayed marriage due to education and migration for education and work.
3. Breakdown of traditional familial controls on courtship, marriage and sexuality.
4. Lack of information and education regarding RH and sexuality.
5. Influence of role models in definition of behaviour.
FEMALES
MALES
Menarche
Expected to provide labour (and sometimes financial support to the household) before marriage. In some societies daughters are expected to forgo schooling and work to provide resources for the education of their brothers.
Formal financial responsibility for the parental household in old age.
Less access to higher education than males thus creating knowledge and power imbalance.
Expected to seek education, find wage labour job and delay marriage for an extended period in order to support the education of siblings, provide capital for the household, build house for parents, etc.
Traditional family controls to avoid initiation of sex. Virginity highly valued.
Parental pressure to postpone sexual activity during period of delayed marriage (to avoid untimely
Boyfriend pressure for initiation of sex.
Peer pressure for initiation of sex during period of delayed marriage.
Early sexual experiences often associated with pain, physical mistreatment, unwanted pregnancy and STDs.
Definition of manhood tied to initiation of sex (which sometimes leads to commercial sex).
Breakdown of traditional system with onset of out- migration.
Usually free from suspicion of being infertile.
Females not prepared to negotiate sexuality in Post- traditional settings.
Sex often related to expectation of physical pleasure and experience but no expectation that men should help women to feel the same way.
Sexuality related to expectation of love and marriage.
Increased risk of STD/HIV associated with migration to cities for work and education.
In some societies, pressure to prove fecundity before marriage.
Risk taking behaviour associated with definition of masculinity.
Increased risk of pregnancy and STD/HIV associated with migration to cities for work and education.
Responsibility for sexual outcomes seen as female.
Transmission of HIV/AIDS is increased due to gender disparities in relationships; for example when there is a large age difference.
The inculcation of shame regarding menstruation leads to lack of proper knowledge of hygiene (with implications for infection), lack of attention to RH issues (including RTIs and STDs), and related health problems.
Male peer groups from young age and also mass media often promote a direct identity between masculinity and dominance in decision making.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS:
Information concerning RH, sexuality, and gender relations issues confronting adolescents who migrate to cities for education and work during the period of delayed marriage.
Participatory research involving adolescents in identifying problems and finding solutions and identify effective strategies and channels for informing, promoting and sustaining healthy reproductive behaviours.
Information relevant to the constellation of factors necessary for the design of adolescent and "male friendly" services.
Deeper understanding of male perspectives concerning sexuality (especially roles and obligations for different types of partners); sexual initiation; "dating" and courtship behaviour; RH and sexuality knowledge and practices.
Risk-taking behaviour and its determinants. Health-seeking behaviours.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Based on an understanding of the determinants of behaviour and of risk behaviour, design an EC strategy to avoid unsafe behaviour.
Promote responsible sexual and reproductive behaviour, keeping in mind is that if men do not take full responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behaviour, it is not due to their irresponsible nature, but because they are acting within a set of cultural norms that determine gender relations, gender roles and acceptable behaviour for each gender.
Advocate for the implementation of a sexuality and reproductive health education programme.
In the services for adolescents, incorporate components to teach sex negotiation skills, skills to counter peer pressure, decision-making skills, components to make each gender understand the other gender's expectations regarding sexuality and sexuality outcomes.
Develop an EC strategy that fosters masculinity definitions not linked with early practice of sexual relations
Identify healthy and socially acceptable rites of passage for men.
Link RH programmes with job creation programmes.
Insure confidentiality in services.
ADULTS
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
1. Lack of information regarding RH and sexuality for both sexes.
2. Increased labour migration (including rural/urban, circular, and international) and exposure to increased STD/HIV infection.
FEMALES
MALES
Patrilocal marriage (women join the kinship group of their spouses upon marriage) thus disenfranchising them from familial social and power networks.
Patrilocal marriage. Men establish an independent household and are expected to assume formal responsibility for the economic foundation of the family.
Polygamy. The hierarchical system of power within the household gives senior wives control over access to food and other household resources thus positioning women in competition with each other for economic resources. This often leads to health problems for minor wives who lack sufficient access to food and medical treatment especially during pregnancy.
Division of labour which marginalises the roles of men in various aspects of parenting.
Lack of knowledge of female RH issues (particularly regarding pregnancy, childbirth, and post-partum) due to rigid division of gender domains.
Dowry. Payment of expensive dowry to husband's family as part of marriage contract. The practice has lead to severe cases of abuse and sometimes mortality to wives whose families have not settled their contractual arrangements.
Lack of knowledge regarding dangers of differential access to food and nutrition for male vs. female children and wives.
Lack of knowledge and awareness of male RH issues and concomitant lack of services.
Traditional practices "birth traditions" concerning pregnancy, childbirth, and the post-partum period which can have dangerous consequences for mothers (food taboos, binding of the uterus, "sweating," etc.).
Monopoly of most knowledge of health issues.
Traditional ideas about where and how to deliver babies.
Outcomes of sexual relationships related to morbidity and mortality, abortion.
Seen as responsible for contraception and as guilty for infertility.
Accepted double standard in sexuality.
Lack of knowledge about the implications of rape and other sexual and domestic violence on the other sex.
In some societies, dowry to be paid to wife's family.
Expression of male power and legitimacy over the partner in sexual matters.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
Information on RH, sexuality and gender relations from the male perspective.
Information concerning different perspectives on sexuality and RH among males and females.
Information concerning social and physiological issues concerning female menopause.
Information on different perspectives on number, spacing and role of children in the family.
Information concerning the socio-cultural and gender context of HIV transmission.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop an EC strategy to raise awareness among men of reproductive health risks and effects of harmful practices.
Design EC approaches that target men's informational needs regarding RH, sexuality, nutrition and to promote healthy behaviour.
Develop programme components to promote quality communication between spouses and promote gender equality.
Conduct participatory research (as with adolescents) which involves adult males in identification of current problems and solutions, including design of "male friendly' services.
Raise awareness among men about the value of women's work and contribution to the household.
Provide counselling and treatment for both men and women related to rape and sexual violence.
OLDER AGES
COMMON ISSUES
Lack of knowledge of health, RH and sexuality issues among and regarding older men and women
FEMALES
MALES
Longevity and age differences with spouses lead to greater frequency and longer periods of widowhood.
Sexuality and RH Issues not addressed by men in part due to conflict with male ideals of power and control (extending to the body).
Gain of status and power in household in older ages.
Longer period of fertility can lead to fatherhood later in life.
Loss of power, status, property through widowhood.
Increased poverty.
Loss of power after son assumes role of household head and/or retirement in some societies.
Major responsibilities for care of aged.
Sexuality and RH issues not addressed due to lack of knowledge, neglect, discrimination, poverty and no provision of services.
Extra-marital partners among those who can afford it is a mark of status, manhood and accomplishment may create increased risk of STD/HIV infection.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
Basic information concerning RH and sexuality problems (physical and social) for men and women in order to assist with the design of better services.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop informational and social support programmes for both men and women on menopause, clarifying commonly held myths.
Create awareness of the risks of AIDS transmission.
Create awareness of each gender's reproductive health concerns during this period.
Promote communication between partners on sexuality/reproductive health issues.
<section>3</section>
III. Services
III. Services
The understanding of male perspectives to reproductive health and sexuality is the starting step to set up services that respond to their needs and, as required by the ICPD, are culturally sensitive. This will make for services that are both more effective and cost-effective.
The challenge:
The challenge resides in the design of services for men, in light of the gender approach, from the male perspective, simultaneously revisiting the services for women, without sacrificing women's programmes, given that women suffer a disproportionate burden of ill-health, only partially explained by biological differences and rooted in the gender differences.^2 This may mean either developing new services for men, or more likely, when resources are scarce, modifying existing women-oriented services to integrate men's concerns in sexual and reproductive health, making sure that confidentiality is maintained for both men and women. This may mean redesigning programmes and strategies to integrate men's needs through providers' education. While designing appropriate strategies for men, programmes can largely benefit from the lessons learned from women's services.
^2 Over one-third of all healthy life lost in women is due to reproductive health problems, compared to 12% for men (WHO).
SOME COMMON MYTHS
1. Men are opposed to family planning and want more children than their partners. DHS evidence from some African countries has shown that men's opposition to family planning and desire for a larger number of children is not as widespread as previously supposed.
2. Men always want sex, initiate sex and orchestrate sex. Male desire is supposed to be separated from affection. They are not expected to be faithful and to show emotions, fear, insecurity without their virility being questioned. They are expected to be strong and take risks.
3. Men tend to engage in deviant behaviour. They are many tunes portrayed in negative stereotypes as violators, insensitive to women's concerns, uncaring and abusers of women's rights.
4. Men will talk only to male service providers. Male RH programmes with female staff, including for the practice of vasectomy have shown as good results as those with male staff. The essential is not the sex of the provider but the respect and confidentiality with which men are treated.
5. Serving men is expensive. There are a number of examples of good quality care with limited resources, especially when existing services are rationalized.
6. All men have the same needs and concerns. Specific strategies are needed to service the specific needs of different men, young, older, rural, urban, educated, non educated, homosexual. Not every action taken for men's health is male's involvement
What should services for sexual and reproductive health of men include?
These may include the following activities: family planning including vasectomy; fertility evaluation and infertility; information, education and communication (IEC) including counselling; prevention and treatment of STDs and AIDS; sexuality and sexual dysfunction; urologic conditions; screening for cancer; substance abuse and mental health needs; referral to other services, both medical and social; prevention of gender-based violence; promotion of responsible attitudes towards sexuality and sharing the concerns for pregnancy support, parenting, including identification of early signs of diseases for children, such as malnutrition. The priorities for programme components are to be determined according to local needs.
The objectives for men's services may be:
To improve the sexual and reproductive health of both men and women by addressing men's issues, to meet the sexual and reproductive needs of men including contraceptive needs; to improve communication and encourage discussion between partners regarding their sexual and reproductive health; and/or to determine men's priorities.
WHY INVOLVE MEN?
1. Men have their own sexual and reproductive health concerns and needs which are not 