<title>Rural women in fishing communities: an overview of CIRDAP action research programme experiences in selected CIRDAP member countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Country experiences
Country experiences
INTRODUCTION
In the backdrop of the existing small-scale fisheries development scenario in the selected CMCs, this section reveals the country-specific situation of the Action Research Project for RUWFIC in the participating CMCs. In particular, impact of the CIRDAP project including the credit component on income and poverty situation and organizational activities have been highlighted. Constraints faced during the implementation of the Action Research Project in different participating CMCs, is also being reviewed as part of action research learning experiences.
INDONESIA
The agricultural development policy of Indonesia has been based on three specific integrated development approaches which are commonly being referred as 'Trimatra' (three policies). These are:
(1) an integrated development of the farm and the farming business by using all available resources efficiently in order to improve the welfare of the farm and fisherfolk families;
(2) a vertical and horizontal integration of the production of various agricultural commodities to achieve a balanced increase of commodities production and varieties; and
(3) integrated development of agricultural areas within the respective regions taking into account the regional potentials for sectoral as well as territorial development.
Several programmes for the development of women's economic activities in rural areas have been implemented. The first project was carried out in 1978 under the programme called the "Crash Programme for the Improvement of Families Welfares . In 1979 this programme was incorporated into the third-five-year development plan as an integrated programme for the development of women's activities in the rural agricultural and fisheries communities. The implementation of the programme for fisherfolk communities actually started in 1980 under the project called the "development of women's role in the rural communities".
There were approximately 859 fisherfolk women groups and fisheries communities throughout the country. Each group consisted of 20-25 members and the group's leader was elected by the members. The formation of the group was initiated by the fisherfolk women under the supervision of Field Extension Workers (PPLs). The project covered wide range of activities such as fish handling/processing, net making/fixing, sails making/fixing, fish marketing, family health/sanitation, family planning, handicraft, and farming.
ClRDAP's action research project on RUWFIC in Indonesia implemented in six different areas of Rural Extension Centres (RECs) in the districts of East Lombok, West Lombok and Central Lombok of West Nusa Tenggara province (Map-l).
The Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension (AAETE) implemented the action programme in Indonesia. AAETE conducted a baseline survey for selecting the beneficiary groups in July 1985. In so doing, three factors were considered essential in selecting the survey sites: (i) coastal communities in which people were most likely to engage in fishing activities, (ii) potentials for successful income generating projects in which women could be involved, and (iii) the poverty level of the communities (poverty level in Indonesia has been defined at the rupiah amount equivalent to 320 kilograms of rice per capita per year).
A total number of 119 women beneficiaries were selected in eight groups from eight villages of the three districts. The survey data showed that per capita income of the selected beneficiary households was below the poverty level. Some problems of the fisherwomen as identified in the survey were: lack of credit facilities, uncertain source of fish stocks, low prices of their catch and limited marketing arrangements and outlets. Paucity of hygienic water, lack of health facilities, unsatisfactory transportation and poor infrastructures were also mentioned as additional problems.
The achievements of the action research project may be highlighted from the fact that the information on socio-economic and demographic situation of women in the sample fishing communities, and their developmental needs were collected and analyzed. Rural women were imparted training in skill development in fish preservation and processing as well as in credit, public health, child care, cooperative management and participation in community development. More importantly, participatory group approaches involving women in fishing communities characterized these achievements.
Based on the 'before-after' analysis, per capita income of the beneficiaries under the project was observed to have increased by 139 per cent with a corresponding surplus in their household budget.
'Credit', which is a major component of the CIRDAP action research project proved to be of great help to the project beneficiaries. Profit earned from their undertakings was utilized for working capital and additional operational support.
The action research project implemented in Indonesia was a "success", particularly in augmenting household income and raising the level of participation in organizational and group activities on the part of the women in fishing communities.
MAP- 1 LOCATION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: INDONESIA
PROBLEM/CONSTRAINTS
(1) The need for avoidance of duplication of activities with other programmes;
(2) Importance of involving the fisherwomen in economic activities other than fisheries; and
(3) The need for imparting increased training to the fisherwomen facilitating their full involvement in a variety of activities in the action programrne. The philosophy of the action programme was also to help the fisherwomen to help themselves in utilizing the delivery system to get access to the existing training facilities.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(1) In respect to the contribution made by the action programme in policy and methodology for agriculture extension work amongst the rural poor (explicitly fisherfolk families who live below the poverty level), in-country workshops as well as field workshops were found to be extremely useful. Through such forums, it was possible to create community awareness of the problem for the rural poor and thereby introducing a redirection in the extension methodology. Field workshop methodology and group production plan were found to be extremely useful instruments for the fishery extension systems in Indonesia.
(2) Formation of groups of fisherfolk women as a first required step was very useful in the whole process of income generating activities.
(3) To improve and strengthen the action programme at the field level, some recommendations might be summed up as follows:
· agricultural field extension worker (PPLs) should work as group organizer and should be responsible for day-to-day implementation of the programme with special emphasis on the development of managerial and technical skills for the fisherfolk women groups.
· the chief of rural extension center along with his staff should work as the coordinator of the implementation in the field to harmonize, guide, supervise and ensure coordination and cooperation in the implementation of the programme.
· executive committee of district as well as Provincial Level Agricultural Extension Coordination Forum (Forum Koordinasi Penyulahan Pertanian/FKPP II and I should function to direct, guide, supervise, and ensure coordination and cooperation in the implementation of the action programme.
· executive committee of the national commission on Agricultural Extension (Komisi Penyuluhan Pertanian National/KPPN) should function to provide policy guidance to the action programme and ensure coordination and cooperation with all concerned agencies in connection with the implementation of the action programme.
· the agriculture information center in Mataram, West Nusa Tenggara should be further strengthened in providing extension materials both printed media as well as audio-visual aids to the fishing communities.
· the fisherfolk women group should develop group production plans.
· the fisherfolk women group should be encouraged to save and plan/fund their own productive/income generating activities.
· the fisherfolk women group should not be required to provide physical collateral against any credit received. The formation of Group Production Plan (GPP) and group guarantee should serve as collateral.
· the fisherfolk women group should be guided, motivated and inspired to take advantage of any other sources of capital assistance with the condition that this will be treated as credit and dealt with accordingly.
· each GPP should be appraised by a loan approval committee (TPKP) headed by Senior Extension Worker (PPM) and represented by the Bank of Pembangunan Daerah and relevant support agencies.
· the fisherfolk women are individually not organized to receive services and supplies from government and non-government sources. Therefore, guiding them through groups to improve their conditions has been found to be the most appropriate strategy. Through groups they plan and successfully implement their activities at the very grassroots levels.
PHILIPPINES
In the Philippines, the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD) was entrusted with the responsibility to implement and coordinate the project with assistance from the municipal officers, Department of Agriculture (DA) as well as the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR).
The action programme covered three fishing villages in the municipality of Looc, province of Romblon (Map. 2). These were: Barangay Agojo, Barangay Punta and Barangay Tuguis. The initial pilot projects implemented were mostly on fish processing and preservation. These projects were deemed most appropriate for the fishing communities due to the abundance of fish catch, especially during the peak seasons.
The number of rural women beneficiaries in the project reached a total of 62 (from the original 25 at the start of project implementation in 1986).
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH
The participatory approach was predominantly utilized in this action programme where the women beneficiaries were involved in all the phases of the programme. In particular, they were involved in the data gathering and the data analysis phases as they assisted the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD) Project Coordinator and the Field Extension workers, either as spokespersons or as information disseminators. They also played a major role in the monitoring and evaluation stages of the project.
The participation of local residents and beneficiaries during the various phases of the survey and data collection provided an entry point towards a participatory action research program in the fishing community. The beneficiaries were directly involved in the exercise of monitoring and evaluation by providing their respective reactions/reports on their shortcomings and preparing a comparative analysis of their socio-economic conditions before and during the introduction of the programme.
In such a participatory development approach, the joint efforts of the NACIAD, the cooperating agencies, the target clientele and the whole community were greatly emphasized. The spirit of close cooperation was also enhanced.
PROBLEMS AND CONSTRAINTS ENCOUNTERED
(1) Formal implementation of the projects began only in May 1986 when the first batch of the loan was released to the borrowers. This was mainly due to two reasons: one involved some institutional and systematic problems which NACIAD encountered in the first stages of the project preparation; and the other was related to the design of the action programme, with CIRDAP requiring the participating institution to raise a risk cum-guarantee fund for the credit loans for the beneficiaries.
(2) Unfavourable weather conditions occurring frequently in the project area also contributed to the delay in the implementation of the project.
MAP - 2 LOCACTION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: PHILIPPINES
(3) The inaccessibility of the project villages was similarly considered as a serious problem.
(4) Communications from CIRDAP to NACIAD and those received from the project area were also quite delayed. Processing and preparation of reports were therefore, adversely affected.
OUTPUT OF THE PROGRAMME
(1) The most "tangible" and direct benefit resulting from the action programme was in terms of the income generating activities accorded to the women beneficiaries. Through the credit assistance, the rural women were able to undertake a number of fisheries activities and contribute to their family income from the profits yielded out of their loan.
(2) The beneficiaries acquired skills, particularly in the area of fish preservation/processing, buying and selling.
(3) Additionally, the rural women obtained through formal means (e.g. by way of the planning workshops and training programmes) and informal means (e.g. through interaction with the ACIAD project coordinator and the cooperating agencies staff), insights on community development and information, knowledge on issues on health and sanitation, education and fund-raising activities.
(4) Several "tangible" socio-economic benefits, as well as some "intangible" or "indirect" benefits were generated. This was particularly true in terms of the target women having yielded some influence on the other members of the village not directly benefitted by the programme.
(5) The participating groups of women, having gained a better socio-economic status, found it easier to share their own experiences and learnings with the rest of the community. They thus motivated others to participate in the action programme.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(1) The lessons learned from the project emphasized the need for applying "participatory approach among the target beneficiaries.(2) The beneficiaries had an active role to play when they themselves conceptualized the projects and identified the most pressing problems or needs of their own communities.
(3) In light of the socio-economic impact of the action programme, it was recommended that the policy-makers in Philippines, consider the developmental approach/strategy of the programme in other projects of the government.
(4) The replicability of the action programme in other fishing villages, or in other government development projects would depend much on the follow-up activities in the
Barangays of Agojo, Punta and Tuguis.
(5) The government, after some time, must follow up on the women's activities.
SRI LANKA
Development of the fisheries sector is a high priority of the Government of Sri Lanka. The principal objectives of the fisheries development in Sri Lanka are as follows:
(1) increase the production of fish and thereby increase the per capita consumption of fish;
(2) improve the social and economic conditions of the fishermen; and
(3) maximize employment opportunities in the fisheries sector
The Welfare Division of the Ministry of Fisheries was designated as the implementing agency for the action research project in Sri Lanka. Three villages were selected for the project, namely, Thaldeka (Puttalam district) Mankuliya (Gampaha district), and Paiyagala in North Kalutara district (Map-3). A total of 30 women were selected as target beneficiaries who were not active panics in actual fishing operations but played important role in marketing and processing of fish. These women groups participated in various stages of the project implementation such as conduct and analysis of baseline survey, skills training, refresher courses and on-the-job training and project monitoring.
Through the Seed Fund established out of the CIRDAP grant, the women beneficiaries at Paiyagala North and Thaildeka were able to start processing of Maldive fish and fish drying while those in Mankuliya preferred sale of fresh fish and fish drying, these being the most appropriate enterprises on account of abundance of fish stocks in these fishing villages. Management of the Seed Fund was the responsibility of the Fisheries Social Development Organization (FSDO) officials while close supervision over utilization of loans was exercised by the District Fisheries Extension Officers and Fisheries Social Development Assistants.
MAP - 3 LOCATIONS OF PROJECT VILLAGES: SRI LANKA
POVERTY ALLEVIATION OF SMALL SCALE FISHING COMMUNITIES
A number of priority measures for the alleviation of poverty among small scale fishing communities include:
(a) Survey of fishing households: a survey of fishing households in the coastal and inland fishing areas should be undertaken with a view to make an assessment of the living conditions of the fishing families. The results of this survey could be used in formulating new schemes of state assistance, especially in providing welfare facilities to this sector
(b) Role of fisherwomen in fishing communities: a survey was to be undertaken to make an assessment of the present role of the fisherwomen in relation to fishing and related activities. It is proposed to formulate specific projects to provide additional employment opportunities depending on their capabilities and provide state supportive schemes in this direction.
(c) Utilization of fishing boats and fishing gear: substantial investments have been made by the private as well as the state sector during the recent years for the introduction of mechanized fishing boats and fishing gear to the coastal fisheries sector in Sri Lanka. As there were no records of the level of fishing effort in relation to the utilization of the coastal fishing fleet, a survey could be carried out in order to develop a basis for future expansion of the fishing fleet.
(d) Evaluation of the welfare measures provided by the Ministry of Fisheries: It is recommended that an evaluation of the Welfare Schemes provided by the Ministry of
Fisheries to the fishing communities be undertaken in order to make an assessment of the impact of the welfare facilities already provided by the Ministry of Fisheries.
(e) Survey on nutritional needs: it was proposed to carry out a survey of fishing households to determine the nutritional levels of fishing families and to identify the nutritional needs of these communities with a view to formulate suitable small scale projects to improve their nutritional status.
(f) Provision of basic amenities: provision of basic amenities to the fishing population has been considered by the Ministry of Fisheries as an important measure to uplift their living conditions. Due to insufficient funds with the government, it is recommended that additional funds from foreign assistance was needed.
SMALL SCALE FISHERIES IN SRI LANKA
There is no single definition to define small scale or artisanal fisheries. Small scale fisheries operations are undertaken in both marine and inland waters and include fish farming. It depends on the scale of operation, the type of technology used, the degree of capital intensity, employment generation and the nature of ownership. In small scale fisheries, the boats are owner operated using comparatively low capital and employing traditional methods fishing. The artisanal fisheries are usually characterized by irregular catch rates, limited fishing range and instability of income levels. Small scale fisheries typically consists of a single unit, owned or hired by a fisherman/fisherwoman or a fishing family.
It is estimated that small scale fishermen represent over 90% of the fishing population in Sri Lanka.
Although contribution by the small scale fisherfolk in fish production is substantial, majority of them live at subsistence level mainly due to lack of access to institutional credit facilities for their economic activities and lack of management skills. The unpredictable catches, low earnings are some of the key issues that require urgent attention. Lack of savings habits among fishermen was another reason for the generally poor status of the small scale fishing communities.
The relative poverty level of small scale fishemen has been defined and measured not only by comparison to the national average level of income but also more significantly in relation to incomes and amenities of similar socio-economic groups, such as, farmers, other rural dwellers and urban workers. It has been found that most of the fishing communities live at subsistence level.
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF FISH
It is estimated that nearly 85% of the fish produced in Sri Lanka is consumed in the wet form while a substantial proportion of the balance is converted to dried fish. Very little processing and freezing of fish is done at present, this being limited to a few species which are mainly exported.
With the liberalization of imports in 1977, the imports of fish and fish products have been increased. This especially included canned fish and dried fish. Fish production, imports and exports of fish and the availability of fish for local consumption from 1977 upto 1981 are as follows:
Production
(in tons)
Fish supply
Per capita consumption (lbs)
Imports
Exports
Source: Ministry of Fisheries Government of
Sri Lanka, 1988
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
The Marketing of fish in Sri Lanka is predominantly handled by the private sector. Most traders have close ties with the boat owners/fishermen and make their purchases at the beaches. The fish is then packed in ice and transported (by lorry or rail) to consumer/sales centres. Substantial quantities of fish are brought to the wholesale fish market in Colombo where it is sold by commission agents. Several Fisheries Cooperative Societies have also set up their own marketing and distribution network. In addition, Ceylon Fisheries Corporation (CFC) is also actively engaged in the marketing and distribution of fish. The CFC has set up fish purchasing centres in important fish producing areas and has its own retail outlets, a number of cold rooms, fish on ice stores and a fleet of refrigerated and insulated trucks. The Corporation maintains a buffer stock of fish in order to stabilize fish prices for both the consumer and producer.
INCOME GENERATING ACTIVITIES
In order to improve the incomes of fishing families, it was felt that income generating activities with financial support by the government, or foreign donor agencies was necessary. Further, projects should not be confined only to fishing related activities, but also to other small scale non-farm activities such as, coir making, ready-made garments, mat making etc., using the local raw materials. In order to strengthen the skills, both in management and technology, necessary training courses should be conducted.
STRENGTHENING OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES IN FISHING VILLAGES - TRAINING NEEDS
It is proposed to strengthen the implementation capacity of the social development activities through the Fisheries Social Development Organizations in the fishing villages. Community leaders will have to be trained to carry out multipurpose activities under social and economic development prograrnmes.
The target groups were:
(a) pre-school teachers;
(b) district fisheries extension officers, social development assistants and fisheries inspectors; and
(c) Leaders of the Fisheries Social Development Organizations.
PROBLEMS/CONSTRAINTS
A number of constraints affected the degree of involvement and participation of the beneficiaries. These included the status of women, low literacy rate, lack of integration and coordination of social component into the project. It was also highlighted that the fisheries development officials and the women leaders needed training on basic project management and book-keeping.
From project experience, the participatory approach was found to be effective in attracting fisherwomen in undertaking activities in fishing villages. More fisherwomen were interested to undertake viable fisheries projects and enhance family income. In view of this, there was a proposal to expand the action project to ten more villages.
VIETNAM
The International Cooperation Department of the Ministry of Agriculture provided guidance to the National Sea Products Exports Corporation (SEAPRODEX) in implementing the action programme in Vietnam. The Vietnam Government's high priority was assigned to developing shrimp production. As a result, generous government loans were provided on long-term basis (3-5 years) and with very low interest through cooperatives. CIRDAP credit funds were disbursed through the women-member cooperatives under the administration of a special steering committee set up for this purpose.
Two villages, Tamgiang and Vienantay from the Namean district of Minhhai Province were selected for the (MAP-4) survey. SEAPRODEX completed the baseline data collection which showed that out of a population of 6.403 at Tamgiang, 35 percent were males and 65 percent females, children comprised one-fourth of the total population. Of the 935 households, 384 were engaged fully in fish catching. One-third of the total fishing households operated in one cooperative (6 families with 55 members) and 16 production groups (88 families with 607 members) while the rest operated privately.
FISHERY DEVELOPMENT AS PART OF INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY IN VIETNAM
The Government Agriculture Development Programme for the Mekong delta area in general and for Minh Hai province in particular, give priority to three major objectives:
(1) develop agriculture including animal breeding and cultivation (e.g. high productivity rice species, cultivation of fruits and industrial plants such as coconut tree, different kinds of beans pine-apples, etc.);
(2) ensure optimum development of forestry resources in an integrated approach; and
(3) develop animal breeding, mainly poultry and husbandry (e.g. pigs, ducks, etc.).
MAP - 4 LOCATION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: VIETNAM
In the initial years of its national reconstruction and development, the fishery industry of Vietnam experienced considerable difficulties. In 1974, Vietnam became one of the leading fish producing countries having annual production of 1 million tons.
During the post war reconstruction era, fishery industry in Vietnam again confronted serious difficulties and consequently the production reduced to 300,000 tons. Beginning 1980, the industry started to regain its momentum. In 1986, production increased to record high of 700,000 tons. A target of I million tons of fish and shrimp was set in 1990 (70% shrimp, 20% squid and 10% aquatic varieties). Serious attention was given on the processing of marine products so as to increase the volume of processed frozen products.
Improved transportation, preservation and processing, storage, port facilities and other support inputs have been emphasized in order to increase export and marketing of fish and fish products in Vietnam.
Fishery industry in Vietnam has attributed to three important contributions towards the economic development programmes (I986-199O period) of the country. These are:
· general development programmes
· consumer goods development programmes
· export products development programmes
Following 1980, the Ministry of Fisheries and SEAPRODEX undertook series of programmes to revitalize the fishery industry. These programmes included:
· resource survey and research
· aquaculture development
· scientific-technical investment (e.g. catching, preservation processing and consuming).
ROLE OF WOMEN IN THE FISHERY VILLAGES
In the overall development programmes of the government, the issue as to how the socioeconomic condition of the women could be improved, received serious consideration in almost all sectors: scientific, technical, administration management, and especially in health and education. However, due to various constraints such as inadequate physical facilities, shortage of finance, lack of proper transportation, communication, etc., much needed fishery action programmes could not expand in Vietnam involving women prior to launching of RUWFIC with assistance from CIRDAP.
In most fishery villages in Vietnam, women play an important role in socio-economic development activities. Primarily, their work largely center around the household (e.g. cooking, looking after children, and housekeeping). They also actively take part in different production oriented fields such as aquaculture, marine products processing, net repairing, handicraft items making, etc. CIRDAP Action Research Programme in Vietnam gave special priority to include the widowed women of war victims to participate in the action programme.
PROBLEMS IN PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
· Serious difficulties were experienced in communication and transportation systems. Located far away from HMC city (more than 400 Km.), and due to the poor communication facilities, there have been many obstacles in effective programme implementations.
· How to secure ecological balance between mangrove forests and shrimp culture areas as they compete with each other in two different directions, became a problem. Such imbalances often cause unfavorable effects on ecology, climate, productivity and on people.
· There existed a large number of widow families in the villages under poor living conditions. As a consequence, with the limited fund from CIRDAP, only the war widowed women families could be selected as beneficiaries.
· Although shrimp culture has long been a traditional and important socio-economic activity, yet, as the initial investment required massive funds for forest clearance, earth excavation and pond digging etc., became a major bottleneck.
· Nam Can women's level of education was very low and the servicing and infrastructure were poor. Therefore, it became necessary to have a comprehensive investment relating to socio-cultural-economic aspects requiring a large amount of fund.
CONCLUSION
The action programme for rural fishing communities was carried out in Nam Can was the first of its kind in Vietnam. Therefore, it gained strong support and interest from different quarters and from local authorities.
As part of action project learning experiences, the problems/ constraints experienced during the implementation of the project were reported. These included poor communication and transportation facilities, undetermined ecological effects of shrimp culture and low literacy rates.
The project helped more than 70 families totalling over 300 individuals. It had favourable impact on the social and cultural life of the fishing families. In view of this, the project was considered to be replicable in other areas with larger numbers of poor window families.
<section>2</section>
Major issues and recommendations
Major issues and recommendations
ISSUES
Social development programmes are considered to be successful to the extent that they produce the results intended by planners and policy makers. Thus, in retrospect, the immediate issues for deliberation, is to review whether the objectives of the action research project have been met. And, if not, what measures are to be taken to improve it. For this purpose, four areas of concern have been identified from the RUWFIC objectives. These are:
1. Participatory Model: this concept refers to (a) survey methodology and (b) evaluation and monitoring including "phasing-out responsibilities" of action research project with the active involvement of the target beneficiaries (Chart-l).
At the in-country implementing agency (IA) level, the survey activities include selecting the survey (project) sites, identifying the target beneficiaries, designing the survey questionnaires and schedules, training the interviewers and the target beneficiaries - all these leading to organizing and implementing the data collection in the first phase and implementing the income-generating projects (IGPs), and other operational requirements of the action research project in the succeeding phase.
The evaluation process starts with a socio-economic survey aimed at determining whether the objectives of the project have been achieved from the perspectives of both the overall project and the target beneficiaries. In the process of evaluation, the project planners/implementors and the target beneficiaries are expected to jointly identify the achievements/performances and problems of the project. The evaluation also helps work out follow-up action both for immediate and long-term needs of the target beneficiaries.
2. Non-Economic Role/Activities: Rural women have always been confined to their ascriptive role in the interior. However, it is now generally recognized that their preoccupation cannot confine them only to purely home-maker's functions. Wide involvement in non-economic or socio-cultural activities can be employed to make wo