<title>Women participation: a new direction for agroforestry research and development in CARP-ISF area at Brgy, Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
While people may consider cities as the "most enticing and dynamic part of the Philippines", the rural areas are the most critical sectors that can determine Philippine progress. The important role of rural areas in development will continue even though urbanization is expected to spread rapidly.
The target of development or upland socioeconomic upliftment is the rural populace. About 60 percent of the Philippine population live in the barrio. Considering this proportion, it would be probably right to assume that the survival of the Philippines largely depends on this sector's liberation from poverty, disease, powerlessness, superstition, fatalistic values, and attitudes.
Latest satellite data (1987) showed that Western Visayas (Region 6) had only 7 percent forest cover. This is an alarming situation where the involvement of the citizenry in the rehabilitation of forest resources is a must. To abate the declining capabilities of these resources to support the demands for survival of the geometrically increasing population, the government, through the DENR, launched development programs to improve the lives of the impoverished upland farmers. And to preserve what is left of the resources or rehabilitate what has been degraded. Two of these programs are the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP) and the integrated Social Forestry Program (ISFP). The CARP's objective is to promote social justice and sound rural development and industrialization through an equitable system of land ownership and distribution. The ISFP, on the other hand, aims to achieve productivity in the country's remaining upland resources while enhancing and maintaining
the quality and balance of the environment.
With these considerations, the DENR has identified several sites to be covered by the CARP-ISF and CARP-ISF R&D programs. The latter is being implemented by ERDB and ERDS. The CARP-ISF R&D identified and qualified recipients of the ISFP which are holders of the Certificate of Stewardship Contract.
For development to take place in a society, an approach involving all structures, principally the social, economic, and political, are considered to serve as stimulants to change. To speed up the developmental activities, women participation has been proven to be indispensable. This approach disproves the belief that in oriental culture, women are demure, dainty, and helpless individuals who need much protection. They are pictured to be lacking in creativity, initiative, and originality. As such, they are expected to take the backseat in any undertaking outside the home, which is probably the only place where they are supreme.
<section>2</section>
Statement of procedure/methodology
Statement of procedure/methodology
1. Coordination with the Provincial Environment and Natural Resources Office/Community Environment and Natural Resources Office.
Proper coordination with the PENROs and CENROs was made in such a way that they could provide services in the survey of the individual farmlots, establishment of permanent monuments, and issuance of the Certificates of Stewardship Contract to the CARP-ISF beneficiaries.
2. Courtesy call with the local officials
Courtesy calls on the municicipal and barangay officials were made to inform them about the project. This could ensure easy means of entry to the community and promote mutual relationship and active support toward the project.
3. Rapid Resource Appraisal (RRA)
a. Site Selection/Identification
Several CARP-ISF areas in Western Visayas were surveyed based on the recommendation of the PENROs and CENROs. After evaluating possible sites, Barangay Maypole, San Enrique, Iloilo, was chosen as one of the pilot (R&D) areas for the Community-based Agroforestry Livelihood Project. Based on the results of the Rapid Resource Appraisal, constraints were identified and analyses were made. Likewise, developmental goals and objectives, as well as strategies to solve such constraints, were formulated, as shown below (Figure 1).
Figure 1a. Schematic diagram of the relationship among constraints, objectives, and strategies for Upland Development Project, (CARP-ISF Agroforestry).
Figure 1b. RRA analysis in CARP-ISF Area in Barangay, Mapili, San Enrique Iloilo.
b. Identification of Farmer Cooperators
The farmer-cooperators were identified based on the criteria formulated by the implementing agency and the Technical Advisory Group of the Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau. The criteria in the selection of the farmer-cooperators are as follows:
a. It must be an identified CARP-ISF area.
b. Participants must be holders of the Certificate of Stewardship Contract (CSC).
c. At least his/her CSC lot is at least not less than one-half hectare.
d. A participant must be willing to abide by the rules and regulation to be set by the association.
Aside from the identification of constraints and formulation of developmental goals and objectives, as well as strategies, a network analysis was made. Figure 2 shows the network analysis of the problems in the identified CARP-ISF area at Barangay Mapili, Iloilo.
4. Community Organizing/Formation of Association/Cooperative
Participants were organized into an association/cooperative. Training courses on Community Organizing and Development were conducted. House-to-house visitations were undertaken to reorient the values and perceptions of the participants. Regular monthly meetings were conducted by the cooperators with the assistance of the site coordinator for them to trace problems and find solutions in order to come up with a meaningful plan for the development of their farm. Participatory approach to development is being practiced whereby every member of the association/cooperative has the right to present his ideas in a collective way.
5. Farmers Training
Trainings courses on Agroforestry Technology were conducted to teach the farmers the techniques of upland farming. A cross-farm visit to other successful agroforestry sites was made to enable the farmers to see for themselves and to interact with their fellow farmers.
A Pre-membership Education Seminar (PMES) on Cooperatives was conducted as a requirement for the registration with the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA). This will strengthen the association in terms of credit assistance and marketing of their products, and provide the association a juridical personality. After the association/cooperative has been legally organized based on the provision stated in Republic Act 6938, otherwise known as Cooperative Law of the Republic of the Philippines, the Mapili Agroforestry Multi purpose Cooperative, Inc. (MAMCI) operated using the model shown in figure 3.
6. Nursery Establishment
A multipurpose nursery shed was established in the area taking into consideration the steps and criteria involved in nursery establishment. This served as a laboratory for the farmer-cooperators on planting stock production, and a venue for meetings and seminars. Aside from central nursery, farmer-cooperators were also encouraged to construct their own backyard nursery. Through this means, they could raise their own stock for their farm and for commercial purposes as an added income.
Figure 2: Network Analysis of the Problems in the Identified CARP-ISF area at Barangay Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo
Figure 3: A Model for Planning of the CARP-ISF Community-based Agroforestry R & D at Brgy. Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo
7. Area Allocation
The area of each participant was allocated in different land uses depending on the soil condition and slope of the area. Soil analysis per cooperator was made to determine the suitable crops that would be planted in their respective farm lots.
8. Formation of Working Groups
Working groups comprising seven to 10 members in each group headed by a key leader were formed. Each working group scheduled its activity in such a way that it would be able to attain its targets. During the monthly meeting, in which the Site Coordinator and the Project Leader are present, "the key leader" reports the group's accomplishments and problems encountered during the period.
9. Establishment of different Soil and Water Conservation Measures
Various soil and water conservation measures were established depending on the biophysical condition of the farmers' lot. In study areas, rock walls were constructed along contour lines while in some areas, kakawate cuttings, flamengia, pineapple suckers, and banana were utilized as planting materials along contours.
In establishing soil and water conservation measures, an A-frame was used to maintain even contours. The distance between contour depends on the degree of the slopes. The steeper the slope, the closer is the distance between contours.
10. Determination of Soil-loss and Soil-Buildup
To determine the soil loss and soil buildup, an erosion gauge was established to provide the farmer data on the effectiveness of the different soil and water conservation structures.
11. Installation of Rain Gauge
A rain gauge was installed in the area to monitor the monthly rainfall. This is necessary or indispensable in the preparation of a planting calendar so that planting will be synchronized with the needed rainfall required by a particular plant species.
12. Planting of cash crops
Crop diversification of crops was practiced in the area. Crop rotation (legumes and non-legumes) was introduced to maintain the fertility of the soil. Likewise, the need for organic farming such as composting and green manuring was emphasized to reduce the use of inorganic commercial fertilizer which most of the farmers cannot afford.
Regular trimming of contour hedgerows 50-70 centimeters from the ground helps in ameliorating the soil by incorporating the leaves and stalks in the soil.
13. Provision of Farm Tools/Implements
Working tools were provided to the association for the use of the participants in the development of their farm lot. The association set a schedule for the use of tools/implements so that all members could use them.
a. Provision of Farm Inputs
Farm inputs such as fertilizers, seeds of cash crops, and insecticides were provided by the implementing agency to the participants during the initial stage of project implementation. A "no dole-out and no-subsidy" approach was applied. Upon harvest, the participant pay back the equivalent amount to the association as their capital build-up. They agreed to pay a 5 percent interest for the monetary value of farm inputs they received. The treasurer of the cooperative deposited such amount to the Land Bank of the Philippines, Iloilo Branch Office, in the name of the association/cooperative. Presently, the association has a seed money of P80,000. Procurement of planting materials is now being handled by the association in such a way that delivery of the materials will be made on time. All expenses incurred are presented to the body during monthly meetings for information and record purposes. Withdrawal of any amount from the Bank can only be made with the concurrence of the
officers and with the corresponding work and financial plan duly approved by the majority of the members.
<section>3</section>
Accomplishments
Accomplishments
Area developed
Ave. area (ha) per cooperator
Area planted to fruit trees
Area planted to forest trees
Area planted to agricultural crops
Average area developed
<section>4</section>
Economic analysis
Economic analysis
a. Economic data analysis
Comparison of profitability before and during R&D (Bray. Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo)
Total expenditures from farming before R & D: 19,434.00
Total net income from farming before R & D: P56,596.00
Profitability before R&D:
Crop before R&D
Area Planted (ha)
Vol./Prod./y ear
Market price
Total Value (pesos)
Total expenditures (Pesos)
Palay (n= 10)
355 cav
150.00/cav
Corn (n =6)
96 sacks
3.50/kilo
Peanut (n =6)
60 kilos
10.00/kilo
Banana (n = 6)
6 kaing
*Expenditures are just an estimate of farmer.
Change in crop production during R&D
Net production during R & D: P81,6771.30
Net production before R & D: P56,596.00
Average % increase in income during R & D= 65.29%
b. Social impact
Project existence in the area brought about worthwhile results among the beneficiaries and the community as well. Through trainings, constant meetings, cross-farm visits, and home and field visitations by the extension worker/site coordinator living in the area, they realized the sincerity and the determination of the government in effecting simultaneous social and economic changes in order to attain a self-reliant community through sustainable development. In addition, the project exceeded the target from 17 farmers with one hectare each to 24 farmer-cooperators with an average of 1.2 hectares. A 141 percent accomplishment was realized, an indication that it has a social acceptability. Economically, the project has increased the level of farmers' income by an average of 65.29 percent compared to their income prior to project implementation in Barangay Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo
Trust, cooperation, and harmony among members of the association developed during R&D. In the past, most of their time was spent idly on gambling and drinking liquors, and farm activities were undertaken individually. Nowadays, their farms are given top priority and the Bayanihan System mutual help is practiced. Beneficiaries are now easily gathered and troubles in the area decreased. They are grateful for having been chosen as beneficiaries of the project. For while their farm income increased, they served now as models in the community and also partners of the government in upland development.
Figure 4. Stages of the Agroforestry technology adoption in Barangay Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo.
5. ADOPTION
4. TRIAL
3. EVALUATION
2. INTEREST
1. AWARENESS
<section>5</section>
Support system requirements
Support system requirements
Linkages with other government agencies, both local and national, and nongovernment organizations, including the private sector, were given much attention to have an easy means of marketing their products. The Panay State Polytechnic College at Mambusao, Capiz, is helping the association in terms of its agricultural needs. The Northern Iloilo State Polytechnic College provided guayabano and passion fruit seedlings as contract growers in close coordination with the Atlas Agribusiness Fruit Corporation. The Dingle Agricultural and Technical College assured the association of extending to it DATEC's sericulture and moriculture technology.
Given the opportunity, both the implementing agency and the association hope to establish more linkages, especially with the Department of Public Works and Highways in the establishment of farm-to-market roads to provide an easy means of transport. This will reduce damages in marketing of their products. With coordinated efforts, the DENR-ERDB, Region VI, set "A New Direction for Agroforestry Research and Development through Women Participation" for a self-reliant and self-sufficient Upland Community.
<section>6</section>
Advantages of agroforestry as an approach to upland farming
Advantages of agroforestry as an approach to upland farming
1. A perennial tree-based system is less affected by typhoon.
2. Diversified cropping ensures regular income and reduced risks from price fluctuation.
3. Assured income flows even in the first year of planting forest trees from the interplanted short-duration crops.
4. The use of space, light, and land space is maximized.
5. Erosion and weeding cost is minimized.
6. Food, fuel, and fodder needs of the family are met.
7. The use of chemical fertilizers is reduced owing to the presence of leaf litter, leaf mulch, and leaf trimmings from nitrogen-fixing trees.
8. Family labor is maximized throughout the year.
9. Tillage is minimized.
10. Micro climate is improved.
<section>7</section>
Appendix A: Profile of beneficiaries of community-based agroforestry livelihood project at Bgy. Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo:
Appendix A: Profile of beneficiaries of community-based agroforestry livelihood project at Bgy. Mapili, San Enrique, Iloilo:
Table 1: Beneficiaries Profile (N = 24) (July 1990)
Characteristics
Frequency (n=)
Sex
Male
Female
Age (years)
50 and above
Civil status
Single
Married
Widow
Education (N=24)
Frequency (n=)
Primary (Grades 1-4)
Intermediate (Grade 5-6)
High School Graduate
College (with units only)
Length of stay in the area (N = 24)
Frequency (n=)
to 8 years
9 years and above
Type of houses (N = 24)
Frequency
Semi-permanent
Permanent
Temporary
Household Characteristics
Average number of family members
Average age
Major occupation
Farming
Average income (major source)
P/4,300/year
Average income (other source) farm labor
P/6,000/year
Other source (business)
None
Household assets (average) (Farm tools/appliance & animals)
P/9,780.00
<section>e</section>
Abstract
Abstract
The production systems, organization, management, and linkages were strengthened through "women" participation and the intervention provided by the implementing agency. An average increase in net income of 65.29 percent was realized by the farmer-participants during the implementation of the CARP-ISF Community-based Agroforestry Livelihood Project. In terms of physical accomplishment, the original target of 17 farmer-cooperators with 1 hectare each overshot to 141.17 percent with 24 active farmer-cooperators with an average area developed of 1.2 hectares.
