<title>Development of fisheries in the region: the role of Filipino women in fishing communities</title>
<section>1</section>
Government intervention
Government intervention
The government through its legislative body, in acknowledgement to the importance of fisheries for the economic development of the country, recently passed a Senate Bill No. 1354. known as 'The Fisheries Code'. The code seeks to "review and consolidate all laws affecting fisheries, and institute all these matters of concern for the development, advancement and optimal use of fisheries and marine resources ..."
Hopefully, with the passing of Senate Bill No. 1354 as an appropriate response to the need of in the region, crisis affecting legal and administrative interpretation of laws, procedures and processes in the use of fishery resources could be cleared aforehand. Apparently, effective utilization of natural resources on fisheries could be implemented and attained with cloth of assurance, authority and legal sanctions.
<section>2</section>
Condition of fishery resources
Condition of fishery resources
The Philippine fishery resources consist of inland, coastal and offshore waters.
Inland waters includes lakes, rivers, freshwater swamps and fishponds. The recent development on modernization brought about by country's attempts towards industrialization has directly affected the ecological balance of the coastal waters. The abruptly planned locations sites of manufacturing and processing plants adversely affect the conditions of coastal environment. Thus, the improper or poorly managed disposal of mineral and organic wastes could result to degraded ecosystem.
The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the government arm task to look into the conservation of the natural resources is not sufficient nor effective enough to arrest factors involving misuse and abuse of local environment, particularly in the area of fisheries. Perhaps, with joint-efforts from the fisheries sector, the pursuit to protect such environment could be initially carried out more appropriately.
While the coastal water are also experiencing the same environmental constraints as aforementioned, efforts to implement preventive measures are participated by the local Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) together with DENR. Although expected results are yet to be concluded, the legislation of SBN 1354 could help augment the process.
Offshore waters could still be considered a remote area for fisheries development. Attempts for improvement of present technologies toward these ends could be given due importance in terms of cost and benefit. Due to distance and accessibility to these areas, well researched plans and programs should be carefully developed prior to the implementation of such projects.
Corollary to fishery development and environmental concerns, the latest developments in aquaculture has resulted in ecological problems. When prawn industry took its peak sometime in 1988, the prevalent use of inorganic fertilizers, synthetic feeds and antibiotics needed to maximize production had adverse affect both in the inland and coastal waters. With the absence of Fisheries Code, laws and policies affecting the protecting of environment was major problem area in the fishery sector. Mismanagement of waste therefore directly affects the propagation of natural feeds and food elements necessary for the culture of milkfish, shrimps and other fishes produced in these areas.
<section>3</section>
Ecological system
Ecological system
From the fisheries standpoint, ecological system would particularly refer to mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds that supports the environment and ecological balance of marine waters.
The Philippine waters has an estimated 30 million hectares of natural coral reefs. Perhaps due to limited information on fisheries ecosystems, not enough concern has been drawn and appropriately implemented on this very important resource area. Unknown to many naturalist and environmentalist, ecosystem in the Philippines is severely damaged by siltation as caused by forest denudation. On record, there is about 300,000 hectares of mangroves and estimated coral reefs. For this resource alone, a protracted production potential of 960,000 tones of fish could be marginally obtained of these areas were properly developed.
Hence, the need to implement an intensive resource management and protection program has to be included as an integral part in the government plans and programs for economic recovery.
<section>4</section>
Status of fisherfolks in the region
Status of fisherfolks in the region
Currently, the population of the Philippines stands at 61.5 Million. Nearly 60% of all Filipinos are below 15 years of age and 33% of the population is malnourished. The latest government figures indicate that 52% of the population live below the poverty level. This means that majority of the Filipinos have to feed, clothe, house and educate a family of six with less than US$100 a month.
The Philippines is widely known for its rich aquatic resources and has great potentials for economic recovery and growth through the development of its fishing industry. However, due to neglect and widespread destruction, abuse of these resources, the fishing industry contribute a measly 5-6 % of the Gross National Product (GNP). This accounts for the widespread poverty and poor living standards of about one (1) million fisher folks on the coastal villages and surrounding bodies of water.
It is a matter of great priority that the country should increase its domestic food production. The collaboration of the government and private sectors is an important development of the fishing industry. It is being increasing recognized that increased production of food is necessary in order to keep pace with the ever increasing population growth.
Some observations in identifying the major problems encountered by the fisher folks and their are as follows:
1. Fish marketing problems which resulted to:
- ill treatment of fish dealers
- sell perishable products
- depend on the availability of fish
- transportation not available
- would they make profit or loss
- could they pay their debts
- would she be beaten up?
- would the husband be drunk?
2. cannot afford education for the children
3. income is not sufficient
4. food is not sufficient resulted to under nourishment, diseases, sickness
5. worries of insecurities
Considering the great potentials of the fishing industry as major contribution to the GNP and the need to improve the quality of life of small and marginal fishermen, the government through the different agencies can play an important role in national development by undertaking appropriate technology, preservation and fishery cooperatives to the fisher folks in the region and their members. Taking into account that people in the coastal villages lack know-how on the existing fishery laws and proper human values among the people, a technical assistance from fishery specialists-experts is needed to strengthen their livelihood situation and uplift their living conditions.
<section>5</section>
Role of Filipino women in fisheries community
Role of Filipino women in fisheries community
History has attested to the active role that women in the Philippines have played in accelerating the material and spiritual progress of the people. There are significant differences in the status of women from country to country considering the rooted cultural framework. On the other hand, basic similarities unite women in the plight against differences wherever they exist-in the legal, economic, social political, and cultural status of women.
In the Philippines, women form a large part of the agricultural workforce; in the preparation, processing and marketing of agricultural commodities. Women constitute a substantial economic resource, yet their status in this sector is of disadvantaged situation. Generally, existing strategies for improving the situation of women tend to emphasize their role as wives, mothers, child rearing and home makers (cooking, gather fuel, fetch water, cleaning, family budget etc.). There are growing evidences which show women's broader roles and in which she plays a vital role in planning, implementing and evaluating. However, the general trend points to an increasing and substantial participation of Filipino women in labor force i.e., in fisheries, agriculture, community organizations etc. Today, women are largely involved in activities such as, fish-shrimp fry collection, fish marketing, mend fishing gears, pre-harvest, post harvest activities, fish production (fish ponds, fish cages,
fish pens, hatchery), fish processing (smoking, canning), preservation, handling packing. Inspite of its involvement, there is still a critical factor on the situation of low income women and young girls in the Philippines. Poverty, unless seriously tackled, no significant change can take place. The problems of poverty would ultimately result in poor health, poor nutrition, low rate of education, limited income and low community participation.
In review of the basic roles and responsibilities of women in the fishing community, special efforts should be made to provide the needs of women workers and their families in the rural areas. The government should work closely with women organizations in order to devise effective mechanism for inter-sectoral, multi-disciplinary approach to mobilize grassroots women. Programmes such as on the job Training, child care facilities, non-formal education should be planned to improve the quality of living for the poor.
<section>6</section>
Contribution of artisanal fishing towards socio-economic recovery
Contribution of artisanal fishing towards socio-economic recovery
Fishing industry in the Philippines plays a pivotal role in the overall economy as well as in the social re-structuring of their own communities.
The inland and coastal waters are traditional fishing grounds for small-scale and municipal fisher folks. Inland water of 350,000 hectares - lakes, rivers, brackish water, swamps are mostly polluted. Coastal waters of insular shelf (about 18 million hectares) have degraded ecosystems and dwindling fish stocks. Mangroves, coral reefs and sea grass beds which support fishes have been extensively destroyed. Less than 10% (nearly half million hectares) of mangroves and only 5 % (3 million hectares) of coral reef remain undisturbed. The Philippines once known for its rich natural resources, has a limited and depleted resources at present.
Fish production in 1988 valued at P42 billion and contributed 4.5% to the Gross National Product. 20% fisheries out of the total production in agriculture valued at p H P 212 billion. Total fish production in agriculture was 2.27 million tons of which 64% was from marine capture, 26% from aquaculture, and 10% from inland capture. Fisheries exports in 1988 was 129,000 tons valued at P H P 9.6 billion. The bulk was shrimp 55% and 24% for tuna. Fisheries import was 165 million tons at P H P 1.31 billion, 44% fish meals and 43% frozen sardines and mackerel. Per capita consumption was 40.5 kg/year compared with 15.7 kg/year of dairy products and 13.2 kg/year of poultry and livestock.
Out of 58 million people in 1988, 48% in labor force was directly employed in agriculture. One million employed in fisheries (750,000 capture fisheries and 250,000 aquaculture).
The goal of the Philippine Strategy for Sustainable Development (PSSD) indicates that sustainable development stresses the need to view environment protection and economic growth as mutually compatible. This implies the growth objectives should be compatible not only to the needs of society but also to the natural dynamics and carrying capacity of the ecosystem.
In a span of fifty years, traditional social relations have changed variedly due to environmental, social and technological factors. Because of the rapid changes affecting the society, fishing technology, economy, as well as religious beliefs and practices, there is a need to study the fishing activities, market, circulation system and social construction of the fishing communities.
The small-scale family based fishermen use various fishing technologies in their areas, based on traditional reciprocal relation. The sea is the basis of subsistence and communication. Catholicism and the persistence of the fishing ritual practices work as integral component in fishing communities.
'People' are considered as one of the most valued resources in any organization. For the development of human resources, education plays an important role. Hence, educators are considered to be one of the most important factors in development. Educators are responsible for the training of the youth and can contribute significantly in the critical issues of environmental concerns.
Numerous action-oriented programmes have been initiated by many government agencies. The effectiveness of these programmes will depend on the various participatory approaches taken to build awareness and skills of fisher folks. One has to learn from them, talk with the people about their problems, opportunities, inventory of resource, the dominant occupation in the community (fishermen, farmers), different species of fish catch, identify the poor, survey the households gather and market information, availability of catch, seasonal availability, taste, etc. Encourage communication and interaction between fisher folks and extension workers. In these approaches, the fisherfolks may perhaps feel comfortable to share their needs. In this context, the educators-teachers can greatly help in people in decision making processes.
The following suggestions are proposed to strengthen the artisanal fisheries communities in the Philippines:
(a) engage more students involved in fisheries undergraduate studies, doing practicum, graduate students in fisheries and related marine sciences;
(b) due to the over-fishing and destruction of resources for the rehabilitation of the marine environment, emphasize resource management programs rather than production oriented programs;
(c) improve fishing gears and techniques;
(d) promote integrated culture and seafarming (polyculture-3-4 organisms of different feeding habits, use of natural food, plankton floating, benthos detritus and pellets);
(e) encourage coastal water farming (seaweed, oyster, mussel);
(f) promote alternative sources of livelihood provided by the government for effective management programmes to reduce fishing efforts;
(g) promote tenure system and open access by the government on territorial rights; and
(h) expand substantially the family planning programs and responsible parenthood programmes.
Thus the major recommendations have been for the promotion of human resources development through education, research, training and effective project implementation.
<section>7</section>
Findings and recommendation
Findings and recommendation
There are growing evidences to suggest increase in the level of poverty decline in the ability of communities to be self-reliant, and the gap between the rich and the poor and widened
The educators, teachers can play an important role in integrating environmental concepts related to fish and fishing industry in the elementary and secondary schools curriculums.
In the past, workshops at national as well as regional levels were conducted on fisheries research, fishing industry, territorial rights in fisheries, fishery cooperatives. fisheries policies funded by different government agencies and private organizations like the Chamber of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Philippines (CFAR), PCAMRD. Similar p Iems were also encountered among the fishing industry and fisherfolks. These are:
(a) lack of education, lack of fisher folks organizations, appropriate technology applicable to fishing industry and fisher folks;
(b) rampant and unabated wanton destruction of fishery resources due to illegal fishing, lack of law enforcement resulting in the depletion of fish catch by sustaince fishermen;
(c) lack of fishery infrastructure and facilities for processing aquatic products for local and international market; and
(d) lack of national programs for the promotion, organization and development of cooperatives among fishermen and people engaged in the fishing industry.
Executive Order No. 15, creating the Philippine Council on Sustainable Development in 1992, emphasized the integrated approach to environment and development issues in the Philippine National Policies, Plans and Programs that involve all sectors of the society. The goal of the Philippine Strategy for Sustainable Development as identified in 1989 mostly relate to aquatic resources (fisheries) in a five-year-plan to address the problems of the fishing industry towards the country's intensive campaign for economic development program - Philippines 2000. These are:
(a) develop management programs to preserve the country's heritage of biological diversity;
(b) build a pool of professionals from faculty to students to actively incorporate environmental concerns and concepts which is relevant to the fishing industry;
(c) develop a comprehensive and research-based fishery program that can serve as a guide in the promotion, organization and improving the fishing industry nationwide, design and implement a training program to provide technical assistance and skills to individual members (fish processing, fish marketing);
(d) develop awareness in the protection and conservation of aquatic fishery resources;
(e) stop the unabated abuse and proliferation of illegal fishing (dynamite, fish poisoning, fin mesh net etc.);
(f) promote the cooperative principles and practices and inculcate the importance of self reliance and self-help;
(g) develop the proper human values for the improvement of the living standards and quality of life of the beneficiaries of the program;
(h) undertake zonification of all swamp lands and estuarine areas into their best uses, increase productivity, establishment of open and closed seasons in fishing grounds, establishment of fish sanctuaries and reservations through measurement of sustainable yield of each fish zone;
(i) university should assume greater responsibility as leader, mover, information center, implementor or ordinances, laws in maintaining ecological balance (protection and preservation of environment);
(j) pursue appropriate programmes in the population sector to control population growth, emphasize proper spacing of births, discourage migration of people to urban areas and improve the quality of human resources in terms of productivity, environmental consciousness and the ability to manage communal resources and social responsibility.
<section>8</section>
Conclusion
Conclusion
The fishing sectors in the developing countries are the major contributors to GNP and foreign exchange earnings and indeed have great potentials to grow. The role of women and children in cooperation with men in the rural coastal fishing villages generate self-employment opportunities among fishermen and help improve their living conditions.
The role of educators and the institutions (universities, colleges) both in formal and non-formal sectors may play an important role in producing a citizenry sensitive to the problems concerning environment and ecology. Educators should specially consider developing human resources in terms of improving their values, attitudes, knowledge, behavior and skills. It is through the development of these value systems by which the country can attain sustainable development in the long run.
<section>e</section>
Introduction
Introduction
In the Philippine, the Fishery Industry has been considered one of the most potent natural resources for economic development and advancement. The country has an estimated 220 million hectares of fishery resource, 185 hectares of which is classified as commercial waters, 27 million hectares municipal waters and an area consisting about 225,000 hectares has been devoted to aquaculture.
Strategically, the Philippines is located in the South Pacific region, an archipelago of 7,101 islands with a total coastline of about 17,460 kilometers which plays a major role of influence in fishery industry. Its populace of about 61 million people, ore million of which earned their livelihood and employment in fishing or fishery related undertaking. The development of fishery endeavor in the country could be considered dormant in the past years despite the open-access resources although efforts were taken just recently. The adverse effect of political set-backs in the past, weak socio-economic structure and changes in government policies involving research and developmental studies on natural resources, hindered the growth of fishery mission and visions towards improvement of livelihood.
Just recently, the government has took cognizance of the basic importance of fisheries, its technologies and development as a potent resource and the significant contribution it could bring about for the economic development and advancement of science in the country. Notwithstanding the imminence of conserving our natural resources and environment, the role of fisheries in the global setting for the upliftment of livelihood, had been recognized in many socio-economic, environmental and governmental forums held worldwide. These consideration have been well defined and discussed in-depth in the recent assembly of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED).
