<title>Non-wood forest products from conifers - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Conifers are capable of growing under a wide range of ecological conditions and dominate large areas of the worlds forests. Conifer forests are especially abundant in the boreal and temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere, but are also important components of many tropical and sub-tropical forest ecosystems in both humid and semi-arid zones. In 1995, almost two thirds of the worlds total industrial roundwood production came from conifers according to the statistics in FAOs Forest ProductsYearbook. In addition to their huge wood production potential, many conifers are capable of providing a wide range of non-wood products that are of great benefit to human society. However, despite this, foresters have so far dedicated little or no attention to enhance the many non-wood uses of conifer forests.
The objective of this paper is to provide a global review of the non-wood uses of conifers and to discuss the many issues involved with their development. Problems associated with the sustainable management, harvesting and utilization of these products and compatibility or conflicts with timber production and other land uses are presented. Both contemporary and historical or traditional uses of non-wood products from conifers are discussed. Where possible, data on levels of production and international trade are given. The document also identifies opportunities for the special management of conifer forests and woodlands where either traditional or contemporary non-wood forest products are presently or potentially an important economic or social resource. The prospective audience for this publication includes foresters, rural development decision-makers, and conservation agencies in both developed and developing countries.
Through the use of this document, it is hoped that opportunities for promoting non-wood conifer products as an integral part of economic development and initiatives to alleviate poverty will be enhanced. In addition, the information provided should facilitate the incorporation of non-wood goods and services from conifers into forest management planning, valuation and implementation activities.
I have great pleasure to release this publication, in the hope that it will serve as a useful reference for all concerned with the sustainable development of non-wood uses from conifer forests in both developing and developed countries.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This publication is based on a draft prepared by William M. Ciesla, previously with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service and subsequently at the Forest Department of FAO, Rome. Many people provided valuable assistance and information in the compilation of this draft, including: Francis Barney, Librarian, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; Robert DeBoo, British Columbia Forest Service; Nancy Turner, University of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; Vidar John Nordin, Ottawa, Canada; Jorge Macias, Mexico; Attilio Disperati, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil; Jorge Urrutia, Universidad Austral, Valdivia, Chile; M.P. Shiva, Centre for Minor Forest Products, Dehra Dun, India; Gordon Hosking, New Zealand Forest Research Institute, Rotorua, New Zealand; Frederich Schlegel, Forest Education Officer, FAO, Rome; Zhou Jian Sheng and Ding Gui Yi of the Anhui Province Forest
Biological Control Center, Hefei, Peoples Republic of China; A. Hafeez Buzdar from Quetta, Balochistan, Pakistan; staff of the Bonsai Nursery Inc, Denver and Pat Ciesla, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
This draft was widely circulated within and outside FAO for peer review, and benefited from the detailed comments of: John Coppen, previously with the Natural Resources Institute, United Kingdom; Steve Wilson, International Flavours and Fragrances, Hangzhou, China; David Pilz, Pacific Northwest Research Station, USDA-FS; and: El Hadji Sene, Christian Hansen, Robert Scharpenberg, Laura Russo, Christel Palmberg-Lerche, Joachim Lorbach and Christopher Prins from FAO. Formatting of the text and proofreading was done by Inés Matyszczyk. Overall guidance and coordination for the preparation, editing and publication of the final document was provided by Paul Vantomme.
FAO sincerely thanks the International Programs Unit of the U.S. Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, and the European Forest Institute, for their financial support for the publication of the present document.
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
BLM Bureau of Land Management
BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
EIS Environmental Impact Statement
EOA Essential Oil Association of the United States
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FAS Foreign Agriculture Service (USDA, USA)
FDA Food and Drug Administration of the United States
FMA Fragrance Materials Association of the United States
ISO International Standards Organization
NCI National Cancer Institute
NCTA National Christmas Tree Association
NTFP Non-timber forest product
NWFP Non-wood forest product
RAAN Región Autónomo Atlántico Norte (Nicaragua)
Tbsp Tablespoon
tsp Teaspoon
USA United States of America
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
USDI United States Department of the Interior
<section>4</section>
INTRODUCTION
Conifers dominate large areas of the worlds forests. They are especially abundant in the boreal and temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere and are also important components of many tropical and sub-tropical forest ecosystems. Conifers are capable of growing under a wide range of conditions. Many can tolerate moisture stress and, therefore are able to survive in semi-arid and arid regions. Others are capable of growing on barren or nutrient poor soils or in extremely cold climates. Some species have co-evolved with naturally occurring wildfires and can co-exist with these catastrophic disturbances. And, most important, many conifers are capable of producing both wood and non-wood products, which are of great benefit to human society.
The objective of this paper is to provide a global review of the non-wood uses of conifers. For the purposes of this paper, conifers are defined as trees and shrubs of the botanical orders Coniferales, Taxales and Ginkgoales (Rushforth 1987). Although some services are briefly mentioned, the focus of this paper is on products which conifers provide species, which are important sources of non-wood forest products, and places where these products are harvested. With the exception of essential oils, which can be obtained from several parts of the tree, the products described are organized by the part of the tree from which they are obtained (e.g. foliage, bark and roots, resin, seeds and cones). Where possible, data on levels of production and international trade are presented. Problems associated with the sustainable management of these products and compatibility or conflicts with other land uses are also presented. Both contemporary and historical or traditional uses of
non-wood products from conifers are discussed.
This information is presented in order to assist in identifying opportunities for management and production of non-wood conifer products as an integral part of economic development and poverty alleviation initiatives in economically depressed regions of the world where conifer forests, either natural or planted, exist. In addition, this information is also designed to help identify opportunities for special management of conifer forests and woodlands where either traditional or contemporary non-wood forest products are presently or potentially an important economic or social resource.
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 1
AN OVERVIEW OF THE CONIFERS
WHAT ARE CONIFERS?
Conifers are trees and woody shrubs, which are members of the plant class Gymnospermae (Gymnosperms). Gymnosperms are characterized by having naked seeds in contrast to the Angiosperms which have seeds enclosed in an ovary (Harlow and Harrar 1950). This diverse and extremely valuable group of higher plants is generally considered to consist of three botanical orders under the class Gymnospermae: the Coniferales, the Taxales and the Ginkgoales. Within these orders are eight families, 55 to 65 genera and more than 600 individual species (Rushforth 1987, Vidakovic 1991).
Conifers receive their name from the shape of the fruit or "cones" produced by many species within this group, especially members of the families Araucariaceaeand Pinaceae (order Coniferales). The term "conifer" is also descriptive of the conical crown form which is characteristic of many trees in this class of plants. Other characteristics include the presence of needle-like or scale-like foliage and a preponderance of species with evergreen foliage (exceptions - Larix, Metasequoia and Taxodium). The conifers include the worlds oldest known trees (Pinus longaeva) and the worlds most massive trees (Sequoiadenron giganteum) (See textbox) (Figs 1.1, 1.2).
Figure 1.1 The worlds largest conifer, the General Sherman Tree, Sequoia - Kings Canyon
National Park, California (USA)
Figure 1.2 Pinus longaeva in Californias White Mountains (USA) are the oldest known trees
DISTRIBUTION AND ABUNDANCE
Various species of conifers, principally members of the family Pinaceae (e.g. Abies, Larix, Picea, Pinus) are often the dominant forest cover over extensive areas of boreal and temperate forests of the northern hemisphere. Conifer forests, principally Pinus spp, are also the dominant forest cover over much of Mexico and the northern portions of Central America. Extensive forests of Juniperus spp., Cupressus spp. and Pinus spp. dominate semi-arid forests in western North America, Mediterranean Europe and the Near East. In other parts of the Northern Hemisphere, conifers are frequently found in association with broad-leaf trees. In the Southern Hemisphere, conifers tend to have more restrictive natural ranges but are equally varied. Species of the genera Araucaria and Agathis are locally abundant and important. In other areas of the Southern Hemisphere, the genus Podocarpus and several members of the family Cupressaceae (e.g. Australcedrus, Callitris, Widdringtonia) are
locally abundant (Fig 1-3).
Many conifers have exceptionally wide natural ranges. Juniperus communis, for example, has a circumpolar distribution and is found across Asia, Europe and North America. Pinus sylvestris is distributed from the British Isles across the European and Asian continents to Siberia, while the natural ranges of Larix laricina, Picea glauca and P. mariana extend across the boreal forests of the North American continent from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean.
Because of their many uses and relative ease of planting, conifers have been widely established in forest plantations. Many species, such as cupressus lusitanica, pinus elliottii, p. Radiata, p. Taeda, and p. Patula have been established over large areas outside of their natural ranges. The genus pinus is the second only to eucalyptus in terms of area of plantations established in the tropics (4.49 million ha as of 1990) (fao 1993). Chile and New Zealand each have in excess of 1.5 million ha of pinus radiata plantations.
THE WORLDS OLDEST AND THE WORLDS MOST MASSIVE TREES ARE BOTH CONIFERS
The worlds oldest known tree is the bristlecone pine, Pinus longaeva, a species which occurs near the summits of high, arid mountain ranges in eastern California and Nevada, United States. A forest of bristlecone pines near the summit of the White Mountains of the Inyo National Forest, California, contains the Methuselah Tree which has been documented to be at least 4 600 years old. This stand also contains at least 17 more trees in excess of 4 000 years (Menninger 1967).
The worlds most massive living tree is a giant sequoia, Sequoidendron giganteum, known as the General Sherman Tree. This tree is located in a grove of giant sequoias in the Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California, United States. This tree has a height of 83.8 meters, a circumference at ground level of 31.3 meters and a trunk volume of 1486.6 m^3 *.
Ironically, the worlds oldest and the worlds most massive trees are located within an air line distance of 100 km of each other.
Information obtained from Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park, USDI, National Park Service, California, United States.
USES
Throughout human history, conifers have provided a wealth of products beneficial to human society. The wood of many species has been used for structural lumber, production of paper and related products, fuelwood, posts, poles and myriad other products. Conifers have also provided a wide range of beneficial non-wood products including essential oils, resin, fragrant and attractive foliage, ornamental plants, decorative objects, edible seeds, flavourings and medicinal products. In many cases, both wood and non-wood products from conifers have been over-exploited to the point where extensive damage or loss of forest area has resulted. On the other hand, conifers have been revered by many human cultures and have been used as both religious and political symbols. They are also the subject of a rich mythology and folklore and are well represented in arts.
Figure 1.3 Natural conifer forests:
A. Juniperus procera, Maralal, Kenya,
B. Pinus brutia,Isle of Rhodes, Greece,
C. Araucaria araucana, Conguillio National Park, Chile,
D. Pinus roxburghii, Uttar Pradesh, India
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 2
CONIFERS IN HUMAN CULTURE
As might be expected of a group of plants that have provided a wealth of beneficial products, which have significantly enhanced the quality of life of human societies world-wide, conifers have played an important role in human culture. They have been the subjects of folklore and mythology. Conifers have also served as political and religious symbols and have played a prominent role in art.
FOLKLORE AND MYTHOLOGY
Conifers, especially pines, have been a subject of the folklore and mythology of many cultures. Examples are described in the following paragraphs.
According to an ancient Greek legend, the forests and glades of Greece were home to nymphs and dryiads and of many minor male gods including Pan. Among the nymphs was Pitys, whose duty was to tend pine trees. She had a lover, Boreas, god of the north wind. Boreas was a big, burly fellow, quite different from the happy, flute playing Pan. Pitys flirted with both Pan and Boreas. One day, Boreas asked Pitys what was going on between her and Pan. Her reply was evasive. In the quarrel that followed, Boreas seized Pitys and tossed her against a rocky ledge. Instantly she was turned into a pine tree. The resin droplets often seen on the wounded limbs of a pine tree broken by the wind are said to be tear drops shed by Pitys when she thinks of her youth, her lover Boreas and, most likely, of Pan. The pine species Pinus pityusa, of the Black Sea region, (synonym - P. brutia) commemorates this legend (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
The pine tree was sacred to Zeus and an attribute to Serapis. It was beloved of virgins. The Pinea corona was the emblem of virginity, which Daphne took from Chloe and placed on her own head. In ancient Rome, the chaste Diana was crowned with a chaplet of pine. Because pine was so important and sacred, the Roman poet Ovid referred to pine branches as cut from arbore pura, a pristine tree. The pole of Bacchus is described by Roman writers as an inflammable and fragrant pine pole (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
In an ancient Phrygian legend, Attis, lover of Cybele, the mother of gods, was changed into a pine tree after his death. The cult of Cybele was adopted by the Romans during imperial times and the sacred pine tree became an object of worship during a spring festival in Rome each year on 22 March. A pine tree (Pinus pinea or P. nigra) was cut in the forest and carried into the sanctuary of Cybele, where it was worshiped. The trunk was then buried. Three days later, the divine resurrection was celebrated with an outburst of glee. In Scandinavia and in northern Russia, a spring festival based on this tradition is held at the end of June. These festivals celebrate the resurrection of life after a long winter (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
According to another legend, when Adam was dying, he sent his son Seth to the Garden of Eden to beg the angel on guard for a little of the precious juice from the tree of life. Instead, the angel gave him a small portion of the tree, which was later planted, on Adams grave. This tree eventually grew into one with three branches, one cypress (Cupressus), one cedar (Cedrus) and one olive. It is from these three trees that the cross on which Christ was ultimately crucified is said to have been made; the upright beam was cedar, the cross arm of cypress and the title of olive. In another version of this legend, when the Queen of Sheba visited Solomon, she was asked to cross a marshy piece of ground by means of a bridge built of cedar (Cedrus) wood. She refused to step on the bridge because she would not tread on wood which she had dreamt would some day bear the crucified body of the Christ (Maheshwari and Chhaya Biswas 1970).
Another legend tells of an angel who took refuge under a massive cedar (Cedrus) tree during a severe storm. After the storm abated, he prayed to God that this tree, whose wood was so fragrant and shade so refreshing might, in the future, bear some fruit to benefit the human race. The fruit was the sacred body of Jesus. Being regarded as a tree of good fortune, its wood has always been a favourite for making sacred icons (Maheshwari and Chhaya Biswas 1970).
In China, cedars (genus not designated) are called the "trees of faithful lovers" because of a legend about a king who sent a good man to prison in order that the latters beautiful wife be available to him. The imprisoned man died of grief and his wife killed herself. Although their bodies were buried far apart from each other at the kings express command, cedar trees grew from each grave, attained vast heights and lovingly interlaced their branches and roots (Maheshwari and Chhaya Biswas 1970).
The indigenous cultures of the Pacific Coast of North America believed that the Pacific yew, Taxus brevifolia, could impart its strength to the people and was traditionally used where strength was required. Young men of the Swinomish tribe used smooth yew sticks to rub themselves to gain strength. The Swinomish also used the boughs of Pacific yew to rub themselves after bathing. The people of the Chehalis tribe would crush the foliage of Pacific yew in a bath for old people and children to make them sweat and improve their condition (Gunther 1973).
RELIGION
Humans encountered pines and other conifers in many places in the Northern Hemisphere. In contrast to deciduous trees, which shed their leaves in fall, most conifers remain green and were re-assuring. Evergreen pines were eternal. Only evergreen oaks rated as high as pines with early human societies who worshiped pines as they worshiped other wonders of nature that they could not understand. Initially, pines were worshiped for themselves. Later, they became the abode of gods and spirits. As human civilization advanced, nations were formed and temples built, humans continued to worship pines as the most sacred of trees (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
The Delphic oracle of Greece commanded the Corinthians to worship a particular pine equally with god (Dionysius) so they made two images of Dionysius, with red faces and gilt bodies. In art this god or his worshipers commonly carries a wand tipped with a pinecone because the pine tree was particularly sacred to him.
The pinecone appeared on many ancient amulets and had a phallic meaning. It is said that the pinecone was most used in the cult of Venus. Pinecones were regarded as symbols of fertility and even now the tops of wooden bedposts are often embellished with carved pinecones. At the festival of Demeter, the Greek goddess of the fruitful earth and happy marriage, pinecones were offered "for the purpose of quickening the ground and the wombs of women." Assyrian priests on ancient bas -reliefs are shown offering pinecones to the altars of gods. Pine cones on these carvings and the tips of priests staffs appear to be those of the stone pine, Pinus pinea (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
Pines have been, and perhaps still, are believed to possess supernatural powers. The anonymous author of Cultus Arborum wrote:
"The pine was supposed by some to be inhabited by wind spirits, like Ariel, owing to the whispering noises proceeding from it in the breeze. The legend was that it was the mistress of Boreas and Pan, an idea acceptable to Germans in the consequence of its holes and knots, which were believed to be the means of ingress and egress for the spirits. It is told that a beautiful woman of Smäland, who was really an elf, left her family through a knothole in the wooden house wall. "Frau Fichte (spruce)," the pine of Silesia, is believed to possess great healing powers, and its boughs are carried about by the children on Mid-Lent Sunday, adorned with coloured papers and spangles. It is also carried with songs and rejoicing to the doors of stables where it is suspended in the belief that it will preserve the animals from harm."
In some parts of Silesia (Germany), people burn rosin all night between Christmas and New Year in order that the pungent smoke may drive witches and evil spirits from the house (Mirov and Hasbrouck (1976).
In Siberia, a ritual was performed at Epiphany during which crosses were made over every door with the smoke of pine torchwood to protect houses and stables from evil spirits. Later votive tapers became a more convenient instrument for this ritual, which is still practised by some Russian Orthodox priests and housewives (Mirov and Hansbrouck 1976).
The yew, Taxus baccata, is deeply woven into the religion folklore of the British Isles. The ancient Britons held the tree sacred and the Druids perpetuated the religious association by erecting temples near yew trees (Harrison 1975).
In Mexico and Central America, pines were worshiped by indigenous people long before Spanish conquest. The Aztecs considered Pinus teocote to be the pine of the gods and burning its incense-fragrant rosin as an offering in the temples was the privilege of priests and kings. In the highlands of Guatemala, some Mayan people avoid, even now, the killing or harming of pines because they are considered not only living but animated beings. For household use and for their pagan-Christian ceremonies, the Mayans lop the side branches of pines, leaving a sizeable tuft of foliage on the top of the tree so it will continue to live. In Guatemala, Mayan people still burn pine rosin in religious rituals (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
The Buriats, a Mongolian people living in the vicinity of the southern end of Lake Baikal in eastern Siberia, often viewed groves of Pinus sylvestris as sacred. These "shaman" forests were scattered over dry grassland. Before the Soviet revolution of 1917, it was a tradition to approach and ride through the groves in silence to avoid offending the gods and spirits of the woods. Solitary trees near the Buriat villages were always sacred and adorned with talismans, ribbons or sacrificial sheepskins. These trees were often called pines, although some were actually larches, Larix spp. (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
The use of a non-wood product from a conifer is mentioned at least once in the Holy Bible. At the time of the Great Flood, God instructed Noah to "Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shall pitch it within and without with pitch" (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
To the indigenous tribal cultures of south-western United States and adjoining parts of Mexico, the piñon, Pinus edulis, was an important part of religious ceremonies literally from the cradle to the grave. When an infant Apache outgrew her cradleboard, her mother would place it in the east side of the crown of a young piñon pine. She would then tell the tree, Here is the baby carrier. I give this to you, still young and growing. I want my child to grow up as you do. Among the Navajo, the cradleboard of a dead child was placed in the crown of a dead piñon, as were the worn cradle laces of healthy children. On the ninth day of Keldzi Hatal, the Night Chant, the Slayer of Alien Gods and the Child of the Water placed their corn husk cigarettes in the shade of a piñon. After the ceremonial of the male initiation, ritual items were placed in a young piñon pine at sunrise and the initiates were instructed not to visit ancient ruins, not to injure a young piñon and not to stand
over another person. On the fourth day of the Night Chant, when performed for male initiates, the Talking God carried in his hand a piñon sapling stripped of its branches. The burning of pitch from the piñon provided the incense of the Night Chant. The ceremonial wands and pokers were of piñon wood, selected from branches that grew on the east, north, west and south sides of the tree (Lanner 1981).
In the Himalaya region of Uttar Pradesh, India, Cedrus deodara is considered sacred and plays an important role in religious ceremonies. Thin slices of its wood are burned with butter and other plants after chanting the "mantras" on the occasion of births, marriages, deaths and other occasions. This ceremony is called hawan. The bright yellow pollen grains are used for brightening metallic idols and as a pitham, a small mark over the forehead for certain religious occasions (Singh et al. 1990).
POLITICAL SYMBOLS
The national symbol of Lebanon is the cedar of Lebanon, Cedrus libani. This tree, with its characteristic multi-stemmed form and massive, spreading crown appears on the national flag, on coins, postage stamps and military insignias. Unfortunately this tree has been over-exploited and few native stands remain in the country. It is said that today there are more cedars of Lebanon on flags, coins and postage stamps than there are in Lebanons forests (Chaney and Basbous 1978). The eastern Mediterranean Island of Cyprus is believed to have derived its name from the extensive forests of Cupressus sempervirens, which once existed there. These forests are said to have been a deterrent to the development of agriculture until copper was discovered on the island. Then the forests were cut for fuel to smelt copper (Brey and Müller 1993).
Early American colonists expressed their affection for the pine by making it an emblem on historic flags. In 1775, both the Continental and the Pine Tree flags were decorated with the green, conical shape of the eastern white pine, Pinus strobus. Today, the Vermont State seal bears the likeness of a pine tree with 14 branches representing the original 13 colonies plus Vermont. Maine is called the "pine tree state" where eastern white pine is the official tree and appears on both the state seal and the state flag (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
ART
The Chinese may have been among the first to paint pines on panels and silk scrolls to decorate their homes. Later pine forests or individual trees became a favourite subject for artists in many countries. The Renaissance painters used pines as the background for their lovely Madonnas or as illustrations for stories as Botticelli did with the Ravenna pines. There are many Victorian paintings depicting Scots pines, Pinus sylvestris (Mirov and Hasbrouck 1976).
One of the most fascinating pieces of art depicting a conifer is a Roman fountain in the shape of a giant, bronze pinecone. It is most likely modelled after the cone of Pinus pinea. The cone was cast in the first century AD by Publius Cincius Salvius, a bronze worker who left his signature at the base of the cone. This bronze was found near the baths of Agrippa and probably decorated a fountain near the Temple of Isis. During the eighth century, this massive cone was situated in the portico of Constantines Basilica of St. Peters in Rome, Italy, where the water, emerging from holes in the points of the scales, was used to refresh pilgrims. During the seventeenth century it was moved to the nicchione, designed by Pirro Ligoro, in the famous Bramante courtyard of the Vatican Museum. Today, the portion of the courtyard housing this giant bronze pinecone is known as the Cortile della Pigna, the courtyard of the pinecone (Hersey 1993, Metropolitan Museum of Art 1975).
The cones of Pinus pinea are featured in wall paintings, sculpture and in mosaics in the ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum, two ancient Italian cities destroyed by an eruption of Mt. Vesuvius. Pinecones are also figured in household altars and paintings at Pompeii (Meyer 1980).
The famous Dutch impressionist, Vincent Van Gogh, is perhaps best known for his bold, colourful paintings of sunflowers. He was also intrigued by the columnar cypresses, Cupressus sempervirens, which, even today, are an integral part of the landscape of the region of Tuscany, Italy and the south of France. In 1890, he painted "Lane with cypresses under a starry sky," an oil of a single cypress along a country lane with a dark sky in the background. Another of his works containing cypress trees is "Wheatfield and cypress" and "Cypresses" both painted in 1889. The latter consists of a grove of columnar cypresses being tossed by a summer mistral in southern France (Zurcher 1985). These masterpieces now hang in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
In a letter to his brother, Theo, in 1899, Van Gogh wrote:
"I am totally preoccupied with the cypress. I would like to create something similar to my sunflower paintings with them. I find it strange that they never have been painted in the way that I see them. They are as beautifully proportioned as an Egyptian obelisk."
In southern Brazil, the tall, stately Paraná pine, Araucaria angustifolia, with its characteristic umbrella-shaped crown, is a regional symbol. In the city of Curitiba, the capital of Paraná State, the characteristic profile of A. angustifolia appears in patterned sidewalks made of tiny black and white stones (Ciesla 1986) (Fig 2.1). Its characteristic silhouette also appears in many art forms including photographs, paintings and pictorial landscapes pieced together from inlaid local woods of various colours and textures (Fig 2.2).
Figure 2.1: Tile silhouette of Araucaria angustifolia in a sidewalk, Curitiba, Brazil.
Figure 2.2: Landscape with Araucaria angustifolia made of inlaid woods, southern Brazil
Perhaps the ultimate form of using conifers in art is the ancient Japanese tradition of bonsai. Bonsai is a three dimensional, living art form in which trees are subjected to special growing techniques and the application of principles of design to develop them into miniature objects dart (Stowell 1966). Many species of conifers, especially pines and junipers are popular plant materials for bonsai. The fine art of bonsai is described in greater detail in Chapter 3.
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 3
WHOLE TREES
LANDSCAPE AND ORNAMENTAL TREES
Landscape and ornamental trees are an important part of human life. They provide shade and beauty around homes, schools, markets and shopping areas, places of work, along streets and highways, in city parks and other areas. They also help conserve energy and the quality of air, water and soil.
Many conifers are important landscape and ornamental plants and fulfil many functions in landscape design. Virtually all countries have some level of nursery industry, which offer for sale planting stock, including conifers, for landscape and ornamental purposes. Small-scale nursery operations are often an excellent opportunity for small business or family run enterprise.
Historical aspects
Trees have been used as ornamental plants since the earliest of times. More than 4 000 years ago, the Egyptians wrote about trees being transplanted with a ball of soil around their roots. Some trees were moved up to 2 400 km by boat. In Greece, Theophrastus (370-285 BC) and Pliny (AD 23-79) gave instructions for tree planting and care. Many books on the care of trees and woody shrubs have been written since those early times.
During the Middle Ages, botanical gardens contained primarily plants of medicinal importance and fruit and nut trees. Later, the gardens of private estates contained many exotic plants introduced via trade and travel. Many of these gardens are now public and are great s