<title>Fuel and financial savings for operators of small fishing vessels</title>
<section>1</section>
PREPARATION OF THIS DOCUMENT
This guide is not a result of new original fieldwork but draws on much of the research and experience of the past two decades, updated where possible to include new technical developments. The author is indebted to many people who have helped in one way or another in the writing of this publication. They are too many to mention individually but suffice it to say that, without their guidance and assistance, the task would have been infinitely more difficult.
The collection of reference material proved particularly challenging, and I am very grateful for the help offered by the following individuals, whose patience I may often have stretched to the limit:
Joan Baron - Head Librarian CEMARE, Portsmouth, UK
Bundit Chokesanguan - Training Division Head, Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre, Samuprakan Thailand
Jean Collins - FAO Fisheries Department Librarian, Rome, Italy
Michael Martin - Westfair Limited, Yeovil, UK
Tony Molland and Phil Wilson - Department of Ship Science, Southampton University, UK
Gowan MacAlister, MacAlister Elliott & Partners, Lymington, UK
Brian O'Riordan - Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby, UK Dr K. Ravindran - Director, Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin, India Linda Temprosa - Librarian, ICLARM, the Phillippines Jeremy Turner - FAO Fisheries Department, Rome, Italy
Finally, I owe particular thanks to my father, Robin Wilson, for his patience with the fax machine and the many volumes of documents.
Explanatory note
Nomenclature
RPM revolutions per minute
SHP shaft horsepower
MCR maximum continuous rating
nm nautical mile
HP horsepower
kt knot (1 nautical mile per hour)
Rules of thumb, guidelines and quick approximations are presented in highlighted boxes:
* The gearbox should be chosen to give a maximum of 1 000 RPM or less at the propeller
Distribution:
* FAO Fisheries Department
* FAO Regional Representatives
* FAO Regional Fisheries Officers
* FAO Fisheries Projects
Wilson, J.D.K.
Fuel and financial savings for operators of small fishing vessels
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 383. Rome, FAO. 1999. 46 pp.
ABSTRACT
Fishing continues to be the most energy-intensive food production method in the world today, and it depends almost completely upon oil fuel-based internal combustion engines. There are as yet no signs of any other energy source that could substitute the internal combustion engine in either the medium or short term. The industry continues to be exposed to global fuel prices and it cannot be assumed that these will remain stable indefinitely.
Small-scale fisheries account for nearly half of the world's fish production and, although they are generally more labour-intensive than larger industrial fisheries, they are increasingly affected by energy costs. In developing countries, in spite of the energy conservation initiatives of the 1980s (subsequent to the dramatic rise in the cost of fossil fuels), mechanization continues to increase. Fuel costs have ever more influence not only on consumer prices but also on fishermen's and boat owners' net incomes. When levels of employment and cost-sharing systems are considered, it becomes even more important from a social perspective to improve and maintain energy efficiency within small-scale fisheries.
This guide presents information on the key technical areas that affect energy efficiency, but only part of the information presented herein will be applicable to any particular fishing situation. The guide is not a result of new original fieldwork but draws on much of the research and experience of the past two decades, updated where possible to include new technical developments.
The guide is divided into two major sections: the first relates to changes in operational techniques rather than changes in technology; the second presents information of relevance to vessel operators who are either considering the construction of a new vessel or overhauling and re-equipping an existing vessel.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
BACKGROUND
Fishing continues to be the most energy-intensive food production method in the world today, and depends almost completely on internal combustion engines based on oil fuels. There are as yet no signs of any other energy source that could substitute the internal combustion engine in either the medium or short term. The industry continues to be exposed to global fuel prices and it cannot be assumed that these will remain stable indefinitely. Indeed, with the current rate of consumption of fossil fuels, some analysts predict dramatic energy cost increases in the next 15 to 50 years.
Small-scale fisheries account for nearly half of the world's fish production and, although they are generally more labour-intensive than larger industrial fisheries, they are increasingly affected by energy costs. In developing countries, in spite of the energy conservation initiatives of the 1980s (subsequent to the dramatic rise in the cost of fossil fuels), mechanization continues to increase. Fuel costs have ever more influence, not only on consumer prices but also on the fishers' and boatowners' net incomes. When levels of employment and cost-sharing systems are considered, it becomes even more important from a social perspective to improve and maintain energy efficiency within small-scale fisheries.
The significance of energy costs within a particular fishery is determined principally by the technology in use and the local economic conditions, including taxes, subsidies, labour and operational costs. Typical figures put energy costs in the region of a little under 10 percent of gross earnings for a trawl fishery down to as little as 5 percent of gross earnings for passive methods such as gillnetting.
It must be recognized from the outset that there are considerable differences in energy optimization needs between fisheries, reflecting local economic conditions, available technology and the cultural context.
AIM OF THIS GUIDE
This guide is not a result of new fieldwork; instead it draws on much of the research and experience of the past two decades, updated where possible to include new technical developments. It presents information on the key technical areas affecting energy efficiency, but only part of the material presented is applicable to any particular fishing situation.
The guide aims to assist owners and operators of fishing vessels of up to about 16 m in improving and maintaining the energy efficiency of their vessels. The basis is technical but, where possible, indications have been given as to possible fuel and financial savings to be gained through improved techniques, technologies and operating practices. Also covered are some aspects of hull design and engine installation for energy efficiency, which should be of interest to marine mechanical engineers and boatbuilders. Fisheries department officials and fieldworkers should also be able to use this guide to assist them in both advising private sector operators and prioritizing intervention activities.
The focus of the guide is exclusively on slower speed displacement vessels, which dominate small-scale fisheries throughout the world, and no attempt has been made to cover technical and operational issues related to higher-speed planing craft. However, in many cases, the basic principles outlined are applicable to both low- and high-speed vessels.
The contents comprises two main parts, Operational measures and Technical measures. The first deals with changes that can be made to improve energy efficiency without changing the vessel or equipment. The topics discussed are related to changes in operational techniques rather than changes in technology. The second is more relevant to vessel operators considering the construction of a new vessel or overhauling and re-equipping an existing vessel.
No attempt has been made to propose complete technical solutions - because of the scope and variation of fishing vessels within the size category, any attempt to do so would be meaningless. The main areas where energy efficiency gains can be made are highlighted and, where possible, the likely magnitude of such gains are indicated. The significance of these gains will be determined primarily by how much energy is used in the fishery as well as by the cost of that energy.
The guide should be considered as part of a decision-making process, and it is inevitable that owners and operators of fishing vessels will have to seek more specialized assistance before implementing many of the ideas presented here. A basic mechanical knowledge is assumed throughout and, while dealing with several quantitative issues, some mathematical ability is also required.
The fuel savings outlined in this publication must be taken as guidance figures only, and neither the author nor the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) accept responsibility for the accuracy of these claims or their applicability to particular fishing situations.
SOURCES OF ENERGY INEFFICIENCY
In addressing the problem of energy efficiency it is useful to understand just where the energy is expended in a fishing vessel and what aspects of this can be influenced by the operator, boatbuilder or mechanic.
In a small slow-speed vessel, the approximate distribution of energy created from the burning of fuel is shown in Figure 1. Only about one-third of the energy generated by the engine reaches the propeller and, in the case of a small trawler, only one-third of this is actually spent on useful work such as pulling the net.
In a vessel that does not pull a net or dredge, of the energy that reaches the propeller:
* 35 percent is used to turn the propeller;
* 27 percent to overcome wave resistance;
* 18 percent to overcome skin friction;
* 17 percent to overcome resistance from the wake and propeller wash against the hull; and
* 3 percent to overcome air resistance.
So where can gains be made, or at least losses minimized?
Figure 1: Energy losses in a small trawler
Engine. Most of the energy generated by the fuel burnt in the engine is lost as heat via the exhaust and cooling system, and unfortunately there is not a lot which the operator can do to usefully recuperate this energy. In certain cases, some of this can be regained through the use of a turbocharger (see the section Engines) but, in general, the thermal efficiency of small higher-speed diesel engines is low and little can be done to improve this. However, some engines are significantly more fuel-efficient than others (especially among different types of outboard motors). Engine choice is detailed in the section Choice of engine type.
Propeller. The energy lost in turning the propeller is controlled by two principle factors - the design of the propeller (how well suited it is to the engine, gearbox, hull and fishing application) and its condition. These factors can be influenced by the vessel operator and are dealt with in the section The propeller.
Mode of operation. The effect of wave resistance, although determined principally by the dimensions and form of the vessel (section Hull form), increases dramatically with speed. Significant fuel savings can be made by maintaining a reasonable speed for the hull, irrespective of vessel type. The factors determining the choice of an optimum operating speed is described in the section Engine operation and in Annex 3.
Fishing operations also influence energy consumption and efficiency through gear technology and operating patterns, particularly trip length. Neither of these are particularly easy to change in practice and are discussed in the section Fishing operations.
Hull maintenance. The significance of skin friction is controlled principally by the quality of the hull's finish - hull roughness as well as the amount of weed and marine growth that is allowed to accumulate on the hull. Both of these factors are under the direct influence of the operator's maintenance programme but, depending on the type of vessel and fishery, a significant expenditure on hull finish is not always worthwhile. This is discussed further in the section Hull condition.
When trying to prioritize what can be most easily done to improve fuel efficiency, it is worth considering the results of related research work carried out in New Zealand (Gilbert, 1983). The results indicate that the major causes of fuel inefficiency, in order of priority, are:
* people - principally the vessel operator!;
* propellers - incorrect diameter or pitch;
* engines - mismatched to the gearbox and/or propeller;
* engine unsuitability or misapplication.
The operator is the most significant factor in the system - technical improvements for fuel efficiency are effectively meaningless without corresponding changes to operational practices. A technical development that allows a vessel to consume less energy at an operating speed can often also be used to increase operating speed, therefore cancelling any gain. In order to make an effective energy gain, this must be kept apart as the savings.
* If the surplus energy created as a result of technical or operational changes is used to go faster (or to do more work), then there will be no savings - control over energy utilization invariably depends on the decisions and judgement of the ship's master on the day.
<section>3</section>
Operational measures
This section discusses fuel efficiency measures that can be taken without investment in new capital equipment.
It is important to note that this does not imply that the measures are cost-free - in every case there is some penalty to be paid for energy efficiency, either in terms of higher operational costs or longer periods at sea. The crucial issue is whether the penalty incurred is offset by savings in fuel. Unfortunately, it is impossible to generalize about the validity of energy efficiency measures - this will vary considerably from vessel to vessel and fishery to fishery. It is up to the vessel owners/operators to evaluate whether these measures are applicable in their particular situation.
ENGINE OPERATION
Slowing down
Speed is the singular most important factor to influence fuel consumption. Its effect is so significant that, although they may be well known by many vessel operators, the underlying principles are worth repeating once again. As a vessel is pushed through the water by the propeller, a certain amount of energy is expended in making surface waves alongside and behind the boat. The effort expended in creating these waves is known as the wave-making resistance. As the vessel's speed increases, the amount of effort spent making waves increases very rapidly - disproportionately to the increase in speed. To double the speed of a vessel, it is necessary to burn much more than double the amount of fuel. At higher vessel speeds, not only is more fuel lost to counteract wave resistance, but also the engine itself may not be operating at its most efficient, particularly at engine speeds approaching the maximum number of revolutions per minute (RPM). These two effects combine to give a
relatively poor fuel consumption rate at higher speeds and, conversely, significant fuel savings through speed reduction.
The choice of operating speed (particularly while in transit) is usually under direct control of the skipper. Fuel savings that can be made by slowing down require no additional direct costs. Vessel speed during fishing may be constrained by other parameters such as optimum trawling or trolling speeds and may not be so freely altered.
Saving fuel through speed reduction requires two principle conditions:
* Knowledge. The skipper must be aware of what could be gained by slowing down.
* Restraint. The skipper must be prepared to go more slowly in spite of the fact that the vessel could go faster.
So what can be saved by slowing down? The actual savings made by slowing down are almost impossible to predict due to the many factors involved. As engine speed is reduced from the maximum RPM:
* the vessel slows down and the journey takes longer;
* the efficiency of the engine will change, but it will consume less fuel per hour;
* the resistance of the hull in the water drops very rapidly;
* the efficiency of the propeller changes.
Engine performance
Diesel engines. The amount of fuel that a diesel engine consumes to make each horsepower changes slightly according to the engine speed. A normally aspirated diesel engine (one which does not have a turbocharger) tends to use more fuel per horsepower of output at lower engine speed, as illustrated in Figure 2. At a lower RPM the engine may actually be working less efficiently.
Figure 2: Typical fuel consumption curve for a normally aspirated diesel engine
A turbocharged diesel engine that is fitted with a small compressor to force more air into the engine has slightly different characteristics. This type of engine may work more efficiently at slightly lower speeds, but efficiency may drop rapidly as the speed is further decreased. The example graph in Figure 3 shows the engine working most efficiently at about 80 percent of the maximum RPM. Note that, in both of these figures, the scale of change in fuel efficiency is actually very small - in the order of a few percent for a 20 percent reduction in the engine's RPM.
The characteristics of the fuel consumption curve vary from engine to engine, especially among smaller-capacity motors, but as a rule of thumb:
Figure 3: Typical fuel consumption curve for a turbocharged diesel engine
* A small diesel engine should be operated at about 80 percent of maximum RPM.
Temperature. Diesel engines are also sensitive to fuel temperature changes. During a long voyage, the fuel in the tank of a trawler slowly heats up because of the temperature of the fuel entering the tank via the return. This results in a small loss of power, about 1 percent per 6°C (10°F) above 65°C (150°F). The effect is more noticeable on vessels operating in tropical climates.
Outboard motors. A conventional gasoline 2-stroke outboard motor may have some particularly unexpected fuel consumption characteristics. The amount of fuel used to generate each horsepower of output increases rapidly as the load is reduced (Aegisson and Endal, 1992). This is due to a breakdown in the flow of fuel mixture and exhaust gases in the engine, resulting in significantly less efficient combustion. It is important to note that as with the normally aspirated diesel engine, an outboard still burns less fuel per hour at lower speeds, but will do so inefficiently - the amount of power produced is disproportionately smaller than the savings in fuel. There is still some benefit from operating at reduced engine speeds, but this is less than might be expected.
Kerosene powered outboard motors are even less suited to fuel savings through a reduction in engine speed. As the throttle opening is reduced, the motor draws proportionately more petrol than kerosene, the cost of which will further diminish savings from reduced fuel consumption per hour. Although fuel can be saved by operating 2-stroke outboard motors at reduced throttle openings, it should be noted that:
* It is more fuel-efficient to achieve reduced operating speeds through the use of a smaller outboard engine than by operating at reduced throttle opening.
This, however, leaves the vessel operator with a reduced power margin to use when speed is necessary for safety reasons (e.g. to avoid bad weather) or when the penalty price paid for increased fuel consumption is likely to be compensated by better market prices for the catch.
Hull resistance. As mentioned above, the resistance of the hull in the water increases rapidly as speed increases, principally due to the rapid build-up of wave-making resistance. The change in resistance of the hull is much more significant than the change in efficiency of the engine. Figure 4 shows how the typical power requirement of a small fishing vessel varies with speed. At faster speeds, note that:
* the curve becomes steeper;
* a large increase in power is required to achieve a small increase in speed; and a small decrease in speed can result in a large decrease in the power requirement.
The exact form of the power/speed diagram will vary from vessel to vessel, but Figure 4 presents a reasonable approximation of a general form for a vessel with an inboard diesel engine. An outboard powered vessel will require approximately 50 percent more power, primarily on account of the low efficiency of outboard motor propellers. It is important to realize that the fuel consumption of both a diesel engine and a petrol outboard motor is approximately proportional to the rated power output, and high horsepower requirement equates directly to high fuel consumption.
Combined effects. When considering the combined effects of speed reduction on the fuel consumption of a fishing vessel, it is very important to remember that the change in the engine's fuel consumption per hour is not of real interest. Almost all fishing operations require the vessel to travel from a port or landing site to a known fishing ground. Therefore, the important factor the quantity of fuel used to travel a fixed distance, or the fuel consumption per nautical mile (nm). The fuel consumption per nautical mile shows, not only how engine performance changes with speed, but also propeller and hull interactions that are not evident from per-hour fuel consumption data.
Figure 4: Power/speed diagram
For small changes in speed, an approximation of the change in fuel consumption per nautical mile can be made using the following equation:
Table 1
Fuel consumption of a 10 m trawler (free-running)
Speed (kt)
Reduction in speed
Reduction in fuel consumption in (litres/nm)
Source: Aegisson and Endal, 1992.
As a worked example, a vessel running at 9 knots (kt) uses 19 litres of fuel per hour. The fuel consumption per nautical mile is therefore:
If the vessel speed were reduced to 8.5 kt, the new fuel consumption is estimated using the equation above:
That is to say that a 6 percent reduction in speed (from 9 to 8.5 kt) results in a fuel savings of approximately 11 percent. The above method is only valid for a quick estimate, as it may conceal several propeller and hull interactions that affect fuel consumption. These are best revealed by performing simple measured trials with the fishing boat in question (see Annex 3, A guide to optimum speed). Trials with speed reduction of free-running trawlers (Aegisson and Endal, 1992; Hollin and Windh, 1984) show that fuel savings can be considerably larger than those indicated by the equation above.
Figures 5 and 6 show typical fuel consumption curves taken from trial data. Figure 5 also illustrates the very large difference in fuel economy between gasoline outboard motor power and inboard diesel power (this is discussed further in the section Engines). The data for the outboard motor propulsion indicate that a 1kt reduction in speed from 9 to 8 kt (11 percent) results in fuel savings of about 25 percent.
Figure 5: Comparative fuel consumption curves for a 13 m canoe
Figure 6: Fuel consumption curve for a 13.1 m purse seiner
The exact magnitude of the fuel savings is closely linked to the original speed of the vessel. The maximum speed of a displacement hull (measured in knots) is about 2.43 x Öwaterline length (measured in metres) after which it starts to plane and pass over, rather than through, the water. The nearer the vessel is to this maximum displacement speed, the larger the gain to be made from slowing down.
Towards an optimum speed. Saving fuel by reducing speed is all very well but, as stated in the introduction to this section, nothing is gained without penalty. In this case the cost to the vessel operator is time, and a difficult decision has to be made as to whether it is worth slowing down. A reduced speed could imply less time for fishing, less free time between fishing trips or even lower market prices owing to late arrival.
Considering only the resistance of a vessel in the water, maximum operating speeds can be recommended as follows:
These guidelines result in the maximum operating speeds recommended in Table 2.
Table 2 may serve as a first estimate in the selection of a reasonable operating speed, but this is not necessarily the optimum speed. The estimation of an optimum speed requires the vessel operator to strike a balance between savings made from slowing down and the costs incurred by spending either more time at sea or less time fishing. Clearly, if late arrival at the port or landing station means that the market will be closed and the catch unsellable, it is worth travelling as fast as possible to ensure a market. Similarly, if the market is always open and prices do not fluctuate, then it may well be worth saving fuel and returning home at a slower rate. The question is, how much slower?
Table 2
Recommended maximum operating speeds
Waterline length (m)
Maximum operating speed (kt)
Long thin vessels
Short fat vessels
* The optimum speed for a particular situation would be that at which the fuel saved by travelling more slowly compensates the exact amount "lost" by arriving later.
An important part of this decision is determined by an evaluation of the skipper's time. Such an evaluation will be, at best, a subjective judgement according to individual priorities. How much would a skipper gain by arriving an hour earlier and how much would be lost by arriving an hour later? These gains and losses may not always be quantifiable. For example, the crew will want to spend time with their families between fishing trips, yet this has no definite value and cannot be readily identified as a cost, should it be lost through late arrival.
It is very important to recognize that the individuals involved in the management and operation of a fishing vessel have different valuations of time. Decision-making is easier if the owner of the vessel is also the skipper. However, when the owner is not on board, a conflict of interests may arise, which does not encourage fuel savings.
For example, the skipper (who makes the decision on board to go slower or not) may be tired and want to return home as early as possible. The vessel's owner, on the other hand, may have already secured a market for the catch and be more interested in reducing operating costs (including fuel) rather than bringing the vessel back to port hastily. The crucial issue is how the person who makes the decision about vessel speed is involved in the cost sharing of the vessel. If the fuel costs are always paid from the owner's revenue, the crew of the vessel may not be motivated to go at a slower rate for the sake of fuel economy.
Based on Lundgren (1985), a quantitative method for estimating optimum speed is laid out in Annex 3. Although the determination of an optimum speed is dependent on the uncertain process of estimating the skipper's valuation of time, the method outlines relatively straightforward measures that can easily identify speeds at which the vessel should not travel, regardless of the human aspects of the decision.
Engine maintenance
Careful initial running-in and regular maintenance are extremely important for ensuring the reliability as well as the performance (including fuel consumption) of any engine. This applies equally to inboard and outboard marine engines. Every engine manufacturer recommends service intervals and these should be adhered to rigorously, especially for basic services such oil changes and filter and separator replacement.
* A new or reconditioned engine needs to be run in carefully.
* The engine manufacturer's maintenance programme must be followed.
* Complicated mechanical work should be entrusted to a qualified mechanic.
Summary Table 1
Slowing down
Advantages
Disadvantages
3No incremental direct costs
8 Requires restraint to reduce speed
3Fuel savings can be very significant
8 Crew and owner may have different interests
3Very easy to put into effect
8 Less convenient
8 If speed is reduced through the installation of a smaller engine, safety margin may be reduced
The consequences of not adhering to running-in and maintenance guidelines may lead to an irrecoverable decline in the performance of an engine. This is best illustrated by an example: a study regarding energy efficiency in small-scale fisheries in India (Aegisson and Endal, 1992) tested two identical engines on the same canoe. One of the engines had been very poorly maintained, and it consumed twice as much fuel but achieved only 85 percent of the speed as the other.
Summary Table 2
Hull condition
Advantages
Disadvantages
3 Fuel savings can be significant
8 Vessel must be taken out of service to improve hull condition
3 Relatively easy to put into effect vessels
8 Requires dry-docking of larger (expensive)
3 Use of antifouling paint protects wooden-hulled vessels from marine borers
8 Paint and labour costs can be significant
The requirement for careful preventative maintenance is all the more acute in areas with low-quality fuel. This can lead to high carbon deposits, low engine temperatures and a significant loss of power. With diesel engines, the high sulphur content in low-quality fuel requires the early substitution of injectors. The first sign of the need for substituting injectors is increased fuel consumption (or a drop in power) and black exhaust smoke. The following list outlines the potential causes of heavy exhaust smoke in diesel engines (Gilbert, 1983):
Black exhaust smoke:
- an overloaded engine;
- a shortage of air;
- worn injectors.
White exhaust smoke:
- mistimed injectors/valves;
- leaking inlet or burnt exhaust valves;
- damaged/worn piston rings;
- low compression;
- exhaust back pressure;
Blue exhaust smoke:
- oil in the combustion chamber (normally in aspirated engines), owing to worn valve guides or worn/ broken piston rings;
- in turbocharged engines, either the above or oil in the exhaust side of the turbocharger following seal failure.
Summary Table 3
Fishing operations
Advantages
Disadvantages
3 Fuel savings can be significant
8 May require considerable investment to increase vessel autonomy
8 Often very difficult to change operational routines in an established fishery
8 Both new operational routines and increased navigational awareness require training and knowledge
HULL CONDITION
Frictional resistance, or skin friction, is the second most significant form of resistance following wave-making resistance. In simple terms it is a measure of the energy expended as the water passes over the wet surface of the hull. Like wave-making resistance, its effect is felt most on faster vessels or vessels that travel longer distances between the port and fishing grounds. It is possible to reduce frictional resistance by operating at slower speeds.
Unlike wave-making resistance, however, frictional resistance is partially controllable by the vessel operator because it depends on the smoothness of the underwater surface of the hull. The more attention paid to the surface finish of the vessel during construction and maintenance, the less energy will be wasted overcoming skin friction. This applies equally to fishing vessels of all sizes.
Constructing a vessel with a very smooth underwater surface, as well as the maintenance of such a surface, is not necessarily easy to achieve. Both of these require increased expenditure on labour costs, materials and (in the case of larger vessels) dock or slipway time.
There are some general pointers that can assist a vessel operator in deciding how much time and money is worth spending on achieving and maintaining a smooth finish. It is both difficult and expensive to improve a severely degraded hull finish - if the vessel was originally launched with a very rough hull it will require a lot of effort to improve this at a later date.
The actual benefit resulting from efforts to improve hull condition depends on the operational pattern. A slow-speed vessel, such as a trawler, operating very near to port does not benefit greatly from an improved hull condition. In one test (Billington, 1985), fouling was found to reduce the free-running speed of a trawler by just under 3 kt. At the same time, it had no noticeable effect on trawling speed or fuel consumption during fishing. In this case the vessel operated very close to its home port, and the significant expenditure made to keep the hull in smooth condition did not prove worthwhile.
* It is better to expend effort on ensuring that the hull condition is good prior to the vessel's first launch. It is difficult to go back and achieve a good finish if it was poor to begin with.
Any vessel th