<title>Fermented frutis and vegetables. A global perspective. . </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Fermentation is an affordable and manageable food preservation technique, which is very appropriate in use where other food processing technologies such as canning and freezing are either inaccessible or unavailable. The fermentation of staples serves as a major source of nourishment for large populations in rural communities and contributes significantly to food security by increasing the range of raw materials, which can be used in the production of edible products.
The consolidated information base on traditional small-scale food fermentations is however very weak and existing information on the subject is widely dispersed. Furthermore, "indigenous knowledge" on fruit and vegetable fermentations is being lost as technologies evolve and populations move away from traditional food preservation practices. The Argo-Industries and Post-Harvest Management Service (AGSI) of FAO has therefore initiated the publication of a document series of fermented foods. The present publication on fermented fruits and vegetables is the first of the series.
It is hoped that this and other documents in the series will generate wider interest in developing and improving small-scale food fermentation technologies.
M. Satin
Chief,
Agro-Industries and Post-Harvest Management Service
<section>2</section>
EXECUTIVE SUMMMARY
1. Fermentation is one of the oldest forms of food preservation technology in the world.
2. Fermented foods are popular throughout the world.
3. Fermented foods make a significant contribution to the diet of millions of individuals.
4. Fermentation is a relatively efficient, low energy preservation process, which increases the shelf life and decreases the need for refrigeration or other form of food preservation technology. It is therefore a highly appropriate technique for use in developing countries and remote areas.
5. There is tremendous scope and potential for the use of micro-organisms towards meeting the growing world demand for food, through efficient utilisation of available natural food and feed stocks and the transformation of waste materials.
6. There is a danger that the introduction of 'western foods' with their glamorous image will displace these traditional fermented foods.
7. It is essential that the knowledge of fermented food production is not lost.
8. It is essential to increase the knowledge and understanding of the methods of preparation, in order to improve the efficiency of fermentation, especially the traditional processes as the yields of traditional fermentation processes are often low and sometimes the products are unsafe.
9. For fermented products such as cheese, bread, beer and wine, which are produced on a commercial scale, a good understanding of the microbial processes has been developed. However with many of the fermented products in Africa, Asia and Latin America, knowledge of the process is poor. It is likely that the basic principles apply across the board, but production conditions vary enormously from region to region, giving rise to numerous variations of the basic fermented product. It is not the intention or the desire to standardise the process and thereby lose this huge diversity, rather it is to harness the tremendous potential these methods have to contribute to increasing not only the quantity, but quality of food available to the worlds population.
10. The collection and preservation of indigenous knowledge is of interest to governments, historians, anthropologists and scientists, to name but a few. Several individuals and organisations are actively involved in research in this area.
11. Most traditional fermented products are made by natural fermentations carried out in a non-sterile environment. The specific environmental conditions cause a gradual selection of micro-organisms responsible for the desired final product. This is appropriate for small-scale production for home consumption. However the method is difficult to control and there are risks of accompanying micro-flora causing spoilage and unsafe products.
12. The art of traditional processes needs to be refined to incorporate objective methods of process control and to standardise quality of the final product without losing their desirable attributes such as improved keeping quality, taste and nutritional qualities.
13. Once the details of the fermentation process and the microbes involved are known and understood, it is possible to begin to refine and improve the process.
14. The areas where the efficiency and yield of food fermentation processes can be increased are: the selection or development of more productive microbial strains; the control and manipulation of culture conditions and the improvement of product purification and concentration.
15. It is often felt that traditional products made at the small scale are unhygienic and unsafe. This is sometimes true. However the case is often overstated. Many fermented foods are inherently safe due to low moisture contents or high acidity.
16. Quality control procedures are essential for the production of safe products and contribute to the success of small food processing businesses. Appropriate quality control procedures need to be developed and implemented. These procedures need to be developed with the processors who must understand and apply them.
17. Documentation of the traditional methods of food fermentation and research to identify improved methods of production are meaningless if the results are not disseminated to those who are likely to put them into practice. There is a danger of mystifying the fermentation process by enrobing it in scientific theory.
18. Fermented foods often are considered as poor man's food. As soon as a family can afford to, they move away from carrying out home fermentation. This is a pity, because as we have seen earlier, fermented food products have many nutritional advantages which surpass western-style fast foods and processed foods.
19. Fermented foods should be recognised as part of each countries heritage and culture and efforts made to preserve the methods of production. A recognised body (government or non-government) should take the responsibility for the collection of details and the promotion of fermented food products.
20. Consumers need to be made aware of the numerous benefits of fermented foods and their prejudices against fermented foods, especially those traditionally produced at the home scale, dispelled.
<section>3</section>
AUTHORS
Mike Battcock
Senior Agro-processing Specialist,
Intermediate Technology, Schumacher Centre for Technology and Development, Bourton Hall, Bourton on Dunsmore, Rugby, Warwickshire, CV23 9QZ, UK
Dr Sue Azam-Ali,
Agro-processing Specialist,
Intermediate Technology, Schumacher Centre for Technology and Development, Bourton Hall, Bourton on Dunsmore, Rugby, Warwickshire, CV23 9QZ, UK
<section>4</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Cover Photograph "Preparation of Mangos for Pickling," by Sue Azam-Ali, Intermediate Technology
<section>5</section>
INTRODUCTION
Agricultural crops are processed for many different reasons. These range from the removal of anti-nutritional components and increasing the storage life of the final product to adding value to increase both employment and income generating opportunities. Fermentation is one of the most ancient and most important food processing technologies. However scientists and policy makers have neglected this area, particularly traditional fermented products from developing countries.
Fermented foods: an ancient tradition
Fermentation is one of the oldest forms of food preservation technologies in the world. Indigenous fermented foods such as bread, cheese and wine, have been prepared and consumed for thousands of years and are strongly linked to culture and tradition, especially in rural households and village communities.
The development of fermentation technologies is lost in the mists of history. Anthropologists have suggested that it was the production of alcohol that motivated primitive people to settle down and become agriculturists. Some even think the consumption of fermented food is pre-human (Stanton, 1985). The first fermented foods consumed probably were fermented fruits. Hunter-gatherers would have consumed fresh fruits but at times of scarcity would have eaten rotten and fermented fruits. Repeated consumption would have led to the development of the taste for fermented fruits. There is reliable information that fermented drinks were being produced over 7,000 years ago in Babylon (now Iraq), 5,000 years ago in Egypt, 4,000 years ago in Mexico and 3,500 years ago in Sudan (Dirar, 1993), (Pedersen, 1979).
Bread-making probably originated in Egypt over 3,500 years ago (Sugihara, 1985). Several triangular loaves of bread have been found in ancient tombs. Fermentation of milk started in many places with evidence of fermented products in use in Babylon over 5,000 years ago. There is also evidence of fermented meat products being produced for King Nebuchadnezer of Babylon. China is thought to be the birth-place of fermented vegetables and the use of Aspergillus and Rhizopus moulds to make food. The book called "Shu-Ching" written in the Chou dynasty in China (1121-256 BC) refers to the use of "chu" a fermented grain product (Yokotsuka, 1985).
Knowledge about traditional fermentation technologies has been handed down from parent to child, for centuries. These fermented products have been adapted over generations; some products and practices no doubt fell by the wayside. Those that remain today have not only survived the test of time but also more importantly are appropriate to the technical, social and economic conditions of the region.
Fermented foods are culturally and economically important
Fermentation is a relatively efficient, low energy preservation process which increases the shelf life and decreases the need for refrigeration or other form of food preservation technology. It is therefore a highly appropriate technique for use in developing countries and remote areas where access to sophisticated equipment is limited. Fermented foods are popular throughout the world and in some regions make a significant contribution to the diet of millions of individuals.
In Asia the preparation of fermented foods is a widespread tradition. The fermented products supply protein, minerals and other nutrients that add variety and nutritional fortification to otherwise starchy, bland diets. For instance Soy sauce is consumed throughout the world and is a fundamental ingredient in diets from Indonesia to Japan. Over one billion litres are produced each year in Japan alone. "Gundruk" which is a fermented and dried vegetable product is very important for ensuring food security for many Nepali communities especially in remote areas. It is served as a side dish with the main meal and is also used as an appetiser in the bland, starchy diet. The annual production of gundruk in Nepal is estimated at 2,000 tons. Gundruk is an important source of minerals particularly during the off-season when the diet consists primarily of starchy tubers and maize, which tend to be low in minerals. In Africa fermented cassava products (like gari and fufu) are a major
component of the diet of more than 800 million people and in some areas these products constitute over 50% of the diet.
The need for research
Although fermentation of foods has been in use for thousands of year, it is likely that the microbial and enzymatic processes responsible for the transformations were largely unknown. It is only recently that there has been a development in the understanding of these processes and their adaptation for commercialisation. There is tremendous scope and potential for the use of micro-organisms towards meeting the growing world demand for food, through efficient utilisation of available natural food and feed stocks and the transformation of waste materials.
Because of the tremendously important role indigenous fermented fruits and vegetables play in food preservation and their potential to contribute to the growing food needs of the world, it is essential that the knowledge of their production is not lost. There is a danger that the introduction of 'western foods' with their glamorous image will displace these traditional foods.
This book presents an overview of the fermented fruit and vegetable products of Africa, Asia and Latin America. The book aims to introduce the reader to the vast wealth of knowledge, much of which is indigenous and undocumented and the importance attached to fermented fruits and vegetables in the diet. At the same time it is a practical handbook, allowing those who are interested to reproduce the products.
DESCRIPTION OF TERMS USED
Fermentation
Fermentation is the "slow decomposition process of organic substances induced by micro-organisms, or by complex nitrogenous substances (enzymes) of plant or animal origin" (Walker, 1988). It can be described as a biochemical change, which is brought about by the anaerobic or partially anaerobic oxidation of carbohydrates by either micro-organisms or enzymes. This is distinct from putrefaction, which is the degradation of protein materials.
The changes caused by fermentation can be both advantageous and disadvantageous. Fermentation, initiated by the action of micro-organisms occurs naturally and is often part of the process of decay, especially in fruits and vegetables. However, fermentation can be controlled to give beneficial results. Fermentation is a relatively efficient, low energy preservation process, which increases the shelf life and decreases the need for refrigeration or other form of food preservation technology. It is therefore a highly appropriate technique for use in developing countries and remote areas where access to sophisticated equipment is limited.
Fruits
There are several definitions of "fruit", which makes classification and distinction between fruit and vegetable difficult. The everyday usage of the word "fruit" defines fruit as "The edible product of a plant or tree, consisting of the seed and its envelope, especially the latter when juicy and pulpy" (Little et al, 1973). The scientific definition of a fruit is "The structure that develops from the ovary of an angiosperm as the seeds mature, with (false fruit) or without (true fruit) associated structures" (Walker, 1988)
In terms of food processing, fruits are nearly all acidic and are therefore called `high acid' foods. The acidity naturally controls the type of organism that can grow in fruits, with yeasts and moulds being the only spoilage organisms likely to be found on fruit products. The acidity level of tropical fruits, such as banana, mango and papaya, decreases as the fruit ripens (Anon, 1993). With respect to food processing and preservation, it is probably this definition of a fruit that will be most useful.
Vegetables
A vegetable is "a plant cultivated for food, especially an edible herb or root used for human consumption"(Little et al, 1973). In general, vegetables tend to be less sweet than fruits and often require some form of processing to increase their edibility.
In terms of food processing, vegetables are classified as `low acid' foods due to their lower levels of acidity. Low acid foods are more prone to deterioration by micro-organisms and can in fact provide an ideal substrate for food poisoning organisms when in a moist environment. Low acid foods can be safely preserved by making them more acidic, either through pickling or salting or drying (Anon, 1993).
Agro-processing
Agro-processing describes the transformation of agricultural produce into a different physical or chemical state. The term agro encompasses a wide range of food and non-food agricultural products. The term food processing applies only to products which are suitable for human consumption. Agro processing applies to any of the numerous activities that take place in the chain of events between harvest or slaughter of the raw material and production of the final product. It covers a range of processes with varying degrees of complexity and technical input to suit the individual situation. Different treatments range from the relatively simple processes of rice husking, drying and grinding to the more complex transformation of oilseeds into margarine and essential oil distillation.
Salometer
Salt present in a brine is expressed as degrees "Salometer" which is a percent saturation of sodium chloride by weight. A saturated solution of pure sodium chloride (100 degrees Salometer) contains 26.359g per 100ml at 15.5 degrees C. Therefore a 10 degree Salometer contains 2.64% salt by weight.
Biotechnology
Biotechnology can be described as the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials, for the provision of goods and services, through the use of biological systems and agents (Anon, 1992).
Complex carbohydrate
A complex carbohydrate is one that is composed of long branched chains of single sugar units (glucose, fructose or galactose). Examples of complex carbohydrates include starch and cellulose.
Reducing sugar
A reducing sugar is a sugar, which has reactive aldehyde or ketone groups. All simple sugars are reducing sugars. Sucrose, a common sugar, is not a reducing sugar.
Micro-organism/Microbe
Microbe and micro-organism are generic terms for the group of living organisms which are microscopic in size. Included in the definition are bacteria, viruses, moulds, yeasts and fungi.
Enzyme
An enzyme is a biological catalyst, which is used to facilitate and speed up reactions. It is a protein and requires a specific substrate to work on. Its working conditions are set within narrow limits - for example, optimum temperature, pH conditions and oxygen concentration. At temperatures above 42° C, mammalian proteins (and therefore enzymes) are denatured. However, certain bacterial enzymes are tolerant of a more diverse temperature range.
Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis is the splitting or breaking down of complex molecules by the action of enzymes or acid. For example the hydrolysis of starch and cellulose both yield simple glucose units.
Aerobic
With reference to micro-organisms, one which requires oxygen for survival.
Anaerobic
An anaerobic organism is one which does not require oxygen for survival.
Facultative anaerobe
A micro-organism which can adapt to exist with or without oxygen.
Microaerophilic
An organism which requires small amounts of oxygen for survival.
Water activity (a[ w] )
Water exists in two states within a cell - free and bound. Water activity is a measure of the amount of free water available for a potential reaction - microbial or enzymic. Water activity is a measure of the free moisture in a product and is the quotient of the water vapour pressure of the substance divided by the vapour pressure of pure water at the same temperature. It is measured on a scale of 0 to 1.0 where 1.0 is the activity of pure water.
pH
pH is a measure of the hydrogen ion concentration. It is measured on a scale of 1 to 14, where 1 represents a high concentration of hydrogen ions (acidic) and 14 represents a low concentration (alkaline). The optimum pH for most micro-organisms is near neutral (pH 7.0). However, certain species are acid tolerant . Foods with a pH of 4.6 or lower are termed high acid foods. If the pH is above 4.6, it is a low acid food and is more prone to bacterial and fungal spoilage.
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 1
THE BENEFITS OF FERMENTING FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
Fermenting fruits and vegetables can bring many benefits to people in developing countries. Fermented foods play an important role in providing food security, enhancing livelihoods and improving the nutrition and social well being of millions of people around the world, particularly the marginalised and vulnerable.
1.1 Improving food security
Eight hundred million people do not have enough food to eat. If we include those not free from hunger the figure rises to 1.2 billion people. This is one fifth of the World's population. A further two billion people are deficient in one or more micro-nutrients (Anon, 1996). In the seventies, food security was viewed mainly in terms of food supply at the global and national levels. Since then there has been a major shift in understanding of food security with more emphasis on access to food rather than purely on production. The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), amongst other influential organisations, has recognised that the problem of food security cannot be tackled in isolation. Moreover that it is an integral component of other development issues. FAO highlights the fact that the world food insecurity problem is a result of undemocratic and inequitable distribution of and access to resources rather than a problem of global food production
(Anon, 1995), (Anon, 1996).
Fermentation technologies play an important role in ensuring the food security of millions of people around the world, particularly marginalised and vulnerable groups. This is achieved through improved food preservation, increasing the range of raw materials that can be used to produce edible food products and removing anti- nutritional factors to make food safe to eat.
1.1.1 Food preservation
Fermentation is a cheap and energy efficient means of preserving perishable raw materials. When harvested, fruit and vegetables, undergo rapid deterioration, especially in the humid tropics where the prevailing environmental conditions accelerate the process of decomposition. There are several options for preserving fresh fruit and vegetables including drying, freezing, canning and pickling. However many of these are inappropriate for use on the small-scale in developing countries. For instance the canning of vegetables at the small-scale has serious food safety implications and contamination with botulism is a possibility. Freezing of fruits and vegetables is not economically viable at the small-scale. Fermentation requires very little sophisticated equipment, either to carry out the fermentation or for subsequent storage of the fermented product. It is a technique that has been employed for generations to preserve food for consumption at a later date and to improve food
security. There are examples from around the world of the role fermented foods have played in preserving food to enhance food security.
Fermented foods for survival in Sudan
About 60% of the fermented foods of Sudan are famine or survival foods. Many of the fermented foods have been developed in Western Sudan in the Kordofan and Darfur regions, which are traditional famine areas. The strong link between fermented foods and food shortages is revealed by the fact that when a family becomes rich a number of fermented foods are no longer prepared. The techniques used are very effective methods of food preservation. The products can be preserved for years through the double action of fermentation itself (which produces anti-microbial acids) and sun-drying. Sudan is probably the hottest and driest country in Africa. Through the years women have made full use of this free solar energy. Shade temperatures in the summer reach 45-50^oC and the hot sands outside the shade reach more than 70^oC. Dried and fermented foods together with the seeds and fruits that can be gathered from the wild have saved lives especially those of children in the past and in the
present in times of shortage (Dirar, 1992). During the 1983-85 famine, relief workers found that people had survived by producing specific traditional fermented food products, especially Kawal (Arthur, 1986).
Gundruk: an important fermented product in Nepal
Gundruk is a fermented and dried vegetable product. It is produced by shredding the leaves of mustard, radish and cauliflower leaves and placing them in an earthenware pot to ferment. After five to seven days the leaves are removed and dried in the sun. Gundruk is a very important food product in Nepal ensuring food security for many Nepali communities especially in remote areas. It is served as a side dish with the main meal and is also used as an appetiser in the bland, starchy diet. The annual production of gundruk in Nepal is estimated at 2,000 tons and most of the production is carried out at the household level. Gundruk is also an important source of minerals particularly during the off-season when the diet consists of mostly starchy tubers and maize which tend to be low in minerals (Karki, 1986).
1.1.2 Salvaging waste foods
Fermentation can salvage waste food which otherwise would not be usable as food by changing the consistency of the product and making it digestible. This increases the range of raw materials available as food.
Bones and hides
A wide range of "waste" products are fermented to produce edible food products in Sudan. These includes bones, hides and locusts. Fresh bones are fermented into a variety of products. "Dodery" is produced by chopping bones into small pieces and placing them into fermenting vats. They are subsequently covered in water, left for three days, removed, crushed into a paste and mixed with the ash from burnt sorghum stalks. The mixture is returned to the fermenting vat for a further two to five days. The final product is rolled into balls and has a shelf like of up to two months. Another product "Kaidu digla" is made from the vertebrae of the backbone. These are chopped into smaller pieces and then sun-dried. After drying they are pounded with stones; mixed with water and salt; moulded into balls and allowed to ferment (Dirar,1992).
Use of waste products in Indonesia
In Indonesia a variety of waste products are fermented to produce nutritious food products. Tempe-bongrek is a protein rich food made in Indonesia by fermenting peanut and coconut press-cake, remaining after oil extraction. The product is similar to traditional tempeh produced from the fermentation of soya beans. The production of tempeh- bongrek is a mould fermentation, initiated by inoculation of the soaked, acidified press-cake with Rhizopus species. The inoculated cakes are placed on banana leaves or plastic sheets in a dark room for about 2 days. An incubation temperature of 37ºC is optimal for the mould and prevents the growth of P. cocovenenans, which produces bongkrek toxin. A pH of less than 6.0 also prevents the development of bongkrek toxin. Ontjom is produced from waste groundnut press cake, tapioca waste and the solid waste of tahu. Ontjom is prepared using a mixed culture of micro-organisms with Rhizopus or Neurospora species predominating. Ontjom is mainly
produced in west Java where it is consumed as a side dish in the form of deep fried slices. It forms an important daily food item for the west Javanese, particularly those from the lower income groups. Fresh coconut residue, left over from the production of coconut cream or milk, can be fermented by Bacillus subtilis, in an alkaline fermentation, to produce semayi, which is widely consumed in Indonesia (Steinkraus, 1996).
Pineapple peel vinegar
A considerable amount of the fruit can be wasted in the peeling and preparation of pineapples in Latin America. Through fermentation, a product can be produced from the peelings, that would otherwise have been discarded. The peelings are placed in containers of water and sugar and yeast are added. They are allowed to sit for about 8 days, after which a pineapple peel vinegar is produced. The product is of a distinct, light pineapple flavour and can be used in the same way as other vinegars.
1.1.3 Removal of anti-nutritional factors
Many fruits and vegetables contain naturally occurring toxins and anti-nutritional compounds. These can be removed or detoxified by the action of micro-organisms during fermentation. For instance the fermentation process that produces the Sudanese product Kawal removes the toxins from the leaves of Cassia obtusifolia and fermentation is an important step in ensuring that cassava is safe to eat.
Removing cyanide by fermentation
Cassava contains a naturally occurring chemical: cyanogenic glucoside. When eaten raw or improperly processed, this substance releases cyanide into the body, which can be fatal. Correct processing removes this chemical. The cassava is first peeled (as about 60-70% of the poison is in the peel) and then soaked in stagnant water or fermented in sacks for about three days. It is sometimes grated or rasped as this helps to speed up the fermentation process. At the beginning of the fermentation, Geotricum candida acts on the cassava. This tends to make the product acidic, which finally kills off the micro-organisms as they cannot exist in such a medium. A second strain of micro-organisms (Cornibacterium lactii), which can tolerate the acidic environment then take over and by the third day 90-95% of the dangerous chemical will have been hydrolysed. The cassava also develops its characteristic flavour. The product is then sieved and the fine starch particles are fried in an iron
pan alone over a flame or with some palm oil. During this process most, if not all the remaining toxins are given off. The liquor from a previous fermentation is used as a starter, thereby reducing the period of fermentation to about 6-8 hours.
1.2 Increasing income and employment
The production of fermented fruit and vegetable products provides income and employment to millions of people around the world.
Food processing is probably the most important source of income and employment in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations has stated that value added through marketing and processing raw products can be much greater than the value of primary production (Anon, 1995). For instance in sub-Saharan Africa more than 60% of the workforce is employed in the small scale food processing sector, and between one third and two thirds of value added manufacturing is based on agricultural raw materials (World Bank, 1989), (Conroy et al, 1995). This is particularly important as agriculture and the formal sector are unable to absorb the growing labour force in many countries.
Fermented foods are popular throughout the world and the production of fermented food products is important in many countries in providing income and employment.
In Africa, fermented cassava products (like Gari and Fufu) are a major component of the diet of more than 800 million people and in some parts of Africa it constitutes over 50% of the diet (Oyewole, 1992). In Asia the preparation of fermented foods is a widespread tradition. Kimchi (a fermented cabbage product) is the major food product of Korea. Soy sauce (a fermented legume product) is economically important from Indonesia to Japan. Over a billion litres are produced each year in Japan alone. Over 2000 million litres are produced each year in Korea and over 150 million litres in Taiwan. Miso (a fermented legume product) is also very important in Asia with over 560,000 tons produced a year in Japan alone (Anon, 1982). In Latin America, fermented cereal products, alcoholic drinks and fermented milk products are three of the most important sectors of the economy.
1.3 Improving nutrition
The optimum health and nutrition of individuals is dependent upon a regular supply of food and a balanced diet. When diets are sub-optimal, the individual's capacity for work and achievements are greatly reduced. The most vulnerable groups are women, children and weaning infants. Availability of food, dietary restrictions and taboos, misconceptions, limited time available for feeding or eating compound to create a group of individuals who are nutritionally disadvantaged. Approximately 30% of women consume less than their daily requirements of energy and at least 40% of women world-wide suffer from iron-deficiency anaemia. Fermentation can enhance the nutritional value of a food product though increased vitamin levels and improved digestibility.
1.3.1 Vitamins
Fermentation processes can result in increased levels of vitamins in the final product. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is able to concentrate large quantities of thiamin, nicotinic acid and biotin and thus form enriched products.
* Sorghum beer in Southern Africa contains relatively high levels of riboflavin and nicotinic acid, which are important for people consuming a high maize diet. Pellagra (a vitamin deficiency disease associated with high maize diets) is unusual in communities in which sorghum beer is consumed. Even children benefit from consuming the dregs which contain relatively little alcohol but are rich in vitamins.
* Palm wine in West Africa is high in vitamin B12, which 