<title>Reduced impact timber harvesting in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia</title>
<section>1</section>
SUMMARY
The study was carried out in the tropical natural forest, concession area of PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya IV in Berau Regency, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. This study analyses productivity, costs and environmental impacts of conventional and reduced impact timber harvesting of the Indonesian Selective Cutting and Planting (Tebang Pilih Tanam Indonesia/TPTI) system.
The conventional and reduced impact timber harvesting operations were observed; both methods used the same equipment and operators and were conducted in almost the same area. Felling was done with heavy chainsaw and skidding with crawler tractor (bulldozer).
Time studies were elaborated for felling, skidding, bucking, loading, hauling and unloading activities to assess timber harvesting performances, productivity and costs under comparable conditions of conventional and reduced impact timber harvesting. Environmental impacts assessments were carried out only for the felling and skidding operations.
The result of the time study for felling shows that the average time needed for felling in conventional timber harvesting for trees with buttresses is 24.24 minutes per tree and for trees without buttresses the average needed is 14.17 minutes per tree. In reduced impact timber harvesting, the average time for felling trees with buttresses is 21.88 minutes per tree and for trees without buttresses the average needed is 15.82 minutes per tree.
The productivity of felling in conventional timber harvesting for trees without buttresses is 11.88 m^3/hour; for trees with buttresses is 17.63 m^3/hour. In reduced impact timber harvesting, the productivity of felling trees with buttresses is 18.34 m^3/hour and for trees without buttresses it is 10.15 m^3/hour.
The cost of the felling operation in conventional timber harvesting was Rp 1 141.10/m^3 and in reduced impact timber harvesting the cost was Rp 1 080.78/m^3. This means that the felling cost decreased to Rp 60.32/m^3 (5.29%) for reduced impact timber harvesting compared with the felling cost of conventional timber harvesting.
The average skidding distance in conventional timber harvesting operations was 350.6 m, and caused an opened area of 872.53 m^2/ha or 8.73%; in reduced impact timber harvesting operations, the average skidding distance was 335.2 m, and caused an opened area of 520.81 m^2/ha or 5.21%.
Time required and productivity of skidding in conventional timber harvesting was 38.14 minutes per round trip with a productivity of 6.47 m^3/h; in reduced impact timber harvesting it was 33.01 minutes per round trip with a productivity of 7.31 m^3/h. The time involved for construction of skidtrails in reduced impact timber harvesting was 3.61 minutes/m^3 of harvested log. Therefore the skidding cost was Rp 10 971.77/m^3 in reduced impact timber harvesting or 2.22% higher than skidding costs in conventional timber harvesting (Rp 10 728.12/m^3).
The comparison between environmental impact caused by conventional and reduced impact timber harvesting operations is as follows:
No
Items
Methods of timber harvesting
Conventional
Reduced impact
Residual stand damages based on tree population and stage of vegetation development (%)
· Seedlings
· Saplings
· Poles and trees
Tree damages based on the injury size (%)
· Light injury
· Medium injury
· Heavy injury
Opened areas (%)
· Caused by felling
· Caused by skidding
This comparison shows that reduced impact timber harvesting can reduce damage up to 50% when compared with conventional timber harvesting.
Comparison of production costs of felling, skidding, bucking, loading and unloading of conventional and reduced impact timber harvesting shows that the total cost of timber harvesting in conventional timber harvesting is Rp 28 081.29/m^3, while in reduced impact timber harvesting it is Rp 28 264.62/m^3. The cost here does not include topographic maps and timber harvesting planning costs.
Assuming that the profit ratio is 30%, the loss of value is twice as great in conventional timber harvesting as in reduced impact timber harvesting (Rp 28 24l.68/ha and Rp 12 433.42/ha).
These research results indicate that conventional timber harvesting with the TPTI System in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia caused heavier damage on soil and residual stands when compared with a reduced impact timber harvesting system.
The application costs of reduced impact timber harvesting are not greater than conventional timber harvesting in either short or long periods because the wood damages value caused by conventional timber harvesting is twice as great as that caused by reduced impact timber harvesting; also, reduced timber harvesting will enhance future forest productivity and reduce the costs associated with potentially adverse side-effects of timber harvesting.
This case study is in response to the FAO model code of forest harvesting practice (D. P. Dykstra and R. Heinrich, 1996) to promote forest harvesting practices that improve standards of utilisation and reduce environmental impacts, thereby contributing to the conservation of forests through their wise use.
Further actions are recommended in order to:
· promote the implementation of the reduced impact wood harvesting in the tropical natural forest;
· develop the local codes of practice of reduced impact timber harvesting operations;
· conduct regular training for chainsaw operators, tractor operators, felling and skidding foremen and timber harvesting supervisors and planners;
· improve payment/salary systems, e.g. tariff systems based on work quality, quantity and working place conditions; and
· promote studies that reduce environmental impact in tropical natural forests, e.g. by providing alternatives to crawler tractor timber harvesting methods on steep slope, namely skyline and helicopter timber harvesting.
<section>2</section>
SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
HP = horse power
hm = hectometre
km = kilometre
kW = kilowatt
m = metre
mm = millimetre
m^2 = square metre
m^3 = cubic metre
mill = million
Rpm = revolutions per minute
Abbreviations
dbh = diameter at breast height
HPH = Forest Concession Right (Hak Pengusahaan Hutan)
PT = Limited Company (Perseroan Terbatas)
TPTI = Indonesian Selective Cutting and Planting (Tebang Pilih Tanam Indonesia)
Exchange rate (as of September 1995)
$US 1 = Rp 2 283.50 (Indonesian Rupiah)
<section>3</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The Indonesian natural forest area, according to the Forest Land-use by Consensus (1982), is estimated to be almost 144 million hectares which is about 74% of the land area of Indonesia. From a functional point of view the natural forest has been divided into four types: Protection Forest (31 mill ha); Natural Reserve and Recreation Forest (19 mill ha); Production Forest (64 mill ha) and Conservation Forest (30 mill ha).
Dealing with the natural forest, there are two major forest types in Indonesia, namely tropical rain and monsoon forest. The tropical rain forest is dominated by Dipterocarp family, namely Shorea, Dryobalanops, Dipterocarpus, Hopea, Vatica, Parashorea, Cotylelobyum and Anisoptera species. At present, these are harvested for economical purposes.
Timber harvesting, as one utilisation of the tropical natural forest in Indonesia, is carried out by the silvicultural system, the Indonesian Selective Cutting and Planting (Tebang Pilih Tanam Indonesia/TPTI). The unit of the utilisation is the Forest Concession Right (Hak Pengusahaan Hutan/HPH), where at present there are about 585 HPHs operating in the tropical natural production forest in Indonesia. For the management of the natural tropical rain forest, almost all forest concession holders use the TPTI system. The cutting cycle is presently at 35 years.
Timber harvesting is the most important intervention factor in forest operations and management practices on the environment. Together with the TPTI system, they ensure the survival of the natural tropical forest in Indonesia. The effect of timber harvesting will vary greatly according to the forest stock and random factor such as the relative spacing of crop tree (stand density) and of the skidtrails. Timber harvesting operations need to be carefully planned to achieve expected results, and stock mapping of the timber harvesting is essential.
Conventional timber harvesting, which has been practised until now, often is considered to be a major cause of forest degradation; however shifting cultivation and forest fires frequently are also responsible for forest decrease. The concession holders and/or logging contractors usually carry out their timber harvesting operations in the simplest way, often without sufficiently detailed harvesting plans and work instruction for timber harvesting operations.
Several research results (e.g. Elias, 1995; D.P. Dykstra and R. Heinrich, 1996; J.G. Bertault and P. Sist, 1995; and Abdulhadi et al, 1981) indicate that conventional timber harvesting with insufficient planning, improper operational techniques and lack of control of operation and supervision result in severe damage to soil and residual forest stand; this leads to environmental degradation (damaged forest, erosion, compacted and infertile soil, turbid water and sedimentation, etc.).
Recently, Elias (1996) found that the degree of residual stand damages caused by conventional timber harvesting ranged between 28-45% and incidence of damage to small trees was greater than to larger trees (about 80%). Most of the damaged trees were heavily injured (about 85%) and had little chance to recover because the degree of damage did not permit their survival. In many instances the growth of forest stand (annual increment) would be affected by the damage. Research in logged-over areas has shown that the average diameter growth of commercial trees after timber harvesting with the TPTI system was lower than 1 cm/year as compared with the estimated growth suggested in the regulation of the TPTI system guidelines.
Another research on reduced impact timber harvesting (e.g. Pinard et al, 1995 and
J. Hendrison, 1990) concluded that residual stand damages and opened area caused by conventional timber harvesting can be minimised by means of better timber harvesting planning and proper, well-controlled timber harvesting operation techniques. Detailed information on how to introduce reduced environmental impact timber harvesting is available in the FAO model code of forest harvesting practice (D.P. Dykstra and R. Heinrich, 1996).
The objective of the study is to test the applicability of some of the suggestions made in the FAO Model Code with reference to improved forest harvesting practices in tropical high forests. This research was conducted in the forest concession area of PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya IV, East Kalimantan, Indonesia, in 1996, on reduced impact timber harvesting versus conventional timber harvesting operations.
<section>4</section>
2. TYPICAL CONVENTIONAL TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS IN INDONESIA
According to J. Hendrison (1990), conventional timber harvesting is unplanned, haphazard harvesting. In this case, timber harvesting operations are not based on a forest inventory and the harvesting area is not laid out before felling. In addition, harvesting operations are not planned or organized and are very often performed by unskilled crews. As a result there is large wastage of harvested timber and considerable harvesting damage. No attention is given to the remaining forest stand and harvesting costs are high.
The typical conventional timber harvesting in the tropical natural forests in Indonesia is conducive to insufficiently planned and improper technique application and lack of control, e.g. the skidtrail network and directional felling are not planned and laid out before felling operations; felling technique is still inefficient (notch and back cut is still too high); the chainsaw operator and the tractor operator work independently and do not use tree location maps to aid their activities; the tractor operator searches for logs by using his helper to look for logs on the ground.
2.1 Forest inventory
Before timber harvesting takes place, a stock survey is carried out which provides information for the calculation of the yield, and for the identification of the harvestable trees. The forest inventory and yield calculation may take up to one year, therefore it is conducted two years prior to harvesting. The forest inventory is a 100 % survey of trees with a diameter 20 cm and upward.
The forest inventory is conducted by a team of timber cruisers. They consist of 6-10 persons, including at least one tree evaluator, one recorder, one compassman and the others are helpers. The team's task is to carry out a forest inventory. The data collected consists of tree species, tree diameter, tree height, tree distribution/location and tree marking for harvestable trees, protected trees and nucleus trees. The survey method uses the systematic strip line with random start. On the average, daily accomplishment is 2-4 km or 4-8 ha per team.
The collected information is then tabulated and used both for an estimation of the stock wood volume of harvestable trees and to produce a tree location map with a scale of 1:1,000 (see Figure 1). This information, together with other required data, has to be formulated as part of a "Yearly Operational Plan" (Rencana Karya Tahunan/RKT).
Figure 1. An example of a tree location map (scale l : l,000)
2.2 Road planning and construction
2.2.1 Road standard and road density
Generally, the method of designating road standards in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia is by a service standard. The Opening Up Forest Guidelines of TPTI recognizes four standards of hauling roads in forest concession areas, namely:
· main roads with surfacing
· main roads without surfacing
· branch roads with surfacing
· branch roads without surfacing
The typical road standard used in forest concession areas in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia is shown in Table 1.
Table l. Typical forest road standards in forest concession areas in the tropical natural forest
in Indonesia
Road standard
Item
Main road
Branch road
with surfacing
without surfacing
with surfacing
without surfacing
Life time
Permanent
5 years
3 years
1 year
use
all weather
temporary/dry season
all weather
temporary/dry season
Road width
12 m
12 m
8 m
8 m
Width of surfacing
6-8 m
4 m
Depth of surfacing
20-50 cm
10-20 cm
Maximum favourable grade
Maximum adverse grade
Minimum curve radius
50-60 m
50-60 m
50 m
50 m
Maximum load capacity
60 ton
60 ton
60 ton
60 ton
Source : TPTI-Guideline, 1993
The road density in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia ranges between 10-25 m/ha, with an average of 17 m/ha.
2.2.2 Road planning and road construction
Road planning in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia has been conducted until now in a very simple way, which is also insufficient and inefficient. Generally the road surveyor inspects the ground with a compass to locate the road trace route by orientation of the topography. After ground orientation the road surveyor draws a road trace route by stacking the central line of the road trace and marking it with red paint, usually on the trees.
The final road location/layout is decided by the road surveyor team after detailed field observation is completed. The team finalises road location by considering required road grades and physical obstacles on/in the ground. The team of 4-6 workers can accomplish around 1 to 3 km/day.
At this point the road construction can be started. Generally the steps are as follows (see Photo 1):
· Piloting
Piloting is the first operation in road construction necessary to make a strip (line) with a dozerblade on the centreline. Bulldozers are the basic equipment used to open the strip. The width of strip-piloting is about 5 m.
· Opening
Opening consists of activities needed to open the strip and may be defined as the removal of trees, stumps, roots and other objectionable matter from the road construction areas. Bulldozers are the basic equipment used to clear and grub. Opening is done to provide access for timber salvage on the right-of-way and is followed by the dozing of stumps and trees on the right-of-way area.
· Grading
Grading includes those activities necessary to construct the road after the construction area has been opened. Earthmoving is usually done by bulldozers over short distances while dump trucks and loaders are used for longer distances. Bulldozers and motor graders are the basic equipment used in grading.
· Shadow felling
To dry out the road, it is common to "daylight" the road by "shadow felling". Shadow felling is generally conducted during the grading phase. Chainsaw is the basic equipment used to fell trees. The width of shadow felling along the left and right side of the road is 20-25 m.
· Compacting
Compacting includes those activities used to compact the road construction. The vibration roller is the basic equipment needed to compact the soil.
· Surfacing
All-weather forest roads require a surface application of rock, gravel or acceptable surface material. This material is usually brought into the road from local quarries. The material is hauled by dump truck and spread with motor graders. Compacting is done with a vibration roller.
· Finishing
The final steps in road construction is the crowning, sloping of shoulders and slopes and ditching. This is usually accomplished with a motor grader. Table 2 shows the steps necessary for road construction.
Table 2. Productivity of road construction in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia
Steps
Equipment
Productivity (km/hour)
1. Clearing (piloting and opening)
Bulldozer
2. Grading (cut and fill)
Bulldozer
3. Compacting
Vibration roller
4. Finishing
Motor grader
· Spreading
Motor grader
· Compacting
Vibration roller
2.3 Felling
Felling in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia is done with a chainsaw equipped with a 60-70 cm guide bar. Equipment to facilitate felling with a wedge is not commonly used. The minimum diameter of tree to be cut is 50 cm. Usually each chainsaw has one operator and one helper, who work for 6-7 hours per day with an average production of 12-18 m^3/h. The productivity in felling is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Felling productivity in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia
No.
Type of chainsaw
Horse power (HP)
Productivity (m^3/hour)
Location
Homelite super 80
Sumatra
Stihl AY 070
Sumatra
Mc Culloch 895
Sumatra
Stihl 190
Kalimantan
Mc Culloch 795
Kalimantan
Homelite super 80
Kalimantan
Generally, the forest concession owners use the contract system in which felling crews own the chainsaw and the company pays the crews by the piece-rate system. Photos 2 and 3 show the equipment and felling technique and the steps for felling in the forest concession areas in Indonesia.
2.4 Extraction
Most of the forest concessions now are operating in the hilly/steep terrain areas. For the extraction of logs from the forest stand to the landing, the equipment commonly used in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia are crawler tractors, such as the Cat D7 and Komatsu D 85E-SS. These crawler tractors can work on steep slopes; they are equipped with a robust dozerblade and a powerful winch.
The skidding team consists of one tractor operator and one helper, operating for 6-7 hours/day. Each team can produce around 17 to 29 m^3 logs per hour for an average skidding distance of 300-400 m. The skidding productivity is shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Skidding productivity in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia
No.
Type of tractor
Slope (%)
Productivity (m^3/hour)
Skidding distance (m)
Komatsu D 85E-SS
Caterpillar D7G
Photo 4 shows skidding operations in the tropical natural forest in Indonesia. Generally the tractor operator searches for logs by using a helper, who looks for logs on the ground. Then the tractor operator opens the skidtrail to the logs and moves towards the logs until the helper can easily hook the log with the winch cable. Winching the logs are generally only for a very short distance (about 1-5 m). Logs are then skidded to the landing.
2.5 Landing
The main activities at a landing are bucking of logs, debarking, scaling and loading logs to the logging truck. At the landing the logs are bucked into more manageable lengths by a chainsaw operator and then debarked with a crowbar by a team of four persons. The logs are then loaded onto a logging truck. The commonly-used equipment for loading are a wheeled loader Komatsu WA500. Performance is about 100 m^3/h for bucking, 15 m^3/h for debarking and 72-76 m^3/h for loading. Photos 5 and 6 show the main activities at a landing.
2.6 Wood transport
The procedure following landing operations is the transport of logs from landing to mill or market. It is mainly carried out by truck hauling and raft towing. Truck trailers are most commonly used in hauling operations in the dryland tropical natural forest in Indonesia. The process of timber transport by truck trailer in a dryland tropical natural forest is shown in Photo 6 and by water transport in Photo 7.
The types of truck trailers commonly used are the Nissan TZ 52, Kenworth C 500, Nissan TZA 52 ZHN and Nissan TZA 52 PPN. The timber transport productivity according to the type of truck trailer is shows in Table 5.
Table 5. Timber transport productivity by truck trailer
No.
Type of truck
Distance (km)
Productivity (m^3/hour)
Location
Nissan TZ 52
East Kalimantan
Kenworth C 500
East Kalimantan
Nissan TZA 52 ZHN
East Kalimantan
Nissan TZA 52 PPN
East Kalimantan
Generally, forest concessions need to raft their logs to mill sites. The logs are delivered to a dumping place in the water (log pond) and rafts are built. Finally, the rafts are towed to the mill sites by two tugboats of 110-120 HP, which can tow 400-600 m^3 of logs. The towing distance is around 100-800 km.
<section>5</section>
3. REDUCED IMPACT TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS
Conventional timber harvesting operations are as described in Chapter 2, which is still a very common practice in the natural tropical rain forest in Indonesia. The felling and skidding operations conducted are not based on a timber harvesting plan (climber cutting, skidtrail network layout, directional felling, winching etc.), and also are not based on tree location and topographic map; generally these activities are uncontrolled.
Reduced impact timber harvesting is based on forest prospecting prior to harvesting, and uses this data to design a layout of felling compartments and inventory units, and also to plan the timber harvesting operations (J. Hendrison, 1990). A tree location and topographic map used for the harvesting plan map serves as a guide for the felling and skidding crew in timber harvesting operations.
3.1 Pre-timber harvest planning
3.1.1 Preparation of a stock map and contour line map
Knowledge on field condition, harvestable trees and nucleus trees distribution, mother trees, protected trees and protection areas within a working area are the keys to selective harvest control in the TPTI system. Therefore, a Stock Map (Tree Location) and Contour Line Map with large scale (1:2,000) from 100 % cruising result of trees with a diameter of 20 cm or more is needed for planning a skidtrail network as well as for directional felling plans. The contour lines interval is 5 m. The preparation of the Tree Location Map and Contour Line Map should be done in the TPTI system two years before the timber harvesting operation. Figure 2 shows an example of Tree Location and Contour Line Map, scale 1:2,000. The reason for using a map with a scale of 1:2,000 is that with scale 1:2,000 the map for one compartment (_ 100 ha) is both easier to use and bring into the forest by the chainsaw and tractor operators.
Figure 2. An example of a tree location and contour lines map (scale l : 2,000)
3.1.2 Areas to be excluded from timber harvesting
In timber harvesting operations, the forest enterprises should exclude some restricted locations within their working areas where timber harvesting is prohibited, such as in the following areas:
· radius of 200 m from the edge of a water springs;
· at minimum, 100 m from the edge of a lake or coast measure from the highest tide toward the coast;
· at minimum, 100 m from the sides of a river and 50 m from the sides of a creek;
· near the edges of steep lands (> 40%) to at least twice of those lands; and
· conservation and research areas.
Forest enterprises are expected to adhere to restrictions mentioned above on areas within concessions where they are allowed to harvest trees. These restriction areas should be excluded from the cutting area; they should be delineated on the timber harvesting plan map and marked in the field as protection areas.
3.1.3 Climber cutting
The cutting of vines can reduce felling damages, since tree crowns are not bound one to another by vines. According to D.P. Dykstra and R. Heinrich (1996), in forests where climbers tend to bridge across tree crowns, climbers should be cut well in advance of the felling operation so that they will die and become brittle. This reduces the possibility of a felled tree pulling over neighbouring trees as it falls.
Therefore, it is recommended in the TPTI system, that all vines with a diameter > 2 cm be cut two years before timber harvesting. However, vines in protection areas and some species which are useful to protected animals are not to be cut. This operation could be undertaken at the same time as the inventory of the forest stand is initiated. Photo 8 shows some vines which exist beside the harvestable trees in the tropical natural forest in East Kalimantan, Indonesia.
3.1.4 Road and skidtrail plan
The actual planning of the forest roads, landings and skidtrails is made on the Tree Location and Contour Line Map. Efficient access to the trees to be harvested can be accomplished by considering factors such as skidding on steep slope, stream crossings, protection areas, and by minimising the length of skidtrails by aligning an efficient skidtrail network.
Skidtrails should be constructed as straight as possible, curves and turnings should be avoided and only inserted for reaching those logs to be skidded; steep areas, valleys/swamps, rivers and unstable areas should also be avoided. The skidtrail should end with a suitable angel to the road, and skidding direction should go up or along the side of the slope. Adverse grades should not exceed 25_.
Average skidding distance of timber extraction by crawler tractors, skidtrail length and optimal distance between the haul roads depend on many factors. In general, the average skidding distance may range between 250-350 m, with the spacing of the main skidtrail between 50-100 m.
Figure 3 shows an example of a haul road, landing and skidtrail layout.
The haul road and landings should be planned, staked on the ground and built one year before timber harvesting operations. The staking and marking of the skidtrail routes should be done after road building and constructed just before felling operations are started.
Figure 3. An example of haul road, landing and skidtrail layout
3.1.5 Felling pattern and felling direction planning
Tree felling direction is planned by considering the safety of the feller, the field situation (damaged residual stand, harvested trees and regeneration), tree position, log skidding and the transportation system. The best felling direction is towards or opposite the skidtrail and should be at an angle between 30_-45_ (herringbone pattern) in relation to the skidtrail, or such that a tree falls in a straight line position to the skidtrail with the felling direction opposite the skidding direction (see Photo 9). Field conditions, the position of tree to be cut towards the skidtrail and tree height determine the felling direction towards or away from the skidtrail. The felling direction is towards the skidtrail if the harvested tree's crown does not disturb the skidding activity and its branchless stem does not lie across the skidtrail.
Essentials that should be considered in planning the felling direction are as follows:
· If possible, the tree felling direction should be aimed towards an open site and preferably some trees should be felled in the same gaps. (The felling direction of a tree that is cut should be towards the crown of a tree that has been cut earlier.)
· On a steep area, the felling direction should not be downward of the slope, but upward or to the side of the slope (along the contour).
· It should be avoided that trees fall across rivers and creeks and disturb the protection areas.
· The felling direction should not result in broken stems (for instance, falling on stones, stumps or ditches) and should not damage nucleus trees, protected trees and regenerations.
3.2 Timber harvesting
3.2.1 Opening up forest stands
Skidtrail marking and opening is done before the felling operation. The skidtrail network is planned first on the topographic and tree location map and then in the field by using a compass, clinometer, paint or flagging tapes. The trees are marked with paint or flagging tapes are tied around trees along the proposed skidtrail route. When this is completed, the chainsaw operator cuts all trees with a diameter of 15 cm, or more, that are located at the prospective skidtrail that has been planned and marked with paint or the flag tape. The felling direction of the trees cut for the skidtrail opening should not damage nucleus trees, protected trees, or regenerations as well as disturb the skidtrail construction by the tractor operator. The felling begins from the end of the prospective skidtrail, with the felling direction away from the landing (see Photo 10). After the skidtrail route is cleared from undergrowth and trees, the chainsaw operator/feller can start to fell trees to
be harvested. The felling pattern is to start from trees on the down-side to the trees on the up-side.
After the felling operation is completed, aligning of skidtrail takes place by the crawler tractor following the projected and opened routes on the ground and on the maps. The skidtrail width should not be more than 4.5 m. The crawler tractor operator will then remove all fallen trees which may block the skidding operation and clear the skidtrail. Non-disturbing stems and branches are left on the skidtrail (see Photo 11). After the construction of the skidtrail, the skidding operation proceeds.
3.2.2 Felling
As mentioned above, the felling begins after the skidtrail has been opened (trees cut on the skidtrail surface). The timber harvesting plan map should be brought into the field and kept by the chainsaw operator. The feller uses the map and the opened skidtrail network in order to make the final decision on the felling direction.
The felling pattern always starts from trees on the down-side and then proceeds to the trees on the up-side. The felling should be started and carried out according to the indicated felling direction on the map or trees to be harvested. For example, it should start from the closest to the landing and then proceed to the next section. The preparation for felling should be focused on work safety, ergonomics and efficiency. The felling should be preceded by clearing the surrounding area of groundcover and lianas. If the trees have buttresses, they should be removed first or not (buttresses sometimes can help control directional felling); notch and backcut should be as low as possible (see Photos 12 and 13).
Once the tree has been cut, the crown of the tree is cut off and bucking is carried out in compliance with the bucking and grading rules and in order to maximise the volume and value of the harvested trees. Therefore, before cutting the stem, its entire length should be measured and cut according to the standard set by manufacturers. After bucking, the logs should be cleaned of branches and buttresses.
3.2.3 Winching and skidding
The skidtrail is opened by chainsaw operator and then constructed by crawler tractor operator according to the route planned and marked on the ground. For winching and skidding operations, the crawler tractor should be equipped with a winch with a cable length of at least 30 m and a diameter of the cable of 1^1/[8] inch (28.6 mm).
The skidding starts with the nearest log from the landing. The winching and skidding operations proceed as follows:
· The empty crawler tractor is driven from a landing on the skidtrail and is placed in an appropriate position to be able to winch in the log or logs.
· The helper pulls the winch cable out and sets the choker(