<title>Silk reeling and testing manual</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The silk reeling industry in general, covers a wide range of techniques. These include handling of fresh cocoons, cocoon drying and storage, cocoon boiling and reeling, raw silk re-reeling and finishing, management of water quantity and quality, utilization of by-products and maintenance of machinery. Both continuous improvement and effective dissemination of technology for silk reeling and testing are essential to meet the increasing global demand for quality raw silk and fine silk fabric, as ever more developing countries become interested in both cocoon and silk production. The author has tabulated fundamental data and explained the basic principles of silk reeling technology so that they can be easily understood by those do not have any previous experience or knowledge of silk reeling.
This manual can also be utilized as a reference guide for silk reeling managers and staff. Furthermore, the techniques described in this manual respond favourable to bivoltine cocoons in the temperate zones. Many tropical countries are trying to adopt bivoltine cocoon reeling, which produces more quantity and better quality silk than multivoltine cocoons.
This manual also provides information on what methods of silk reeling are to be used to produce good raw silk and silks fabric. It also contains the answer on how to adjust filature processes based upon the properties of raw material cocoons.
Morton Satin
Chief
Agro-industries and Post-harvest Management Service
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
The origins of sericulture and silk production are closely associated with the emergence of China as one of the great civilizations. It is believed that sericulture evolved gradually and by the middle of the third millennium BC was already being used by humanity.
Silk is an animal fibre, produced by caterpillars belonging to the genus Bombyx. A single silk filament is the product of a series of stages derived from the cultivation of mulberry trees for feed to the propagation of the domesticated silkworm, Bombyx mori. During the caterpillar phase, the worm wraps itself in a liquid protein secreted by two large glands in its head. This secreted protein hardens upon exposure to the air. The resulting filament is bonded by second secretion, sericin, which forms a solid sheath or cocoon. Under natural conditions, a moth eventually breaks through the cocoon. In sericulture, the larva is killed in the cocoon by steam or hot air in the chrysalis stage before its metamorphosis. Sustained heat processing softens the hardened sericin so that the filament can be unwound.
The silk filament is a continuous thread of great strength measuring from 500-1 500 metres in length. Single filaments are too thin for utilization. For production purposes, several filaments are combined with a slight twist into one strand. This process is known as "silk reeling or filature".
Silk is a premium priced agricultural commodity, although its sheer volume is less than 1 percent of the market for natural textile fibres (Table 1). The international demand for high quality silk has multiplied. Appropriate cocoon-drying techniques and reeling operations are vital to supply good quality silk. Although new technologies are applied among major silk producing countries in Asia, many newcomers to the industry including non-traditional producers have not been transitioned to the methods that ensure high quality silk for export.
World production of raw silk reached nearly one hundred thousand tonnes in 1993. In contrast to strong declines in Japan and the Republic of Korea to roughly 3 900 and 500 tonnes respectively. China for the first time surpassed the 66 000 tonnes and India raised its output to 14 000 tonnes. Outside Asia, Brazilian output exceeded 2 500 tonnes per year, with the then USSR output lingering around 3 000 tonnes yearly. When compared to these three countries, production figures in some traditional sericulture countries have declined.
Table 1 - World production of textile fibres (in >000 tonnes)
Category/year
Cotton 
Wool 
Cellulose fibres
Synthetics 
Silk 
Recently, China experienced a striking decline in output to 59 000 tonnes in 1996; however a slight recovery was anticipated in 1997. At this time, China's production will be sustained around 60 000 tonnes per year. Output in India also diminished from nearly 14 000 tonnes in 1994 to less than 13 000 tonnes by 1996 (Table 2). Still over 70 percent of global output are attributed to China, followed by India as the second largest producer.
Table 2. Production of raw silk in the world (Unit : M/T)
Year Country 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
China 
D.P.R. Corea 
Greece 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran 
Italy 
Japan 
Lebanon 
Rep. of Korea
Rumania 
Thailand 
Turkey 
ex-USSR 
Vietnam 
Others 
TOTAL 
Source: I.S.A. Bulletin (* Estimated)
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 2
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COCOON
2.1 Physical characteristics of cocoons
The silk glands of the Bombyx mori are structured like tubes consisting of a Posterior, Middle and Anterior section. The Posterior is long and thin. The Middle is short with a diameter measuring 3-4 mm. The Anterior is extremely thin, leading to the spinneret in the head of the larvae (See Appendix, Figure 1) from which the silk is excreted.
Fibroin is secreted in the Posterior and transferred by peristalsis to the Middle section, which acts as a reservoir. Here it is stored as a viscous aqueous solution until required for spinning. The majority of the sericin is created within the walls of the Middle section. In fact, these two proteins are reserved side by side in the Middle section without mixing one into the other. The fibroin core is covered with a layer of sericin and the secretions from the two proteins join at the junctions where the sericin is fused into one layer. The Filipis glands discharge a liquid protein. To form its cocoon, the silkworm draws out the thread of liquid protein and internally adds layer after layer to complete this protective covering.
Colour
Colour is a characteristic particular to the species. It is the presence of pigments in the sericin layers, which cause the colour. This colour is not permanent and washes away with the sericin during the degumming process (see Chapter 5). There are diverse hues of colour including but limited to white, yellow, yellowish green and golden yellow.
Shape
Cocoon shape, as colour, is peculiar to the given species. At the same time shape can be affected by the execution of the mounting process (see Chapter 3), especially during the cocoon spinning stage. Generally, the Japanese species is peanut-shaped, the Chinese elliptical, European a longer elliptical and the polyvoltine species spindle-like in appearance. Hybrid cocoons assume a shape midway between the parents for example, the case of a longer ellipsoid or shallowly enclosed peanut form (see Appendix, Figure 3). The shape of cocoons assists in identifying the variety of species plus evaluating reelability (see Reelability, page 6).
Wrinkle
The deflossed cocoon has many wrinkles on its surface. Wrinkles are coarser on the outer layer than within the interior layer. The outline of the wrinkle is not uniform, but various according to species and breeding conditions. Spinning employs high temperature and low humidity settings, which render fine wrinkles or cotton-like textures of, cocoon layers. These provisions discourage the agglutination of the baves resulting from accelerated drying. It is recognized that coarse wrinkled cocoons reel poorly.
Size
Cocoon size or volume is a critical characteristic when evaluating raw materials. The size of the cocoon differs according to silkworm variety, rearing season and harvesting conditions. The number of cocoons per litre, ranging between 60 and 100 in bivoltine species calculates size. Multivoltine species measure considerably higher.
Cocoon weight
The most significant commercial feature of cocoons is weight. Cocoons are sold in the marketplace based on weight as this index signals the approximate quantity of raw silk that can be reeled. The whole weight of a single cocoon is influenced by silkworm species, rearing season and harvest conditions. Pure breeds range from 2.2 to 1.5 g, while hybrid breeds weight from 2.5 to 1.8 g. In nature, the weight of a fresh cocoon does not remain constant but instead continues diminishing until the pupae transforms into a mother and emerges from the cocoon. This weight occurs gradually as moisture evaporates from the body of the pupae and as fat is consumed during the metamorphosis process (Table 3).
Table 3. Daily loss in weight of fresh cocoons
Days after mounting 
Days after pupation 
Index of fresh cocoon weight
Thickness/weight of cocoon shell
The thickness of the cocoon shell is not constant and changes according to its three sections. The central constricted part of the cocoon is the thickest segment, while the dimensions of the expanded portions of the head are 80 to 90 percent of the central constricted (Table 4).
The weight of the silk shell is the most consequential factor as this measure forecasts raw silk yield. As with other characteristics introduced in this chapter, shell weight differs in correspondence to varieties of silkworms. Further, weight is also influenced by the type of technology used for rearing and mounting. In practice, uni and bivoltine species produce heavier shell weights than multivoltine species.
Hardness or compactness
Cocoon hardness correlates to shell texture and is affected by cocoon spinning conditions. For instance low humidity during the mounting period (see Chapter 3) makes the cocoon layer soft, while high humidity makes it hard. The degree of hardness also influences air and water permeability of cocoons during boiling. A hard shell typically reduces reelability (during the cocoon reeling process), while a soft-shell may multiply raw silk defects. In short, moderate humidity is preferred for good quality cocoons.
Table 4 Variations of shell thickness in different parts
Varieties
Parts
A
B
C
micron
index
micron
index
micron
index
Head extreme end 
expanded 
Central constricted
Tail expanded 
extreme end 
Shell percentage
As the entire cocoon including the pupa is sold as part of the raw material, it is essential to quantify the ratio of the weight of the silk shell versus the weight of the cocoon. This is calculated in the formula:
This value gives a satisfactory indication of the amount of raw silk that can be reeled from a given quantity of fresh cocoons under transaction. The calculation assists in estimating the raw silk yield of the cocoon and in deriving an appropriate price for the cocoons. The percentage will change based on the breed of the silkworms, rearing and mounting conditions. Percentage rates are altered based on the age of the cocoons (see cocoon weight) as the pupa loses weight as metamorphosis continues. In newly evolved hybrids, recorded percentages are 19 to 25 percent, where male cocoons are higher than female cocoons.
Raw silk percentage
This index is the most important for the value of the cocoon as it has a direct impact on both the market price of cocoons and the production costs of raw silk. The normal range is 65 to 84 percent for the weight of the cocoon shell and 12 to 20 percent for the weight of the whole fresh cocoon.
Filament length
Equally important as the percentage of silk shell is measuring the length of the bave contained in the shell. The factor determines the workload, rate of production, evenness of the silk thread and the dynamometric properties of the output. The length of cocoon filament corresponds to the varieties of silkworms. Range of total length is from 600 to 1 500 m of which 80 percent is reelable while the remainder is removed as waste.
Reelability
Reelability is defined as the fitness of cocoons for economically feasible reeling. Industry practice measured the case with which the cocoon yields the bave in reeling. Poor reelability causes a variety of production problems such as halts in production due to filament breakage and high degrees of waste product. Reelability is greatly affected by careful action during cocoon spinning, drying, storage, pre-processing, reeling machine efficiency and operator skill.
Recent statistics show an average reelability of percent for good cocoon varieties. The measured range is from 40 to 80 percent with serious deviations depending on the type of cocoon. Note that stained cocoons generally have poor reelability.
Size of cocoon filament
The measure denier expresses the size of silk thread. A denier is the weight of 450 m length of silk thread divided into 0.05 g units. The diameter of the bave is not constant throughout its length, instead changes according to its position in the bave shell. At the coarsest section of cocoon filament from 200 to 300 meters, the denier increases. Once more these dimensions become finer and finer as the process approaches the inside layer (see Figure 1). The average diameter of cocoon filament is 15 to 20 microns for the univoltine and bivoltine species.
Defects
A series of minor defects may be found in cocoon filament such as loops, split-ends, fuzziness, nibs and hairiness (Figure 2). While these defects are observed among silkworm varieties, mounting conditions seem to contribute to their incidence. These filament defects directly affect raw silk quality. It is not recommended that silk varieties graded below 90 percent in the Neatness Chart be used.
Size curvature of cocoon bave S: sericin; F: fibroin; O: outer layer; M: middle layer; I: inner layer; D: size (denier) Size curvature of cocoon bave S: sericin; F: fibroin; O: outer layer; M: middle layer; I: inner layer; D: size (denier)
Figure 1 - Size curvature of cocoon bave
S: sericin; F: fibroin; O: outer layer; M: middle layer;
I: inner layer; D: size (denier)
Neatness defects (1) (1') Loop (2) Hairiness (3) Split-ends (4) Nibs
Figure 2 - Neatness defects
(1) (1') Loop (2) Hairiness (3) Split-ends (4) Nibs
Lousiness
Hair-like projections in the silk fibre are called Lousiness. Lousiness is more prevalent in baves produced by silkworms, which have been overfed in their fifth stage of rearing. Lousiness is found less in breeds of silkworms, which spin finer bave. Another factor promoting lousiness is mounting of over-mature larvae. This defect poses serious problems to silk fabric manufacturers, in particular those producers of smooth satin and necktie materials. When fabrics woven with these defects are dyed, it looks as if the fabric is covered with dust or is a paler shade than the rest. In fact, the protruding fibril is more transparent and has a lesser capacity to absorb dyes.
2.2 Composition of the cocoon
Composition of a whole cocoon
The composition of the whole cocoon is defined as the cocoon shell, pupa and cast off skin shown in Table 5. The pupa makes up the largest portion of its weight. Note that much of the cocoon content is water; therefore it is necessary to remove the water to improve the cocoon filament for reeling and to better preserve the cocoon over a long period.
Composition of cocoon shell
The silk filament forming the cocoon shell is composed of two brins (proteins) named fibroin and covered by silk gum or sericin. The amount of sericin ranges from 19 to 28 percent according to the type of cocoon.
Table 5. Composition of the cocoon
Weight
Fresh Cocoon
Dried Cocoon
Race A
Race B
Race A
Race B
Actual number (g)
Ratio (%)
Actual Number (g)
Ratio (%)
Actual Number (g)
Ratio (%)
Actual Number (g)
Ratio (%)
Cocoon 
Cocoon shell 
Pupa 
Cast-off skin
The composition of the cocoon shell is given below:
Fibroin 72-81 percent
Sericin 19-28 percent
Fat and wax 0.8-1.0 percent
Colouring matter and ash 1.0-1.4 percent
Usually the sericin content of the cocoon shell is at the maximum level at the outside layer 1 becoming progressively lower at the middle layers 2 and 3 and the absolute minimum at the inside layer 4 (Table 6).
Table 6. Sericin content to different layers of cocoon shell
Cocoon layers
Race A
Race B
Race C
Race D
Outside 1
Inside 4
2.3 Properties of silk
Structural features of silk
The silk of Bombyx mori is composed of the proteins fibroin and sericin, matter such as fats, wax, sand pigments plus minerals.
Fibroin in the Bombyx mori comprises a high content of the amino acids glycine and alanine, 42.8 g and 32.4 g respectively as shown in Table 7.
The key amino acids in sericin are serine (30.1 g), threonine (8.5 g), aspartic acid (16.8 g) and glutamic acid (10.1 g) (see Table 7).
Table 7. Amino acid composition of Fibroin and Sericin (Kirimura, 1972)
Amino acids
Fibroin
Sericin
Amino acids
Fibroin
Sericin
Glycine 
Glutamic acid
Alanine 
Serine 
Leucine 
Threonine 
Isoleucine 
Phenylalanine
Valine 
Tyrosine 
Arginine 
Proline 
Histidine 
Methionine 
Lysine 
Tryptophan 
Aspartic acid
Cystine 
Values are given as gram of amino acid per 100 g of protein.
Sericin is a complex protein composed of three distinct components (I, II and III) of which sericin III is the interior layer directly adjacent to the fibroin core. The sericin I outer lay is the most soluble of the three constituents, while sericin III is difficult to dissolve. Viewed as a cross section, the brins have the appearance of equilateral triangles with rounded corners that face each other at their respective bases (Figure 3).
Texture of the silk thread.
Figure 3. Texture of the silk thread
When the brin is crushed, it splinters into numerous minute fibrils revealing the actual structure of the brins. The thickness of each fibril is less than one micron and they are parallel to the axis of the fibre. A single fibril contains many microfibrils which, when examined with an electron microscope, have a diameter of approximately 100 Å per microfibril. Microfibrils contain micelles, which are separated into crystalline and amorphous segments.
Physical and chemical properties of silk
1. Specific gravity
The bave specific gravity on average of sericin and fibroin measures from 1.32 to 1.40. Generally, the specific gravity of sericin is slightly higher than that of fibroin (See Raw silk, Table 8).
Table 8. Specific gravity and tensil strength of various fibres
Fibres
Specific gravity
Tenacity (g/denier)
Elongation (%)
Raw silk 
Degummed silk
Wool16 
Cotton 
Flax 
Nylon 
2. Tenacity and elongation
Tenacity indicates the quantity of weight a given fibre can support before breaking. the typical tenacity of a bave is 3.6 to 4.8 g per denier (see Raw silk, Table 8). Degummed silk has greater tenacity than raw silk. Elongation defines the length to which a fibre may be stretched before breaking. Raw silk has an elongation of 18 to 23 percent of its original length. Excess moisture increases the elongation of silk, but decreases its tenacity.
3. Hygroscopic nature
Moisture content and humidity are of critical importance to commercial silk production. Figure 4 illustrates the pattern of moisture regain where a hysteresis exists between the adsorption and desorption curves. Desorption measures a greater regain at a given relative humidity. For instance, given 65 percent RH, the adsorption regain value is 10 percent and the associated desorption value is 11.1 percent. Currently, 11 percent is the accepted moisture regain coefficient for silk; the mercantile weight of silk is derived based on this factor.
4. Effect of light
Continuous exposure to light weakens silk faster than cotton or wool. Raw silk is more resistant to light than degummed silk. It is advised that silk drapery and upholstery fabrics be protected from direct exposure to the light.
Hysteresis phenomenon a : adsorption, d : desorption, R.H. : relative humidity, MC : moisture content
Figure 4. Hysteresis phenomenon
a : adsorption, d : desorption, R.H. : relative humidity, MC : moisture content
5. Electrical properties
Silk is a poor conductor of electricity and accumulates a static charge from friction. This trait can render it difficult to handle in the manufacturing process. This static charge can be dissipated by high humidity or by maintaining a R.H. of 65 percent at 25ºC. Based on its insulating properties, silk is used extensively for covering wire in electrical equipment.
6. Action of water
Silk is a highly absorbent fibre, which readily becomes impregnated with water. Water, however, does not permanently affect silk fibre. Silk strength decreases about 20 percent when wet and regains its original strength after drying. The fibre expands but does not dissolve when steeped in warm water. Note that the fibre will also absorb dissolved substances present in water. This is the reason that special attention is given to the quality of the water utilized for reeling, washing, dyeing or finishing.
7. Effect of heat
If white silk is heated in an oven at 110ºC for 15 minutes, it begins to turn yellow. At 170ºC, silk disintegrates and at its burning points releases an empyreumatic odour.
8. Degradation by acids, alkalis
Treatment of silk fibres with acid or alkaline substances causes hydrolysis of the peptide linkages. The degree of hydrolysis is based on the pH factor, which is at minimum between 4 and 8. Degradation of the fibre is exhibited by loss of tensile strength or change in the viscosity of the solution.
Hydrolysis by acid is more extensive than alkali, and it has been postulated that acid hydrolysis occurs at linkages widely distributed along the protein chain, whereas in the early stages of the alkaline treatment, hydrolysis happens at the end of the chain. Hydrochloric acid readily dissolves fibroin especially when heated - and this is used mainly in studies of hydrolysis. Hot concentrated sulphuric acid, while rapidly dissolving and hyrolyzing fibroin, also causes sulphation tyrosine.
Nitric acid readily decomposes fibroin, due to its powerful oxidizing properties and concurrently causes nitration of the benzene nuclei. Organic acids have few effects at room temperature when diluted, but in a concentrated form fibroin may be dissolved, along with a certain amount of decomposition.
9. Proteolytic enzymes
Proteolytic enzymes do not readily attack fibroin in fibrous form apparently because the protein chains in silk are densely packed without bulky side chains. Serious degradation may be caused by water or steam at 100ºC.
10. Oxidation
Reports regarding the oxidation of proteins are rather meagre since the reactions are very complex. Oxidizing agents may attack proteins in three possible points:
a) at the side chains,
b) at the N-terminal residues, and
c) at the peptide bonds of adjacent amino groups.
Hydrogen peroxide is absorbed by silk and is thought to form complexes with amino acid groups and peptide bonds. It has been demonstrated that hydrogen peroxide diminishes the tyrosine content and further that the peptide bonds are broken at the tryosine residues. Peracetic acid causes more rapid scission and produces more acid groups than peroxide.
11. Other agents
Chlorine attacks fibroin more vigorously than does sodium hypochlorite. The oxidation is mainly at the tyrosine residues.
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 3
COCOON QUALITY AND CLASSIFICATION
3.1 Cocoon quality
A series of natural circumstances will produce variations in cocoon quality. Some of the most noteworthy include:
* differences in cocoon quality in the same batch;
* differences in cocoons produced in the same location by different farmers who have reared the same species;
* seasonal influences. In Japan for example, cocoons produced in the spring and late autumn are higher in quality than those in early autumn and summer;
* environmental conditions affect cocoon reelability such as temperature and humidity;
* processing technique in reeling will impact reeling efficiency as well as raw silk quality;
* bivoltine cocoons are superior quality compared to multivoltine silkworm species traditional farmed in tropical zones.
Recent silkworm cultivation now develops cross-breeds of multivoltine with bivoltine silkworms as a strategy to improve overall cocoon quality.
3.2 Factors influencing cocoon quality
This section presents the measures to be taken during silkworm rearing and mounting to obtain a better quality of cocoons with higher silk content, longer filament, better reelability and lower percentage of defective cocoons.
Temperature and humidity during mounting
Maintain temperatures at or near 25ºC and relative humidity around 65 percent for silkworms to spin good quality cocoons with a high reelability.
Mounting device
Although different mount practices are employed among producer countries, rotary mounting frames provide good ventilation. The result is improved reelability of cocoons.
Harvesting and handling of fresh cocoons
Cocoons should be harvested only following complete pupation. In practice, the appropriate harvesting day would be the fifth day in tropical countries, and the seventh or eighth day in temperate countries, from the mounting date. If premature harvesting takes place, the silkworm will still be in its larval stage, weigh more, have fragile skin, and could likely be crushed, which would cause stains to the cocoon during handling and transportation.
Transport of fresh cocoons
After proper harvesting and removal of diseased or damaged cocoons, the fresh cocoons are taken to the market. For short distances, the farmer carries the cocoons in bamboo baskets or jut bags on his head or by bicycle. If the distance is longer, cocoons are transported in a van or a bus. Caution should be exercised when loading fresh cocoons on to the van to ensure that containers are loosely packed in tiers to avoid damage. Vibration and shock during long trips can spoil fresh cocoons. Cocoon quality is affected by steam produced while being transferred in a bag or basket. If there are defective cocoons (see section 3.3) fresh cocoon quality will be harmed.
Table 9 describes the impact of transportation on fresh cocoons. While it is advisable to avoid carrying cocoons over long distances, there are steps, which preserve silk reelability. First use of P.V.C. containers with 15 kgs capacity is recommended. Shock absorbers, such as sponge can prevent damage over long distances. To minimize the risk of heat deterioration, shipping should take place only during the night or early morning. Ideally, the fresh cocoons should arrive at the stifling unit within two to three days after harvest.
Table 9. Effect of transportation containers of fresh cocoons on reeling results (Song and Kim, 1974)
Transportation containers
Raw silk yield (%)
Cocoon reelability (%)
Reeling troubles per 10,000m (times)
Neatness (%)
Cleanness (%)
Bamboo basket with cotton bag 
P.V.C. container with sponge (shock absorber)
3.3. Classification of cocoons
When cocoons are sold at the market, price is assessed on the basis of cocoon quality. This is judged by grading shell percent, filament length, reelability and the percentage of defective cocoons. If the percentage of defective cocoons is high, the price will be affected. The next section outlines the characteristics of defective cocoons.
Defective Cocoons
1. Double cocoons
A double cocoon is spun by two worms, producing a filament, which does not unwind smoothly and tangles easily. As these cannot be reeled along with normal cocoons, double cocoons are used for manufacture of a coarse, non-uniform, stubby yarn called "doupion". Double cocoons may be caused by crowded mounting conditions, high temperatures, high humidity and mutation of silk species.
2. Inside stained cocoons (dead cocoons)
Dead cocoons are also known as melted cocoons. In this case, the pupa is dead and sticks to the inside shell of the cocoon causing a stain. Melted cocoons are called mutes because they do not make a sound when shaken. These cocoons are difficult to process and will result in silk, which is dull in colour.
3. Outside stained cocoons
These are recognized by a rusty colour spot on the cocoon shell caused by absorption of intestinal fluid/urine of the mature worm formed during mounting. Reelability is very poor in this case.
4. Printed cocoons
This defect may happen due to improper mounting frames; these are also called scaffold pressed cocoons.
5. Malformed cocoons
These are abnormally shaped cocoons, which may arise from species variation. This defect may be due to racial characteristics and breeding with mulberry leaves stained with agrochemicals.
6. Flimsy cocoons
Here, the shell is loosely spun in layers and has a low silk content. These cocoons are easily overcooked and produce waste.
7. Thin-end cocoons
One or both ends of the cocoon are very thin and risk bursting when processed. The cause of this defect may be attributed to species characteristics or improper temperature and humidity during rearing and mounting.
8. Pierced cocoons
This happens when a moth has emerged, been eaten by beetles or in the case of the emergence of a parasite. Pierced cocoons are unfit for reeling and can be used only for hand spinning or as raw material of machine spun silk yarn.
3.4 Cocoon testing and grading
In sericulturally advanced countries, cocoons are subjected to systematic testing and grading before sale. Prices are based on the quality of the cocoons. But in developing countries, there is no system for cocoon testing. Cocoons are sold on visual inspection and personal experience is relied upon in marketing of cocoons. No laws exist or compulsory testing and trading of cocoons. The result is that cocoons are simply auctioned or in certain instances, even sold at a price fixed by the Regional Departments of Sericulture. There is no direct correlation between price and quality of cocoons.
Major sericultural countries through the International Sericultural Commission (ISC) have studied an International Cocoon Classification System. However, diversion of silkworm species, techniques of breeding, silk reeling and other factors lead to the production of non-uniform cocoons. These parameters have challenged the effort to unify equipment and testing methods (see Table 10).
Cocoon testing and grading
Cocoon testing and grading may be accomplished with a compact automatic reeling machine as well as a multi-ends reeling machine, which is typical equipment in major sericultural countries. Testing methods used by major sericulture countries are displayed in Table 10.
The quantity of fresh cocoons, which are taken out of a lot for testing purposes depends on the actual weight of the lot on offer.
The cocoons on offer are divided into three batches.
Batch weighing up to 1 000 kgs
Batch weighing up to 2 000 kgs
Batch weighing up to 4 000 kgs
The sample size of fresh cocoons taken out of each batch for testing is as follows:
1^st batch - 2.0 kgs
2^nd batch - 4.5 kgs
3^rd batch - 6.0 kgs
In the case of dry cocoons, the quantities taken out for testing from each batch are as follows:
1^st batch up to 400 kgs of dry weight - 0.8 kgs taken out for testing.
2^nd batch up to 800 kgs of dry weight - 1.8 kgs taken out for testing.
3^rd batch up to 1 600 and over - 2.4 kgs taken out for testing.
1. Drying of the cocoon test sample.
The cocoons received must be dried as soon as possible and to an acceptable degree. To do this, the moisture content of the fresh pupa and the cocoon shell percentage must be measured. The percentage of drying is calculated according to the formula.
Table 10. Cocoon classification systems of major sericultural countries
CHINA
INDIA
JAPAN
KOREA
Visual and mechanical test
A. Visual inspection
- cocoon shell weight (g/20
p.c.s. of bivoltine or 40
p.c.s. of polyvoltine)
- 1 ~11 grade
: 9.0-7.0 g (Jiangsu)
9.4-6.4 g (Sichuen)
B. Mechanical test
(Multi-ends reeling)
- Length of non-broken
cocoon filament (major
item)
: 1~20 grades
(950-340 m)
- Percentage of good
cocoons (auxiliary item)
: 1~ 8 grades
- Size of cocoon filament
and percent of inside
stained cocoons
(correction items)
Visual test
A. Estimated Renditta constant
shell % of cocoon lot
constants : 165-133
weight of
100 shells
shell%=-------------------x 100
weight of
100 cocoons
B. Cocoon pricing cost of
cocoon per kg.
Kakame cost
Renditta
- Kakame cost
= silk price
+ income from by-products
- (cost of manufacture +
profits)
Mechanical test (Auto reeling)
A. Cocoon testing items
- Raw silk percentage of
cocoon (%)
- Percentage if eliminated
cocoon (%)
- Reelability percentage (%)
B. Classification of cocoons
- Grade : Reelability
percentage
5A : 100-85
4A : 84-80
3A : 79-75
2A : 74-70
A : 69-65
B : 64-60
C : 59-55
D : 54-50
E : 49-
Mechanical test (Auto and multi-ends reeling)
A. Cocoon testing items
- Raw silk percentage of
cocoon (%)
- Percentage of eliminated
cocoon (%)
- Lengt