<title>Forest Energy Forum N. 04. Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
The new Director of the Forest Products Division, Dr Wulf Killmann, took up his duties in January 1999. We are honoured that Dr Killmann has accepted our invitation to write the editorial for this issue.
The 14th Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO) was held in Rome from 1 to 5 March 1999. COFO has been convened every two years since 1971 to review FAO's forestry work programmes and their implementation, as well as to guide the FAO Council. More than 400 representatives from 130 countries discussed forestry issues of international relevance. Needless to say, Sustainable Forest Management and Forest Fires were both high on the agenda, as were FAO's Outlook Studies.
An important issue that was brought up, however, was that of fuelwood supply, with a number of countries making it a special point in their country presentations. The need to gather more information on fuelwood was even mentioned in COFO's report (under item 18) to the FAO Council. In addition, one of COFO's side meetings was dedicated to "Opportunities for the forest sector within the Kyoto Protocol".
In time for COFO, FAO's report State of the World's Forests 1999 (SOFO 1999) was published in the Organization's five official languages. SOFO gives an overview of recent changes in forest cover, trends in forest management, developments in forest policy and international initiatives. Within the context of developments in the supply and demand of forest products, the importance of fuelwood and charcoal as sources for household energy is pointed out [see under Special Features for more information on SOFO].
Tree
This issue of Forest Energy Forum focuses on carbon sequestration and substitution. In fact, the subject is becoming so important that we have decided to dedicate a special section to it [see Forests branch off ... into carbon sequestration and substitution]. We also supply you with news on stoves, biodiesel and our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS). Our Country Compass travels the world on the forest energy footpath, and we give you the latest literature which might be of interest.
As most of you know, Rome is full of fora (the Latin word forum means public space), all of them at least 2 000 years old, and in ruins. This, though, is your forum, young and still under construction.
It is your platform to exchange ideas, views, and experiences on forest energy. We are glad and proud to function as facilitators to maintain this forum for the participation of all our readers.
We thank you all for your keen interest and are looking forward to your response.
Wulf Killmann
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF WOOD ENERGY OR FUELWOOD, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel.: (+39 06) 57054175
Fax: (+39 06) 57055618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
State of the world's forests - contribution of woodfuels to the energy sector
Much of the wood harvested worldwide each year is used for energy production. Of the estimated 3 350 million m^3 of wood harvested in 1995, about 2 100 million m^3, or 63 percent, were used as woodfuels. While, in developed countries, only 33 percent of the wood produced was used for energy purposes, in developing countries woodfuels accounted for 81 percent (91 percent in Africa, 82 percent in Asia and 70 percent in Latin America) of the wood harvested. The figures illustrate the importance of woodfuels in total wood production and their relevance for the forestry sector.
Woodfuels remain significant sources of energy in developing countries, especially in the rural and domestic sectors. In recent years, however, they have been attracting attention as environmentally friendly modern energy carriers. Changes in energy policies have favoured the development of wood energy systems, and new biomass energy technologies are improving the economic feasibility of wood energy, particularly in countries which are heavily forested and have well-established wood processing industries. The environmental costs of fossil fuels are also making woodfuels more attractive.
Role of woodfuels in the forest and energy sectors
Woodfuels consist of fuelwood, charcoal and black liquor (a by-product of pulp and paper). The Table shows the consumption of different woodfuel types by region and provides a picture of forestry's contribution to the energy sector.
Woodfuels account for an estimated 7 percent of the world's total energy supply. In developing countries, however, where fuelwood is a major source of fuel for household use, the average share of woodfuels in total energy use is 15 percent. In 34 developing countries, fuelwood and charcoal supply more than 70 percent of national energy demand. Woodfuels constitute the major source of energy for most countries of sub-Saharan Africa, Central America and continental Southeast Asia. While fuelwood is the predominant form of wood energy used in rural areas of developing countries, charcoal remains a significant source of energy for many African, Asian and Latin American countries, mainly for urban households.
Woodfuels account for only 2 percent of total energy use in developed countries. This figure, however, conceals great differences in use at national and subnational levels. For example, in Europe, relatively small quantities of woodfuels are used in the United Kingdom, Belgium and Germany, while large amounts are consumed in the densely forested countries of Finland, Sweden and Austria. In Finland, wood energy supplies an estimated 17 percent of the national energy demand. Black liquor accounts for a high proportion of the total woodfuels used in most developed countries, where it is used by large pulp and paper industries to meet their needs for heat and power.
Consumption of woodfuels and share of woodfuels in total energy use in 1995
Regions
Woodfuels (106 m3 equivalent)
Fuelwood Charcoal Black liquor Woodfuels' share in total energy use (%)
Developing countries total 1 533 131 34 15
Africa 445 72 3 35
Asia: developing 859 25 12 12
Oceania: developing 6 0 0 52
Latin America1 and Caribbean 223 34 19 12
Developed countries total 187 6 228 2
Europe, Israel and Turkey 56 2 51 3
Former USSR2 32 0 8 1
Canada and United States 96 4 146 3
Australia, New Zealand and Japan 3 0 23 1
World total 1 720 137 262 7
[Source: FAO-WEIS. For more details on these figures refer to the Web site:
www-data.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/energy/feforum.htm]
[1 Including Mexico, and all Central American and South American countries.]
[2 Including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.]
Recent developments in wood energy
Woodfuel consumption in developing countries has increased steadily with the growth in population, although woodfuels' share in national energy balances of these countries has progressively diminished as a result of the increased use of fossil fuel such as oil, coal and gas.
Similarly, fossil fuels have continued to fulfil most of the increased demand for energy in the majority of developed countries.
Actions by many countries to deregulate, liberalize and privatize energy markets over the last two decades, however, have stimulated competition between energy suppliers and have presented new opportunities for other, non-fossil fuel, energy sources. Some countries have also raised taxes on fossil fuels, resulting in decreased use of these fuels and, in some cases, increased use of other energy sources. In addition, woodfuels are becoming considerably more cost-competitive as energy sources with the development and adoption of new technologies for their production, transport, handling and storage; more efficient combustion devices; and improved systems for planning, management and organization of wood energy systems. In Sweden, for example, the price of energy generated with fossil fuels doubled between 1980 and 1997, whereas that of wood energy remained stable. This was due to the combined effect of increased cost efficiency of wood energy generation and increased taxes on
fossil fuels which made them less attractive financially.
Several countries are changing their energy policies to encourage expanded use of wood energy. The recently adopted White Paper by the Commission of the European Communities gives special attention to bioenergy (including both woodfuels and agricultural energy crops) and constitutes a framework for the future development of renewable energy within the 16 European Union countries.
In 1994, the Finnish Government established objectives for the promotion of wood energy with the aim of increasing their use by 25 percent from the current level by the year 2005. Similar initiatives are being adopted in other countries. In Denmark, 50 percent of households are on district heating fuelled by biofuels. The Netherlands have launched a special investment programme for the promotion of power and heating plants using woody biomass as fuel.
The Canadian Forest Service began an initiative in 1995 to facilitate the introduction of bioenergy (mainly wood energy) for power generation in the remote "First Nations Communities" in northern Canada. The purpose was not only to provide more energy to these isolated areas but also to create employment and foster self-reliance of the indigenous communities.
Several successful bioenergy programmes have been established in developing countries. Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia have recently launched wood energy initiatives with the support of an economic cooperation programme between the Economic Commission and the ASEAN countries (the EC-ASEAN COGEN Programme). A private company in Chile, Chilgener, has been supplying industries with energy generated from woody wastes since 1992. In Nicaragua, two sugar mills have diversified their sugar production with electricity generated with bagasse (during the sugar-cane production season) and fuelwood (when bagasse is unavailable) derived from eucalyptus plantations (see Box on p. 4). Both mills sell this energy to the national power grid. A similar project is under way in Honduras.
BIOELECTRICITY IN NICARAGUA
Following the trend of most energy sectors of Latin America, Nicaragua has passed an energy law with new rules for the participation of the private sector in the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. San Antonio and Victoria de Julio are two sugar mills which have taken advantage of this new law and are supplying about 27 megawatts equivalent (MWe) of electricity to the national grid using bagasse as a main fuel (during the sugar-cane season) and fuelwood (off-season) derived from more than 6 000 ha of eucalyptus plantations.
San Antonio is the largest sugar mill in Nicaragua. It has a contract with the government to supply bioelectricity using bagasse and fuelwood. The first eucalyptus plantations were established in the area of the sugar-cane plantations. Additional plantations have since been established on rented lands. Some of the fuelwood is being produced by local farmers, who have long-term contracts with the mill, which guarantees a price for the wood. By 1996, over 2 600 ha of fuelwood plantations had been established.
Victoria de Julio, the second largest sugar mill in Nicaragua, started operating in 1985. It has a generation capacity of 12 MWe electricity using bagasse and fuelwood and has ambitious expansion plans. The concept of electricity as a second product was integrated into the original design of the plant. The sugar-cane plantations have a circular configuration as they are irrigated by a circular pivot system. Eucalyptus is planted on the land between the circular sugar-cane plantations and now totals about 4 000 ha.
An economic study concluded that electricity generation in Nicaraguan sugar mills using these biofuels is not only technically feasible but appears to be competitive at the current selling price of 5.7 ¢/kWh against 6.8 ¢/kWh for fuel oil. In addition, 73 percent of the income derived from the energy generated with eucalyptus remains in the Nicaraguan economy, compared with 14 to 30 percent in the case of electricity produced with fuel oil. In terms of employment generation, eucalyptus provides three times more jobs than does fuel oil.
Source: FAO. 1997. La generación de electricidad a partir de eucalipto y bagazo en ingenios azucareros de Nicaragua, by R. van den Broek. Final report. Rome.
Potential for wood energy development in the future
Woodfuels are expected to continue to play an important role for some time to come as a traditional source of energy in developing countries, particularly among low-income sectors of the populations.Fuelwood and charcoal will also continue to be burnt in limited quantities by households and small industries for specialized uses in developed countries. Recent policy changes and experiences with bioenergy programmes in several countries, however, indicate that woodfuels are becoming more attractive to countries as a modern, renewable energy source. They have the potential to become more competitive with fossil fuels under certain situations, both for economic reasons (e.g. as locally available and inexpensive sources of energy from fast-growing fuelwood plantations, thinnings from timber plantations, residues from forest industries, etc.) and for environmental reasons (e.g. related to efforts to mitigate global warming). The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) has recognized the potential role of woodfuels as part of the substitution strategy to reduce emissions of CO[2] from fossil fuels. The Kyoto Protocol of UNFCCC, if ratified, has the potential to play a catalytic role in the further development of wood energy.
STATUS OF INFORMATION ON WOODFUELS AND EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THE SITUATION
There are major weaknesses and gaps in information on woodfuels, which make planning for current woodfuel production and use and modelling future wood energy scenarios problematic. Lack of good-quality data on woodfuel production and flows makes it difficult to address crucial issues on woodfuel supply, trade, use and substitution. These problems stem from methodologies and weak national capabilities in woodfuel data collection, compilation and presentation. The use of different terms, definitions and units for data also make it extremely hard to exchange and compare information available from different agencies at the national and international levels. Various regional and international organizations (including FAO, the International Energy Agency, the Asian Institute of Technology, the Organización Latinoamericana de la Energía and the European Statistical Office) collect and disseminate data on fuelwood and charcoal production and use. In order to enable comparison of
national and international statistics on woodfuels, FAO, in conjunction with other relevant agencies, is now working on the development of unified wood energy terminology and conversion factors. This, combined with on-going efforts to strengthen national capabilities in collection and analysis of woodfuel data, should improve the quality and availability of information on woodfuels.
Increased consideration of woodfuels is likely to be given by both the forest and the energy sectors in the future in response to these recent developments. Improved planning will depend in part on a sound information base but, at present, the global information on woodfuels is extremely weak (see Box below). Continued efforts at improving information collection and analysis will be essential, as will be further assessment of the relative costs and benefits of woodfuels, fossil fuels and alternative sources of fuels as economic conditions and environmental commitments evolve. (Source: State of the World's Forests 1999 [SOFO].)
An electronic copy of SOFO 1999 is available on FAO's Web site (www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm). A printed copy of the (priced) publication may be ordered from: FAO, Sales and Marketing Group, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360;
e-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
For more information, please contact: Ms S. Braatz, Forest Sector Analyst/SOFO Coordinator, Forestry Planning and Statistics Branch, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Susan.Braatz@fao.org
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
FORESTS BRANCH OFF ...
into carbon sequestration and substitution
Bioenergy and the kyoto protocol
Following are some comments from one of our readers on bioenergy and the Kyoto Protocol.
The International Energy Agency Task 25 position paper on bioenergy, presented at the recent UNFCCC climate negotiations in Buenos Aires, Argentina, attempts to refocus attention towards bioenergy as a CO[2] mitigation option rather than sinks. Quotations are taken from that paper.
"Long-term and sustainable reductions of CO[2] emissions through land-based activities will to a large extent have to come from the use of wood for bioenergy and products." At the government level, understanding the complex issues clearly and completely is necessary in order to formulate productive strategies that support the UNFCCC objective to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that avoids dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the climate system.
The UNFCCC Kyoto Protocol does not discriminate between measures reducing fossil fuel consumption ("whose combustion is by far the main source of anthropogenic greenhouse gases") and carbon sinks, as strategies for CO[2] mitigation. It must be understood that atmospheric CO[2 ]from biotic sources (e.g. burning trees) is part of the closed biogeochemical cycle, and can be sequestered again (e.g. growing trees), so is quite distinct from fossil greenhouse CO[2].
Fossil-sourced CO[2 ]is additional to biogeochemically sourced CO[2], is not part of the closed cycle and therefore cannot be validly compensated for by carbon sequestration (e.g. trees). A fossil reservoir, a permanent carbon reservoir, becomes a permanent source of CO[2 ]if exploited. Recognizing this and accounting for fossil carbon separately from cycled biomass carbon will provide the incentive for immediate fossil energy substitution with bioenergy, a far more important strategy than carbon sinks.
Carbon sinks are actually counterproductive in this respect because the price margin between biomass and fossil fuels remains a deficit - fossil fuels are cheaper. The problem is that under the Kyoto Protocol the forest biomass, as a reservoir, is of equivalent value (per tonne of carbon) to fossil emissions. It is less expensive to plant forest sinks and reservoirs (and trade the carbon content for fossil emissions) than it is to use biomass for energy instead of fossil fuels (unless fossil energy pricing is artificially increased by the amount of this margin).
Furthermore, as the value of tradable carbon certificates resulting from forests covered by the Kyoto Protocol increases because of demand (resulting from excessive fossil emissions), this price margin deficit remains since, although fossil emissions become more expensive, forest reservoirs also become more valuable. Thus the status quo remains; it will always be cheaper to plant the tree as a carbon sink, trade the carbon content and use fossil energy rather than to use it for renewable energy.
About 20 percent of global CO[2] emissions coming from deforestation and forest fires are at present within the biogeochemical cycle being re-absorbed by a surplus growth increment. "The difference between the annual growth increment and actual harvest from the world's forests is believed to be substantial", but only because excessive past deforestation has allowed forest regeneration now. All part of a closed cycle. However, the energy component has not been and is not being captured. Trees and other combustible biomass can be utilized for energy to offset fossil fuel consumption and permanent CO[2] sources can be replaced by temporary cyclical sources.
The UNFCCC global policy priorities could be for involved nations to negotiate least-cost renewable energy measures that fully include fossil externalities, first, by endeavouring not to deplete further biotic carbon stocks; second, by utilizing for energy all available biomass, while maintaining stock equilibrium (and ecosystems) by growing and harvesting biomass, and utilizing ALL waste immediately, e.g. decomposable forestry residues, municipal solid waste, landfill gas and disposed wood products. The emphasis here is that it is better to capture the energy component of ALL biomass that would otherwise rot or burn as waste as contributing directly to the accountable national fossil CO[2] reduction inventory. Not a difficult proposition to implement, but effective in reducing fossil emissions, which is on the right track. And third, by negotiating and setting realistic fossil reduction commitments (amounting to the energy component of available biomass plus other available
equivalent least-cost renewable energy options).
Wood products are presented in the IEA paper as carbon sinks that can be used for energy at the end of their lifetime within a net accounting framework (under the Kyoto Protocol). Accounting for biomass (CO[2] flow and stock change) seems so pointless when the biogeochemical equation is cyclical and closed. It is fossil source accounting that is relevant. Permanent sources that the global community must address now for the future. Why not keep national fossil CO[2] (reduction) inventories for the rest of the world and leave biotic carbon inventories the business of that nation? If they choose to deplete their resource (harvest for wood), the wood is still a carbon "sink" until it is eventually burnt for energy (under the above policies).
Meanwhile, internal politics (under the commitments made) determine whether the forests get replanted, an economic decision based on energy and wood value, and a sustainable land-use policy as negotiated. Restoration of forest carbon reservoirs can take place at any later date without difficulty (by replanting trees or natural regeneration) and the deficit is only short term. At least permanent fossil emissions are addressed.
Article 3.3 of the Kyoto Protocol appears to give an unfair advantage to countries such as New Zealand which, before 1990, harvested a significant proportion of their natural forest estate and are now planting trees to offset fossil fuel CO[2], when really we are only sequestering carbon previously released on harvest of the natural forest. Part of the same cycle: the biogeochemical cycle. Forest sinks provide no long-term carbon benefits unless all corresponding forest-related sources are utilized for their energy component - including the huge quantities of waste wood (branches and tree heads) that are piled up and burnt, wood products that have reached the end of their useful life, cellulose, cardboard, paper components of municipal solid waste and methane ("representing a potential for about 40 percent of present energy use"). Pastures planted in trees now were once in trees until cleared and burnt and are therefore Kyoto Protocol forests resulting from reforestation,
not afforestation. A desert planted in trees using irrigation could be called afforestation and, therefore, a carbon sink ... .
Historical emissions are easy to ignore now, under the Kyoto Protocol, but are in fact part of the same closed cycle as our proposed sinks, and baseline years can be used to distort biological CO[2] source and sink accounting equity, resulting in least-cost policies with an unfair economic advantage.
Oil companies and governments taking advantage of this low-cost "mitigation" option (afforestation since 1990) will continue with existing fossil fuel exploitation, while being seen to be countering "net greenhouse gases".
The long-term effect of this will be the ridiculous economic situation of having to maintain maximum capacity carbon reservoirs worldwide in perpetuity because of the continued permanent fossil emissions, when politics only deal with the short and medium term. With this status quo remaining on fossil fuel exploitation, what will happen to renewable energy? It is obvious that we should plant forests for future wood products and bioenergy, not as CO[2] (mostly fossil emission) sinks! It is the fossil reservoirs that should be maintained in perpetuity! (Contributed by: Mr Dean Satchell, Forester, R.D. 1 Kamo, Northland, New Zealand; e-mail: dsatch@igrin.co.nz)
Carbon sequestration advisers
EcoSecurities Ltd is a specialist company in the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) mitigation market. It provides unique services in this new market by combining scientific, policy and financial structuring skills within one single organization. Its partners were involved in two of the world's first carbon offset projects, designed the world's first carbon offset verification service and have worked with a variety of organizations in the public and private sectors worldwide.
CARBON TRADING
At the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit in 1992, a framework was agreed for countries to reduce global greenhouse gas emission. This was in due course made legally binding by the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in December 1997. In this agreement, industrialized countries and countries with economies in transition (Annex I countries) agreed to binding commitments to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases by 2008-2012, with an average of 5.2 percent below 1990 levels.
The Kyoto Protocol provides three flexibility mechanisms to help countries meet these targets:
· An emissions trading system, allowing the international transfer of national allotments of emission permits: a country that exceeds its emission reduction target can sell the excess to one that does not.
· Joint implementation (JI): the creation of emissions reduction units derived from investments between parties in Annex I countries.
· The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM): this allows for the creation of Certified Emission Reductions through investment in developing countries, regulated by a newly formed authority.
The criteria for these mechanisms are not yet finalized but are likely to include many activities that result in avoided emissions from forestry, energy efficiency and fossil fuel substitution.
Source: Ecosecurities Press Release, March 1999.
EcoSecurities has offices in Oxford, United Kingdom, Los Angeles, United States and Perth, Australia, as well as representations in Brazil and the Netherlands.
EcoSecurities Ltd has acted as carbon sequestration advisers to Australian Plantation Timber Ltd (APT) for its 1999 forestry investment fund. In 1998, APT's fund raised $A 20 million, and it is expected that prospectus-based forestry funds in Australia will raise even higher amounts in 1999. This project is in harmony with Australia's objectives to reduce its GHG emissions and to increase forest cover in the country. This represents one of the first investment funds that have taken account of the carbon dioxide emission and sequestration potential of their activities.
EcoSecurities is also working with other organizations engaged in carbon sequestration and emission-reduction activities, with a view to maximizing the environmental benefits of their forestry or renewable energy operations.
The forests of the Asia-Pacific region are not the only carbon sinks but their value is enhanced owing to their role in global biodiversity conservation.
Source: RWEDP Field Document No. 53, Carbon dioxide offset investment in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector: opportunities and constraints.
EcoSecurities' Managing Director Pedro Moura Costa commented: "This represents a major step in the recognition that activities that either emit or sequester carbon dioxide may respectively have a value or a cost. In order to make a fully appraised investment decision, investors in projects and companies have a right to know what the future carbon obligations or benefits might be. We anticipate that this practice will become widely adopted. By taking early action to demonstrate the intent of projects to sequester carbon and to quantify it, we believe carbon credits generated from these funds will have greater value and eligibility in a future trading regime. This adds value to shareholders and makes products more competitive." (Source: EcoSecurities press release, March 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Paul Soffe, Consultant, EcoSecurities Ltd, Delawarr House, 45 Raleigh Park Road, Oxford OX2 9AZ, UK.
Fax: (+44) 1865 251438;
e-mail: paul@ecosecurities.com or news@ecosecurities.com;
www.ecosecurities.com
Climate change: ancient co[2] levels correlate with climate
According to the Associated Press, "Carbon dioxide levels in the Earth's atmosphere fluctuated after the Ice Age, helping to warm the climate and trigger the spread of deserts," a new study suggests. The findings "raise questions about whether the Earth is headed for rapid and drastic climate changes in the twenty-first century."
The study, published in the journal Nature, says that levels of carbon dioxide (CO[2]) rose and fell by small amounts between 11 000 and 1 000 years ago, in a pattern that correlated with droughts and the spread of deserts in Africa and Asia. But the changes over the last few thousand years were "tiny and slow compared with what humans are doing", said glaciologist Richard Alley of Pennsylvania State University, who did not participate in the study. Concerns about rising greenhouse gas emissions from power plants, factories and motor vehicles have spawned UN-brokered agreements to restrain such emissions.
The study, by researchers from the University of Bern in Switzerland and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, California, is based on analysis of ice cores drilled from glaciers in Antarctica (Joseph Verrengia, AP/Boston Globe, 11 March). (Source: UN Foundation News, 11 March 1999.)
Comercio de carbono
En el Encuentro sobre el Comercio de Carbono y Desarrollo Forestal Sostenible, llevado a cabo en Buenos Aires durante el mes de septiembre se avaló el papel de los bosques en la mitigación del efecto invernadero y las oportunidades que la Convención sobre Cambios Climáticos ofrece para el desarrollo forestal sustentable.
La convención identifica como relevante la gestación sustentable de los bosques en su papel de sumideros y depósitos de gases como efecto invernadero, pues el 20 por ciento de las emisiones globales de gases proviene del sector forestal. Las posibilidades de incrementar la captación de carbono mediante reforestación, regeneración y crecimiento de los bosques y de mantener un nivel de carbono fijo en áreas protegidas, son opciones reales para contribuir con la reducción de los cambios climáticos.
A través de nuevos mecanismos financieros, en proceso de desarrollo, la fijación de carbono se está convirtiendo en una fuente de recursos para el sector forestal en algunos países del mundo. Cerca de 350 millones de dólares EE.UU. están destinados a proyectos de secuestro de carbono en el mercado mundial. (Fuente: Sociedade Brasileira de Silvicultura, octubre de 1998.)
Emissions: new world bank fund to promote joint action
This year the World Bank will launch a pioneering effort to promote international public-private cooperation in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
The Prototype Carbon Fund, which is to be launched in September or October, will finance projects to curb emissions in developing countries with the help of governments and private companies in developed countries, according to Ken Newcombe, the project's manager. Newcombe announced the fund at a press conference in Tokyo. Norway, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands have decided to participate in the project together with 13 corporations and business organizations.
The project is one of the first concrete efforts to implement a controversial provision of the UN treaty on global warming. Under the Kyoto Protocol, developed countries have agreed to cut their emissions by a collective 5.2 percent below 1990 levels between 2