FAO INVESTMENT CENTRE Environmental Report Series 2.
INCENTIVES SYSTEMS FOR NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT: The Role of Indirect Incentives.
REPORT NO. 99/023 IFAD-RAF.
The Environmental Report Series is a new series of publications produced by the FAO Investment Centre. The primary objective of the Series is to provide illustrative examples of recent environmental "best practices" in support of the design of agricultural and related investment projects. The intended users of the Series are Centre staff, their national counterparts and other interested professionals involved in investment project design. In most cases, the material presented in the Series is based on recent work of Centre staff supported through co-operative agreements between FAO and its partner institutions. The primary criteria used for the selection of material published in the Series are quality, degree to which the underlying work represents accepted "good practices" in the field, relevance to meeting Centre needs, and originality.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO or IFAD concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city of area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
(Note: this version has been slightly amended from the printed document for web publication) © FAO 1999 FAO INVESTMENT CENTRE 1999.
In response to a number of requests from the Governments of the Sahelian countries, IFAD has agreed to assist in the preparation of National Action Programmes under the framework of the International Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD). In initiating this work, incentive systems for Natural Resource Management (NRM) have been identified as a possible entry point, since this issue has not yet been addressed in a systematic and conclusive manner by the several CCD consultations at international, regional and national levels. In this context, current options for NRM incentives include matching grants, food- or cash-for-work, provisions for tools, equipment, and social infrastructure, support to female-headed households to cushion the impact of male migration, and specific activities in favour of youth to encourage their participation in resource conservation activities instead of resorting to permanent migration. Beyond such short- and medium-term incentives, there is need for: (i) longer-term incentives relating to security of access to and control of resources; (ii) sectoral prices and subsidies (of both inputs and outputs); (iii) information on soil fertility management technologies; and (iv) decentralization of decision making and financing (through de-concentration, delegation, devolution and privatization). Finally, while the importance of the macro-economic environment is recognized, in many cases this is far from being a sufficient condition to bring about the desired changes in resource management practices at a local level. Experience has also shown that different incentive systems are often used by different donors, even for target groups living in similar agro-ecologic or socio-geographic conditions. This lack of consistency in approach can create confusion and inevitably raises the issue of sustainability. The Convention's emphasis on beneficiary participation therefore offers an opportunity to reflect on optimal external incentive systems (i.e. those which are cost-effective, replicable and sustainable), which could also influence the resource users' choice in terms of sound natural resource management practices. This reflection should also provide an opportunity for governments to formulate appropriate policies in collaboration with development partners. In 1996/97, IFAD initiated an action-research programme, in consultation with a number of agencies, aimed at assisting the concerned governments in the following areas: (i) the establishment of a consultative framework, at country level, for the systematic review and capitalisation of relevant experiences with NRM incentives systems; and (ii) the preparation of policy guidelines, based on best practices, to facilitate a progressive harmonisation of the terms and conditions of interventions by development partners. The action-research programme started with a desk review of practical experiences with direct incentives, undertaken by the Free University of Amsterdam on behalf of IFAD. In addition to the specific findings related to direct incentives, the study also emphasized the importance of indirect incentives. Consequently, IFAD requested the FAO Investment Centre (FAO/IC) to undertake a study on indirect incentives in NRM, and this report presents the findings of the study. It is proposed that the next steps would involve the participatory operationalization of the conceptual framework on NRM incentives, including validation, at country level, of the findings of the two studies. In each participating country, this should lead to a progressive harmonisation of approaches among development partners, based on a common understanding between all stakeholders concerning the incentive system practices which have already proven unsustainable - and, therefore, should not be replicated - as well as the various sustainable options, with a final choice being left to the communities. These options would vary according to agro-ecological zones and socio-economic conditions. The challenge would be to arrive at an indicative "mapping" of incentives packages by agro-ecological zone, which could be the object of fine-tuning in response to local socio-economic conditions.
Acknowledgements.
This study was prepared with the inputs and assistance of numerous people. In particular, the comments and suggestions provided by Vanda Altarelli-Herzog and Jeff Tschirley of FAO are gratefully acknowledged. Initial discussions concerning the scope of the work involved staff from both FAO and IFAD, and we would like to especially thank Rodney Gallacher from the former and Cheikh Sourang and Nessim Ahmad from the latter. These discussions also included Ms. Mineke Laman and Fred Zaal from the Centre for Development Cooperation Services at the Free University of Amsterdam, whose initial study of direct incentives and natural resource management paved the way for the complementary research contained in this study. Additional comments on earlier drafts were provided by Lorenz Petersen of the FAO Investment Centre and are appreciated. The principle author would also like to thank Gayatri Acharya and Tom van Rensburg of the Environment Department at the University of York, who are responsible for most of the chapter on enabling incentives. The Environment Department also kindly provided the facilities for the preparation of this report.
Incentives Systems for Natural Resources Management: The Role of Indirect Incentives.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 2: Household Decision Models and Implications for NRM APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 3: Evidence of Agricultural Output Price Impacts on NRM APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 4: An Overview of Structural Adjustment in Africa APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 5: Land Tenure and NRM.
1-1 1-2 1-3 1-4 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 4-1 4-2 4-3 4-4 5-1 A5-1 Factors Influencing Soil Fertility The Drought Cycle Natural Resource Degradation, Thresholds and the Safe Minimum Standard A Conceptual Framework for the Study of Indirect Incentives in Natural Resources Management Policy and Market Failures in Relation to Increasing Resource Scarcity and Environmental Degradation Links between Population, Environment and Poverty Poverty-Environment: The Process of Cumulative Causation Possible Environmental Impact of Raising Agricultural Prices How Structural Adjustment Policies Interact Predicted Effects of Structural Adjustment Policies on Agriculture International Prices Relevant to the Sudano-Sahelian Zone, West Africa International Prices Relevant to the Forest (Humid) Zone, West Africa Linkages Between Tenure Security and Investment Demand Tenure Change in Agro-Ecological Zones.
Different Views of Soil and Water Conservation Indicators of Population Growth and Land Availability, West Africa Share of Total Income Reaped from Village Commons by Poor and Non-Poor Families in 7 States of India, 1984 2-3 Review of Financial and Economic Rates of Returns for Conservation Technologies, West Africa and Central America-Caribbean A2-1 A Comparative Summary of Agricultural Household Theories 3-1 Ratio of Official Producers' Prices to International Reference Prices, Western Africa 3-2 Vegetal Cover Factors for Erosion in West Africa 3-3 Estimates of Fertilizer Subsidization and Consumption Rates, West Africa 3-4 Estimates Average Rate and Value of Pesticide Subsidies 3-5 Cost Recovery in Irrigation in Selected Asian Countries 3-6 Indicative Labour Requirements for Soil Conservation Technologies A3-1 Short and Long Run Price Elasticities of Supply for Individual Crops in Africa 4-1 Effects of Policies on Macroeconomic Variables and Land Degradation in Ghana 4-2 African Countries with High Export Concentration in Predominantly Agricultural Export Commodities in the Early 1980s 4-3 Tariff and Non-Tariff Protection from the EC, Japan and the USA 4-4 Expected Changes in the Real Exchange Rate in Response to Various Influences 4-5 Structural Adjustment-Environmental Linkages in Three West African Countries 4-6 Effects on net Economic Welfare and Food Production in Sub-Saharan Africa of Agricultural Trade Liberalization, 1990 4-7 Effects of Trade Liberalization by the OECD (and Developing Countries) as Indicated by the Percentage Change in International Commodity Prices 5-1 Long Term Land Improvements and Land Rights in Three African Countries 5-2 The Effect of Agricultural and Pastoral Tenure Type and Perceived Tenure Security on Investment Decisions 5-3 Conditions and Attributes of Successful Collective Action and Well-functioning Common Property Resource (CPR) Regimes 5-4 Rival Paradigms for Extension Analysis 1-1 2-1 2-2.
Acronyms and Abbreviations.
ADP AHM BCA CAP CBT CCD CFA CGE CGIAR CILSS CPR CSZ DAP DC EC ERR FAO/IC FSG FSP FUA GATT GDP GEF HYV ICRAF IFAD IIED ILCA ILEIA IMF IPM LDC NCS NEAP NGO NRM NSDS Ntb O&M ODA OECD PAF PRA PV RRA SAP SMS UN UNCED UNEP WTO WUA WWF World Bank Agricultural Development Project (Nigeria) Agricultural Household Model Biological Control Agent Common Agricultural Policy (EC) Construction Boom Theory Convention to Combat Desertification Communauté financière africaine franc Computable General Equilibrium (Model) Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel Common Property Resource Close-Settled Zone (Northern Nigeria) Diammonium Phosphate Developed Country European Community Economic Rate of Return FAO Investment Centre Food Studies Group, Oxford Farming Support Programme Free University of Amsterdam General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Gross Domestic Product Global Environment Facility High Yielding Variety International Center for Research in Agroforestery International Fund for Agricultural Development International Institute for Environment and Development International Livestock Centre for Africa Information Centre for Low-External-Input and Sustainable Agriculture International Monetary Fund Integrated Pest Management Lesser Developed Country National Conservation Strategy National Environmental Action Plan Non-governmental Organization Natural Resource Management National Sustainable Development Strategy Non-Tariff Barrier Operating and Maintenance Overseas Development Administration Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development Programme d'Action Forestier ­ Forestry Action Programme (FAP) Participatory Rural Appraisal Present Value Rapid Rural Appraisal Structural Adjustment Programme Safe Minimum Standard United Nations United Nations Conference on Environment and Development United Nations Environment Programme World Trade Organization Water Users Association World Wide Fund for Nature.
Incentives Systems for Natural Resources Management - The Role of Indirect Incentives.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY i) Incentives structures are recognized as being important determinants of rural household behaviour. Concern with how farmers and pastoralists respond to the incentives they face, and the subsequent repercussions for the conservation of natural resources, is a key area of research interest. Moreover, the design of policies to encourage the sustainable use of these natural resources can benefit from an understanding of these linked decision-making and natural processes. Where natural resources are particularly fragile, as is the case in the Sahel and other dryland areas prone to desertification, the need to ensure that government policies and management regimes have the desired effect becomes even more critical. This desk study examines so-called indirect incentives, which comprise those influences on producers' decisions that are not concerned with directly bringing about changes in the management of natural resources (NRM) through financial or similar inducements (direct incentives). ii) As a general review of a very diverse topic, the study does not attempt to present a unified or consistent viewpoint throughout, in recognition of the often contradictory views held by researchers and the relatively immature state of knowledge on many aspects. For this reason, perhaps the main conclusion of the study is that very definitive generalizations concerning the linkage between specific indirect incentives effects and NRM are not appropriate at this time. In the majority of cases, the indirect incentives effects of specific policies are difficult to nail down and may vary from highly positive to equally strongly negative under differing resource endowments, cultural contexts and household strategies. Notwithstanding the above, it should not be inferred that there is nothing to be learned from studying indirect incentives and their impact on NRM. Indeed, it is clear that distortions and inappropriate policies which lead to an undervaluation of the natural resource base create poor incentives for its maintenance and sustainable use. iii) Much potential exists for the confusion of terminology, especially regarding the concepts of direct and indirect incentives. In looking at indirect incentives, we distinguish variable incentives, which may alter a producer's NRM decisions, from the incentives associated with the enabling environment within which these decisions are made. In the first case, we refer to actions on the part of governments that bring about production changes at the farm level. An example of such actions might be policy-induced modifications in producer prices. Also important are nonagricultural sector developments over which agricultural planners may have little or no control, or which have unintended impacts on small producers. Ultimately, most variable incentives operate by altering the net returns that producers can earn from cropping, livestock management or soil and water conservation activities. iv) Enabling incentives instead stem from policies which bear on the enabling environment, and therefore work in a more roundabout way on producer behaviour. Of principle interest is the influence of land tenure on NRM decision-making, but incentives issues relating to collective action in the management of common property resources and government intervention in NRM are key aspects as well. Enabling incentives also include information about soil and water conservation technologies and more sustainable cropping practices provided to producers via government research and extension programmes. Complementing information transfer is the availability of credit, which can be required if producers are to invest in certain types of improved land management, particularly those involving structural measures.
v) NRM problems result from a multiplicity of underlying factors and interacting mechanisms and an understanding of these is imperative in the study of issues associated with indirect incentives. Physical resource attributes and socio-economic factors create the conditions for land degradation to occur but may not compel it. In many cases, farmers are aware of the potential for their lands to degrade but may be constrained or discouraged from making the necessary improvements. Market and policy failures may be primarily at fault: since farmers do not reap all the benefits of improved land management, the socially optimal level of investment in land improvements will not occur. Government policies may aggravate the situation by creating the wrong incentives for conservation instead of correcting for market failure. Current thinking on the causes of resource degradation emphasizes the role of market and policy failures, inappropriate institutions and government policies, as well as the interaction of compounding or `disabling' factors such as poverty, population growth and income or asset distribution. vi) In light of the above description of the problem, Figure 1-4 (see main text) presents the study's conceptual framework, which is centred on the process of household decision-making concerning the use of its natural resource base. Given its endowment of natural, human and technological resources, the household makes decisions under the constraints or incentives imposed by the enabling environment. In this regard, tenure and other factors both create and limit the opportunities available to the household. Variable incentives determine the net returns, risks and other pecuniary elements entering into the decision-making process and, in this sense, the structure of variable incentives imposes further constraints (and opportunities) on household decision-making. There are the additional cross-cutting considerations of poverty and population growth that influence household decision-making but are distinct from indirect incentives. vii) At the core of the conceptual framework are farmers' perceptions. Changing incentives or net returns signal to the farmer that the use of household resources for a particular purpose may no longer be desirable and that resource reallocations may be necessary. Many options are available if farmers wish to respond to perceived changes in their production environment. Whether these activities will have a positive or negative effect on NRM depends on such factors as how they are carried out, what crops/animals are involved and whether they are maintained over time, amongst others. Feedback mechanisms close the loop and lead either to self-reinforcing improvements in NRM or spiralling degradation, which can eventually culminate in the collapse of the farming or grazing system. viii) Commencing with a consideration of variable incentives, we distinguish incentives stemming from policies at the sectoral level from those associated with macroeconomic policies. As a result of the recognized role of net returns in stimulating either good or bad farming practices, a key area of research has been the influence of sectoral pricing on NRM, whether of outputs or inputs. It is necessary to distinguish between aggregate production responses to higher prices, which can be manifested in higher yields or an expanded cropping area, and crop switching, which occurs when relative crop prices change and substitution of one crop for another takes place. Conclusions regarding the effects of these mechanisms for NRM are difficult, particularly with respect to output pricing, since a wide range of varying crop characteristics (e.g. erosive versus non-erosive) and production responses (e.g. extensification versus intensification) must be considered and these are liable to be highly location-specific. ix) As an example of the type of analysis envisioned we can consider tobacco, for which the output response to a change in the producer price is quite strong. As tobacco is typically a highly erosive crop and additionally requires large inputs of fuelwood for curing, there is an indication vi.
of a negative degradation effect in tobacco-growing areas when the tobacco price rises, on the assumption that tobacco will displace less erosive land uses (i.e. crop switching). Thus, output price increases in this case constitute a significantly negative indirect incentive for NRM. With respect to aggregate production responses, where land of at least passable quality is available and a sufficiently long timeframe is considered, extensifying may be a more common response to higher prices. If marginal, fragile lands are involved, degradation can be the result. However, higher prices may also stimulate better management of non-frontier natural resources as they now become more valuable, but ancillary effects may be mixed. Certainly, reductions in the volatility of prices, or price risk, would seem to induce better resource management, as this permits producers to take a longer-term perspective in managing their resources. x) At first glance, subsidies on agricultural inputs provide a more obvious relationship with NRM. Where the inputs in question are unquestionably harmful to the environment (e.g. pesticides), inducing greater use would seem to be negative for NRM. However, even here caution is advised. In most cases, there are important substitution effects at work when input prices are adjusted and the implications of these for NRM must be considered as well. For example, draft animals may substitute for tractors, manure or mulches for inorganic fertilizer and integrated pest management (IPM) for pesticides. The extent to which substitution may actually occur will depend on how perfect these practices substitute for each other, their relative prices/costs and their availability: manure and mulches are often limited in supply and thus cannot fully substitute for inorganic fertilizers. Furthermore, modern agrochemicals have at least some role to play in the process of agricultural transformation in Africa, and there is little evidence of over-use of these inputs and the associated damages at present, except in areas of intensive land use. xi) Some specific concerns regarding subsidies, input usage and variable incentives include the following: · Inorganic fertilizers have both positive and negative consequences for NRM, as they contribute to beneficial intensification but can displace more sustainable options or mask underlying soil depletion, so that subsidies may be good or bad; Pesticides can cause well-known damages when applied excessively or incorrectly and subsidies can contribute by encouraging the over-use of calendar or pre-emptive spraying or, in the area of IPM, by artificially lowering the damage thresholds at which spraying is done; Irrigation water subsidies, particularly when combined with inappropriate pricing mechanisms (e.g. unit area pricing) encourage overwatering and degradation, leading to declining profitability and further diminishing prospects for cost recovery and investment in system upkeep; and Mechanization (tractor) subsidies can distort production decisions long after they are dropped because of the lifespan of such capital equipment, while substitution effects vis-à-vis draft power are complex because of the mixed benefits and costs of this latter technology.
xii) In addition to sectoral policy influences on NRM, there is increasing evidence that policies at the macroeconomic level can have a substantive impact on NRM. A myriad of distortions created by inappropriate exchange rates, taxes and interest rates, combined with expansive fiscal and monetary policies, can alter the allocation of resources in ways that affect NRM at the household level. For example, indirect effects stemming from macro level policies vii.
have been shown to dramatically reduce the effective prices paid to producers in Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana. Once the full economy-wide effects of such policies are taken into account, the impacts may be much greater than at the sectoral level alone. Distortions in natural resource institutions or in pricing at the sectoral level, however, may exacerbate the undesirable effects of macroeconomic policies. Thus, without imperfections in tenure security or the underpricing of biomass resources, to cite two possible distortions, the environmental consequences of macroeconomic reforms may be significantly less or even negligible. xiii) Various macroeconomic policy links with incentives for improved NRM can be highlighted for Africa: · Expansive fiscal and monetary policies have characterized many of these countries with consequences for inflation, interest rates and exchange rates. The resulting macroeconomic imbalances reduce economic stability and discourage farm level investment in improved land management. High debt service ratios encourage expanded export production to generate the needed foreign exchange earnings, and this can harm NRM if it creates incentives to expand these activities onto marginal, fragile lands or involves erosive annual crops. High inflation can stimulate investors to invest in land, as a hedge against the declining value of assets in other forms, with generally negative consequences for NRM, especially if there are legal requirements for land clearance as a condition for continued ownership. Overvalued exchange rates provide incentives similar to artificially low producer prices or input subsidies but the effect is concentrated on tradable goods. Thus, high input commercial agriculture using imported tractors and agrochemicals is favoured over low impact pastoral and subsistence cropping systems. Protectionism in some West African countries creates incentives for the economically inefficient and potentially damaging cultivation of irrigated rice and wheat.
xiv) Many of the recommended reforms at the macroeconomic level have been bundled together under structural adjustment programmes (SAPs). Given their multi-faceted nature, SAPs are likely to have widespread but uneven NRM effects through their intended impacts on producer prices and other incentives. Levels of compliance help to condition the economic and environmental response: members of the CFA franc zone, for example, have relatively poor records in this regard. Similarly, international commodity price developments have tended to moderate some of the intended changes in producer incentives. Case study research in West Africa supports the contention that SAPs have had both positive and negative consequences for NRM. However, some researchers argue that a SAP's more important influence on NRM results from a roundabout process involving initial effects on social structures, income distribution and other socio-economic conditions. These effects then lead to impacts on NRM via the sorts of cross-cutting, compounding effects of poverty and commercialization discussed previously. xv) On an even more aggregate scale, biases in the global trade system against commercial agriculture in developing countries have implications for NRM. Although African countries are generally much less excluded from Western markets than other developing countries, they still suffer from depressed prices for their commodity exports, in comparison to a distortion-free trade viii.
regime. This situation has incentives effects on export cropping, product mix and other aspects of domestic production, some of which are negative while others positive for NRM. Trade liberalization, while generally criticized in many quarters, has commensurately equivocal results for NRM, as evidenced in empirical studies. However, most analyses concede that while liberalization's global benefits are probably positive overall for the environment, the developing countries may incur some negative costs. Africa's experience is liable to be muted because of existing preferential trade arrangements and other factors. xvi) Enabling incentives mediate the household's potential response to the variable incentives discussed above, and thus help determine cultural practices and land management. Of particular interest are the enabling incentives associated with alternative institutional responses to nonexistent property rights (open access) and deteriorating or displaced traditional institutions. Such interventions may come in three guises: · · Privatization of land as a form of increased tenure security, which can have consequences for the incentives to invest in land improvements. State intervention through nationalization, sedentarization or collectivization policies, which can be disruptive of local level NRM institutions, or decentralization, by which governments may beneficially shift NRM responsibilities from the formal level to a more informal one. Collective action can aid the conservation and management of common property resources, which may include shared farm or pastoral management systems and systems for water resource allocation (irrigation), pest control and the harvesting of various products from common and private lands.
xvii) By providing more security to the farmer and by providing collateral to the lender, tenure security is argued to bring about increased investment, more demand for inputs and subsequently increased output levels and higher land value. From an NRM perspective, this line of reasoning is particularly applicable to investment in structures for soil and water conservation, since these are more likely to involve out-of-pocket costs. However, in general such linkages between land tenure and investment in land improvements are not as strong as previously supposed. Neither agricultural nor pastoral sector studies provide conclusive evidence that privatization has increased investments in land productivity or motivated sustainable practices and, in some instances, it has had the opposite effect on NRM. Privatization may be desired by benefiting producers because it guarantees land rights, but it does not necessarily bring about changes in their natural resource use strategy. xviii) Land titling can have more pervasive effects, some of which have negative consequences for NRM. For example, analyses of tenure systems in some African countries show that privatizing land tenure can promote land grabbing, concentration of ownership, de facto expropriation of land or user rights held by women, landlessness and increasing marginalization. Privatization may also extinguish secondary land rights, affecting women and seasonal herders who may depend on these forms of traditional tenure for their livelihoods. In the latter case, conferring land tenure rights on sedentary agriculturalists may disrupt a system of pastoral seminomadism, based on rights of passage and dry season grazing, which may create disincentives for the sustainable management of these lands as residual pastoral areas. In contrast, research indicates that traditional institutions governing access to land resources are flexible in responding to internal and external pressures. Thus, radical changes in traditional systems of ix.
tenure may not be necessary to enable them to operate adequately and to avoid the insecurity of access rights which can undermine NRM. xix) Contrasting with privatization, the assumption of state ownership of resources represents a form of centralization of control, which governments are not always able to support properly, given the limited resources available for the management of vast lands and for the enforcement of formal legal controls. National governments also may have distant and antagonistic relations with local communities, making efficient management of natural resources difficult and instilling disincentives at the local level. Furthermore, governments may manage state lands for purposes other than wise use or local welfare, instead emphasizing such objectives as rent or revenue extraction or self-serving political ends. State intervention can be defended in some cases, as part of a transition process during which communities experience a decline in traditional institutions and 