<title>Voices for change: Rural women and communication</title>
<section>1</section>
Communication in a changing world
During these last decades of the twentieth century, the world has witnessed the emergence of a new political, social, technological and economic environment. There have been major changes in the role of the state, and governments have withdrawn from certain functions that are now being taken over by civil society and the private sector. Societies are demanding new forms of governance, allowing greater scope for democracy, decentralization, popular participation and pluralism. New institutional frameworks are being formed, and more responsibilities are being assumed by non-governmental organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations (CSOs), rural institutions and local leaders.Globalization is shaping the world economy, and the current information revolution is resulting in a knowledge-based society. New communication technologies are being developed rapidly and made more widely available, although their transfer is taking place through private investment - global media
markets are now dominated by a mere handful of transnational companies.
For communication to give a voice to rural women, they need access to communication channels and media as well as the knowledge and skills to use them.
At the same time, poverty and social inequalities still prevail, especially in rural areas. The gap between the rich and the poor continues to grow as a result of disparities in access to resources, knowledge and technology. Most major issues on the development agenda still represent a challenge for the global community. Among them are: managing the environment in a sustainable manner; curbing the exponential rates of population growth and urbanization; ensuring food security; fulfilling human health and education needs; increasing literacy; alleviating poverty; and achieving gender equality. Although it is widely recognized that both women and men have a critical role in agricultural and rural development, efforts to improve opportunities for rural women have met with limited success. Sustainable development is hindered by the restricted access that rural women have to land, credit and legal provisions as well as to education, training, extension and other support services.
Information, knowledge and participatory processes of social change are essential if women and men are to respond to both the opportunities and the major challenges of the coming century.
This is the age of communication, and the current information revolution is dramatically increasing the potential for sharing information across the globe. The information revolution we are witnessing today has been compared to the invention of moveable print in the fifteenth century or to the transition from an agrarian to an industrial society in the nineteenth century. Economic liberalization has concentrated ownership of the global media in the hands of a few large companies, but the communication environment in developing countries is changing nevertheless. Technologies and media are becoming more appropriate for conditions in rural areas. Democratization, government deregulation policies and pluralism have encouraged the decentralization of information production away from central governments while horizontal, people-to-people processes are replacing vertical, traditional lines of communication. Participatory approaches have paved the way for community-based ownership
and use of various communication media, for example rural radio.
Gender-sensitive communication processes that facilitate learning and social change can empower women to take more control of their lives and participate as equals with men in promoting food security and rural development for the present and future generations.
In today's climate of political and socio-economic change, communication can play a decisive role in promoting development. By fostering a dialogue between rural people and other sectors of society, communication processes can empower both women and men to provide information and knowledge as a basis for change and innovation, take decisions concerning their own livelihood and thereby increase their overall involvement in development. More specifically, communication processes can give rural women a voice to advocate changes in policies, attitudes and social behaviour or customs that negatively affect them. The same processes can help women exchange experiences, find common ground for decisions, take more control of their lives and add value to their role as active partners in rural and sustainable development.
Given that women and men play different roles in agricultural and rural development, communication media and strategies should reflect their diverse needs and priorities. For communication to give a voice to rural women and help them realize their potential, they must first have the means to be heard. In other words, they need access to communication channels and media as well as the knowledge and skills to use them.
<section>2</section>
Invisible Partners
Although both women and men contribute substantively to agricultural and rural development, women are assuming an increasingly prominent role. Women farmers are responsible for half of the world's food production and, in most developing countries, produce from 60 to 80 percent of the food destined for household consumption. They play an important role in fisheries and forestry and constitute an important labour force for cash crop production. They are also responsible for providing food for their families. Moreover, civil strife, rural-urban migration of men in search of employment, and the growing number of mortalities attributed to HIV/AIDS have led to an increase in female-headed households in the developing world.
This "feminization of agriculture" has placed a considerable burden on women's capacity to produce, provide and prepare food in the face of already considerable social, economic and cultural constraints. Despite their essential role in achieving global food security, the contributions of women are often underestimated and overlooked in development strategies - they remain the "invisible" partners in development.
Rural women are key actors in solving the major issues on the development agenda for the coming century, including the need to manage the environment in a sustainable manner, the exploding rate of population and urbanization, food security, human needs with regard to health, education and literacy, and the elimination of poverty.
Women are economic agents, although their work is often not accounted for and so their development potential is grossly neglected. Rural women are a major force in environmental protection because they live and work in close contact with the ecosystem, possess an intimate knowledge of local biodiversity and can help safeguard natural resources for the future by practising sustainable agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Women are also key agents of human development; they can improve the quality of life in rural communities by helping to reduce maternal and child mortality as well as birth rates, improving family nutrition, ensuring the use of safe drinking water and sanitation, and teaching their daughters good health practices as well as other skills at home.
Given equal access to opportunities and resources, women, like men, have proved to be efficient, dynamic and indispensable partners in development. Their empowerment through the exchange of knowledge and information is crucial for enhancing rural living conditions and achieving development goals.
QUESTIONS OF DIFFERENCE
Notwithstanding efforts made over the past decades to improve the status and opportunities of women, urgent action is still required to overcome the following critical issues:
Increasing poverty and declining food security
Women constitute the majority of the world's poor. Information, knowledge and skills can help decrease women's vulnerability to poverty in crisis situations.
Unequal access to land, credit and agricultural support services
Women are denied both ownership and effective use of productive resources. Knowledge of their rights and opportunities can enhance women's contribution to production.
Unequal access to agricultural inputs, tools and technologies
New technologies and inputs are channelled primarily towards cash crops, the domain of men, and women lack the money required to purchase inputs as well as the knowledge and skills to apply them.
Unequal access to education, training and extension
Women receive less education than men and constitute the majority of the illiterate population. Their vocational and technical training is even more neglected than their general education, and extension is primarily directed towards men.
Insufficient knowledge about access to marketing outlets
Illiteracy as well as capital and legal constraints limit women's access to modern markets. Women need to acquire skills in marketing, accounting and business management.
Negative impacts of structural adjustment policies and economic globalization
Globalization and structural adjustment policies have brought unemployment and undermined social services. Information on their rights and opportunities can help women to overcome the negative impact of these policies.
Statistical invisibility
A lack of gender-disaggregated data from rural areas prevents policy-makers from including womens' concerns in development programmes. Accurate gender information is crucial in the formulation of agricultural development and food security strategies.
Poor working conditions and unequal wages
Women tend to work longer hours than men, and for less or no reward. Women need to be informed of their right to organize themselves and take advantage of social services, training and other opportunities.
Ignorance of women's indigenous knowledge
Women farmers' wealth of accumulated experience and knowledge often passes unnoticed. Planners and policy-makers need information about womens' potential and actual contribution to agriculture.
Problems related to nutrition, health and violence
Women and girls are subject to food discrimination and damaging cultural practices such as genital mutilation, and they lack information on nutrition and health. Information and education to promote changes in social and cultural behaviour are crucial to help overcome these problems.
Environmental degradation
Resource-poor women farmers are driven to adopt practices that are harmful to the environment. They must be alerted to the threats that environmental degradation poses to food security, and need to learn to use technologies and inputs that are less damaging to natural resources.
To overcome these "questions of difference", and thus improve the status and living conditions of rural women, there must be a change in attitudes and behaviour at all levels - above all, through the sharing of knowledge, information and skills.
<section>3</section>
Giving a voice to rural women
HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL OF COMMUNICATION
The shift in development thinking and practice towards people-centred programmes and the participation of people and communities in decisions concerning their own lives is creating new opportunities for social change and the empowerment of both women and men in rural areas. Nevertheless, it is vital to stimulate their awareness, involvement and capabilities further.
Different methods of communication and media can facilitate development by encouraging dialogue and debate. Furthermore, they can give a voice to rural women, thus enabling them to articulate their own development agendas. Similarly, by fostering the exchange of knowledge and information, communication can stimulate women's awareness and motivation, allowing them to take informed decisions on the crucial issues affecting their lives.
Communication can promote changes in attitudes and social behaviour and help communities to identify sustainable opportunities and development solutions that are within their reach. In addition to putting development planners in a position to respect women's traditional knowledge, communication processes can improve the management and effectiveness of new social organizations and institutions, ensuring that they provide services to women in a participatory and democratic manner. Bernard When used effectively, communication acts as a mediation tool between planners and rural communities, helping to resolve conflicts, achieve consensus and find common ground for policies and actions to be taken. Media and communication technologies can also help rural women to exchange experiences and learn from each other. They can be powerful tools for advising women about new ideas and practices and improving training. The majority of rural women are illiterate and live in remote, isolated
areas where access to information, lack of transportation, a scarcity of trainers, and cultural and language differences are common problems - problems, however, that can be overcome through the use of appropriate communication technologies.
WOMEN'S INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND COMMUNICATION
An FAO project covering several countries in southern Africa is studying issues of knowledge related to the conservation of biodiversity and considering how that knowledge can be used to promote food security.
The project is designed to support organizations that are already working with rural communities in the documentation of indigenous knowledge. The question is: How can this knowledge be gathered, conserved and shared in ways that lead to concrete benefits for the women and men who hold it? This is why communication is vitally important to the project strategy.
Field staff are trained to work with women and men in rural communities to help them realize and document the value of their knowledge, using media that they can understand and adopt easily. This may involve folk media to promote awareness, for example, or the introduction of new media such as participatory video, which opens new horizons and interests. The project will then take the knowledge gained from working with a given community and share it with other rural communities, NGOs, government institutions, decision-makers and the media.
Communication is the key to raising awareness, sharing knowledge and supporting a broader debate on indigenous knowledge and biodiversity, all of which are conducive to more effective policies and action programmes
The communication technologies and expertise exist. The challenge now is to use them appropriately and effectively to give a voice to rural women and to promote social change and sustainable agricultural and rural development for both women and men.
COMMUNICATION AS A SOCIAL PROCESS
Communication is no longer seen as a one-way, top-down transfer of messages and information through the media; instead, when applied to development, communication is used to promote a two-way process of sharing and participation. The word itself comes from the Latin "communis facere", which means participation and doing things together. An FAO consultation in 1984 defined communication for development as "a social process, designed to seek a common understanding among all the participants of a development initiative, creating a basis for concerted action".
Communication technology and the media are useful tools for facilitating this process, but should not be considered as an end in themselves. It is the process that is important. Interpersonal and face-to-face forms of communication are essential components in this process, and they are critical for changing attitudes and behaviour.
LISTENING AND LEARNING
The experts at the 1984 FAO Consultation indicated that "people-oriented and sustainable development can only realize its full potential if rural people are involved and motivated and if information and knowledge are shared. Sharing is not a one-way transfer of information; it implies rather an exchange between communication equals. On the one hand, technical specialists learn about people's needs and their techniques of production; on the other, the people learn about the techniques and proposals of the specialists." This means that participatory communication efforts with rural women should begin with development planners and technical specialists listening to them. Lstening goes beyond a simple appraisal of needs. It involves listening to what women already know, what they aspire to become, what they perceive as possible and desirable and what they feel they can sustain.
Although often illiterate, rural women have wisdom, knowledge and practices based on deep-rooted cultural norms, traditions and values, as well as generations of experience. This indigenous knowledge should be taken into account, and traditional methods of information exchange and communication should be harnessed together with modern means.
Communication strategies and materials should reflect women's perceptions, needs and perspectives. The development of participatory and qualitative research methods such as participatory rural appraisal (PRA), focus group discussions, interpersonal communication techniques and audiovisual media enable communication specialists and communities to quicken the process of sharing experiences and learning together. Where the questionnaire and statistical survey were once the main tools of research and analysis, there is now a mix of methods that are not dependent on literacy and formal education capabilities and can be applied to discover the problems and needs of rural women as well as the opportunities and solutions open to the community.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES RECOGNIZE THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION
A number of major international conferences have stressed the important role of communication in attaining the goals of their action plans and achieving sustainable development.
* Earth Summit (1992). Officially called the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), this conference produced Agenda 21, a programme devoted to various aspects of the environmental crisis. All 38 chapters of Agenda 21 implicitly recognize the critical role of communication in successfully implementing sustainable development. The Conference affirmed that all stakeholders in development are users and generators of relevant information on the environment.
* International Conference on Population and Development (1994). The Plan of Action passed by this conference calls for the strengthening of information, education and communication activities concerning population and sustainable development issues.
* World Summit for Social Development (1995). The Declaration and Plan of Action produced by this summit directs attention to rectifying social disintegration and emphasizes the role of communication for doing so.
* Fourth World Conference on Women (1995). This conference produced, for the first time in history, a Platform for Action that devotes an entire section to women and the media. It identifies the mass media as having great potential for promoting the advancement of women and the equality of women and men. It states that "television, especially, has the greatest impact on young people and, as such, has the ability to shape values, attitudes and perceptions of women in both positive and negative ways". It identifies actions to promote a balanced and non-stereotypical portrayal of women in the media, as well as the incorporation of more women at decision-making levels in the development of communication policies, technologies and media operations. It also identifies actions that can help increase women's access to, and participation in, the expression of views and decision-making through the new communication technologies. It encourages the development of education and
training programmes in communication and media technologies for women.
* World Food Summit (1996). The Plan of Action passed by this summit deals with women and rural development, among other issues. It affirms that sustainable agricultural development will only be achieved if policies and technologies are accompanied by participation, equity, dialogue, enabling mechanisms and empowerment. In short, it advocates a people-centred approach to development, in which communication is an essential component.
WOMEN'S COMMUNICATION NEEDS
Participatory audience research is an essential prerequisite for the planning of successful communication strategies, the selection of appropriate media and the design of creative messages. In developing countries, the communication requirements of women in rural areas are different from those of women and men in urban centres and developed countries. Rural women do not have equal access to information, for reasons such as their restricted mobility outside the home, lack of education and, in some cases, men's control over information and media. Development communicators may need to "repackage" information in forms that are comprehensible to illiterate women, adapting it to their understanding and perception of messages.
Special attention should be paid to selecting the communication channels that are most appropriate for women and to producing materials in local languages. Because women are involved in many aspects of rural life, their traditional knowledge systems are complex and holistic. Consequently, communication programmes must deal with the various economic and social issues affecting women, including agriculture, habitat, health, nutrition, family planning, population growth, the environment and education and illiteracy.
PARTICIPATORY RURAL COMMUNICATION APPRAISAL
INVOLVING RURAL WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT
With the support of an Italian-funded FAO project, the Southern African Development Community's Centre of Communication for Development, based in Harare, Zimbabwe, has pioneered a people-oriented alternative to traditional communication research. Called participatory rural communication appraisal (PRCA), the new approach involves rural people in the design of communication strategies.
PRCA has been used effectively to promote the involvement of rural women in decisions that affect their livelihood. Perceptions and local knowledge play a key role in development, hence the need for a communication approach that ensures the problems to be resolved are perceived in the same way by the distinct groups concerned (women, men, elders, youth) as well as by the development agents working with them. Unearthing women's perceptions and local knowledge can be difficult, however, because rural women often hide their true feelings and information from outsiders. To overcome this, PRCA uses visual methods and group facilitation techniques for generating, analysing and presenting information that helps to reveal the "visions and voices" of women. Through PRCA, development efforts can be firmly rooted in women's realities and thus be more responsive to their needs, aspirations, abilities and knowledge.
* PRCA has been used to identify constraints to, and opportunities for, women's participation in beekeeping in the Solwezi District of northwestern Zambia, where beekeeping is traditionally undertaken by men. Since considerable interest in the activity had been shown by women, a team of researchers (trained by the SADC Centre of Communication for Development) used PRCA tools to reveal the perceptions of the various stakeholders in the activity. Findings indicated that a women's beekeeping project would be viable, and also revealed the necessary conditions for its successful implementation. Based on its appraisal, the team provided guidelines for the design of a communication strategy and training materials for the project's implementation.
* "Oy! Engiten'g Ai." When a Masai mother or father expresses love for their child, especially a daughter, they will always compare the child to a cow - beautiful and full of riches. This sums up the importance of cattle to Masai people in the United Republic of Tanzania. Here, PRCA served to show that it is the women who tend the cattle from the time they enter the kraal (Boma) in the evening up until midnight. Traditionally, the Masai men have been considered the principal caretakers of cattle while the Masai women have been thought to play a minor role. However, a multidisciplinary research team that visited the Masai of Kimokouwa village in Monduli District in support of the FAO Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign was able to reveal the full role played by women in cattle rearing. The team (including staff from the SADC Centre of Communication for Development) carried out a PRCA exercise which, in addition to revealing the Masai's traditional communication practices,
clearly illustrated the important role of women in cattle rearing activities.
TRAINING IN COMMUNICATION SKILLS
The Platform of Action set by the Fourth World Conference on Women stressed the importance of enhancing women's skills, knowledge and access to information and communication technology. The training of women as rural communication specialists at all levels - from fieldworkers to trainers and planners - is an essential requirement for successful communication efforts carried out by women for the benefit of women.
Women can only have access to communication media if they have the skills and training to use them. a question of training more women, but also of improving and adapting the type of training provided. In the past, training was often theoretical and primarily concentrated on media production and technology. New participatory communication approaches require innovative and interactive learning processes, preferably field-based. Women can learn more effectively through field experience and practice rather than through traditional classroom training.
In addition to technology and media production, curricula should include participatory research methods, practices such as group facilitation, group dynamics and conflict resolution and the socio-economic, political and cultural processes related to rural development and communication.
Video, audio and computer technologies have become smaller, cheaper and more user-friendly. Easy-to-use equipment as well as participatory approaches and methods have given rural women the opportunity to become skilled in using media and to have access to, and control over, the necessary tools for information generation and exchange.
MAYAN WOMEN LEARN COMMUNICATION SKILLS
The Centre for Mayan Women Communicators, located at Atitlán in Sololá, Guatemala, is a non-profit organization that enables indigenous women to come together and communicate. The centre is supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other donors, and has its own Web site. It provides training to indigenous women in video production, photography, computer use and Internet communication. Video and photography are used for research, dialogue and community organization.
Among other things, the communication process is considering the oral Mayan language and exploring ways of using visual media to overcome barriers of language and illiteracy. Videos produced in and by the communities are used to share information with neighbouring communities that can identify with the local images.
Padma Guidi, the trainer at the centre, says:
"In developing the curricula, I have been led by the requests of women who come and want to see how the stuff works. Cameras are popular and exciting, easy to use and a real ice-breaker. My approach is to keep the learning interactive... [H]istory will not repeat itself in Guatemala if indigenous women have their voices heard. With today's user-friendly communication media available to them, these women will establish themselves as a conscious and participating force in future world events."
<section>4</section>
Communication approaches
MASS MEDIA
Rural radio
Radio remains the most powerful, and yet the cheapest, mass medium for reaching large numbers of people in isolated areas. Thanks to the revolution of the transistor, even the remotest villages have access to rural radio, which builds on the oral tradition of rural populations. Although men own the majority of radio receivers, women can listen to programmes at home in the evenings when the main chores of the day are finished.
Radio is an important tool for the rapid diffusion of important messages on new agricultural production ideas and techniques as well as on health, nutrition, family planning and other social and cultural issues. Combined with other media, it can be used for training and the transfer of technologies. It can promote dialogue and debate on the major issues of rural development as well as providing a platform for the expression of rural women's needs, opinions and aspirations. Radio enables women to voice their concerns and speak about their aspirations with external partners such as national policy-makers and development planners. Finally, radio is a tool that can be used to develop community cohesion and solidarity. Community involvement is fundamental for the successful use of radio with rural populations. Radio programmes are most effective when produced with audience participation, in local languages and with consideration for cultural traditions. Successful features
include live public shows, quizzes and village debates.
Community-based radio
Democratization, pluralism and deregulation policies adopted in many developing countries, together with the decreasing cost of FM transmitters, have favoured the proliferation of local community radio stations. In Mali alone there are more than 75 radio stations, established by private individuals, associations, local communities and commercial, religious and political organizations. Community stations treat issues concerning the everyday life of their listeners and also promote local development. They are an important channel for the motivation and education of women and they raise consciousness of gender issues as well as informing women about their rights. They offer rural women the opportunity to use the microphone to talk about the issues that interest them and they play women's music that is seldom heard elsewhere. More and more women are receiving training in the programming and management of community-based radio stations so that the programmes can reflect their
real needs.
RURAL LISTENERS TALK BACK
According to one woman radio listener in Kodialanida, Mali:
"The station has helped us understand the importance of literacy for our commercial activities. It has encouraged the women to devote more time to this. To begin with, we worked separately but, after listening to radio programmes, we had the idea of coming together in an association. Other women have done the same and have been successful. They have listened to the advice given by radio stations that have made themselves accessible and have been open to questions from the listeners."
Another listener in Kodialanida commented further:
"The radio station has brought about a genuine change in the everyday lives of villagers. It has prompted a qualitative change in farming techniques (helping in the selection of the best seed varieties, cotton processing and following the farming calendar). It has also brought about a change in attitudes: individualism has given way to a community spirit and the popularity of home improvements has increased as a result of programmes broadcast on this subject. The radio station has also been a great help to people striving to master water purification and treatment methods. And, it has increased enthusiasm for literacy. Generally speaking, it has helped greatly in raising awareness."
Television
The Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) identified the mass media as having great potential to promote the advancement of women and the equality of women and men. In particular, it states that "television especially has the greatest impact on young people and, as such, has the ability to shape values, attitudes and perceptions of women in both positive and negative ways." Indeed, television is a prestigious, powerful and empowering tool that can raise awareness, generate discussion and increase knowledge. It is an important channel for advocacy, for drawing policy-makers' attention to the potential of rural women and for promoting the inclusion of appropriate strategies on development agendas. Although television is not generally available to communities in very isolated rural areas, increasingly in many developing countries it is becoming a reality in the countryside.
With increasing urbanization, television can be an important means to reach women audiences who ha