<title>Filling the Data Gap: Gender-sensitive statistics for agricultural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action, adopted by Heads of State and Government in Rome, in November 199
acknowledge the fundamental contribution of women in achieving sustainable food security for all. In particular, FAO members committed themselves to foster equitable participation of women and men, and to adopt legislation guaranteeing women access to and control of productive resources. In this context, they recommended improving "the collection, dissemination and use of gender-disaggregated data in agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural development".
Although the role of women as powerful agents for social transformation and development has been increasingly recognized by governments, much remains to be done to translate sensitivity and commitment into action. Agricultural development policies do not adequately reflect the needs of women and, even when women's needs are incorporated, they often fail to be translated into practice. Consequently, there is a growing recognition of the need to collect and disseminate information on the crucial role women play in agricultural and rural development, in order to improve policy and decision-making processes so that sustainable livelihoods and food security can be achieved in rural areas, without discrimination of gender.
FAO is assisting its members in their efforts in this regard. The selection of the theme "Women feed the world" for World Food Day and TeleFood in 1998 was further evidence of the importance that the Organization continues to attach to this crucial issue. One of FAO's key strategic objectives is to contribute to the eradication of food insecurity and rural poverty by assisting its members in developing policies for sustainable livelihoods in rural areas, ensuring equitable participation and the access of both women and men to productive resources.
I firmly believe that there is a need to take a more holistic view of farm production systems and to offer a framework that allows policy-makers and planners to gain a clearer understanding of the dynamics operating at the household and community levels. This would enable them to formulate more gender-responsive national policies.
Too often, the different and complementary roles and responsibilities of women and men in agriculture are overlooked, and so the differing impacts of policies and programmes on women and men are not given sufficient consideration. For this reason, formal statistics need to be supplemented by socio-economic research and analysis to ensure the formulation and successful implementation of agricultural development policies that respond to actual conditions.
The purpose of convening the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information this year is to maintain momentum in our efforts to sensitize policy- and decision-makers, as well as the general public, to the actual and potential contributions of rural women as agents for social change and as important partners in agricultural and rural development.
This publication summarizes available, albeit limited, global and regional gender-related information pertinent to FAO's mandate. It discusses methodological and measurement issues, identifies data gaps and highlights the efforts that are still needed to improve the availability of data necessary for a better understanding of gender issues in rural and agricultural development, particularly in the developing countries.
If we are to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century and overcome hunger and malnutrition, agricultural and rural development policies and strategies must identify and support both women and men farmers on an equal footing. We need to know more about rural women - for too long the invisible protagonists of development - and to find out what they do, what they know, and what their needs and priorities are as farmers and food producers in their own right.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General, FAO
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The end of the second millennium has been strongly influenced by the "era of communication", which has increased the speed and range of information as a result of more powerful communication technologies. Information is becoming the basis of development and its absence or insufficient flow may in turn become a new dimension of poverty. In developing countries, rural areas remain outside the mainstream information channels, and the central government authorities therefore have insufficient knowledge of their conditions.
For two decades, the questions surrounding the recognition of women's roles in economic and social development and of equality between men and women have fostered increasing interest among members of civil society, international organizations and governments. However, despite a noticeable improvement in gender^1 awareness worldwide, two contradictory phenomena are being witnessed.
On the one hand, information on women's contributions to development is far from comprehensive. Unfortunately, even when available, this information is not sufficiently utilized as a tool by planners and decision-makers in formulating their national development plans. This is especially evident with regard to information on rural women's contribution to agriculture and rural development. On the other hand, there is an increasing demand for gender-specific statistics at the national and regional levels, from researchers, academics and women's groups to non-governmental organizations (NGOs), all of whom are interested in addressing various socio-economic development issues and participating more actively in decision-making on such topics.
FAO has participated actively in the international effort to document, develop and disseminate information and data about the roles and responsibilities of rural women in the fields of agricultural production, food security and rural development. FAO's Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001) (C/95/14-Sup. 1, Rev. 1) and the Progress Report on its implementation (C/97/INF/18) stress that, in order to make informed decisions, it is essential to have statistics disaggregated by sex,^2 together with information and precise data on the roles and responsibilities of men and women and their respective constraints and needs as they strive to reach their full potential.
During the last 20 years, information on rural women has increased significantly, but its validity and relevance are still questioned, as is its usefulness in decision-making and planning. This stems partly from the fact that the information is often not sufficiently substantiated by reliable statistics. Notorious deficiencies and shortcomings of gender data include the absence of reliable sources, a lack of precision, and weakness of analysis. Quite often, these statistics are too limited in scope and coverage, and do not allow for generalization.
In general, gender-related information also suffers from a weak dissemination system. When data are available, they are usually diffused only partially and selectively without a real awareness of the target audience. Moreover, the generation and use of information on rural gender issues compete with many other priorities. Clearly, many of the agencies producing, using and disseminating such information are those that are most likely to examine issues relating to global development; these agencies may have little interest in disaggregating data available at the subnational level. Thus, important rural/urban, gender, age and other differentials at the subnational level are overlooked in research and evaluation. This makes it difficult for issues of social equity and the specific needs of male and female agricultural producers to be adequately addressed. With new challenges arising from political and economic liberalization processes, it will be of the utmost importance to make
statistics available to a wider variety of users. This greater availability of data will help to empower rural women and men through better knowledge, representation of their interests, and more opportunities for collective action for development.
The main purpose of this publication is to sensitize policy-makers to the benefits that sex-disaggregated information can bring to policy-making, and - as the main recipients and seekers of such information - move them to action at the national level. In this capacity, policy-makers possess the ability to influence actively both the production and the quality of information.
While stressing the need for relevant statistics, this publication also shows the demographic structure and characteristics of rural areas in developing countries, most of which are dominated by agriculture. It presents the type of readily available data, albeit limited, that address gender issues in rural and agricultural development and, subsequently, methodological and measurement issues. Data gaps and action needed to improve the present situation are highlighted. Tables and figures illustrating gender disparities with respect to key socio-economic indicators (e.g. illiteracy rates, life expectancy at birth and school enrolment) are presented in the annexes.
^1 Biological differences between men and women do not change but the social roles that they are required to play vary from one society to another and according to different periods of history. The term "gender" refers to the economic, social, political and cultural attributes and opportunities associated with being male or female.
^2 Data disaggregated by sex refer to the collection of data by physical attributes. Gender-disaggregated data, however, are analytical indicators derived from sex-disaggregated data on social and economic attributes. The term "gender" in this context refers to a set of statistics derived from the results of social and economic analysis.
<section>3</section>
Rural producers: trends, issues and challenges for socio-economic development
Over the last decade agricultural and rural populations in the developing world have become more extensively and directly affected by several new processes in a rapidly changing global context. Globalization and liberalization of trade have brought about a greater integration of rural economies in both national and world markets. Rural populations are being confronted with more dynamic and, therefore, less predictable market-dominated conditions of production. The responses of rural populations to uncertainties and risks are also becoming less predictable but increasingly more important as an economic factor. In keeping with the rapid transformation occurring in global markets, markets for agricultural labour are likewise experiencing changes and becoming more dynamic. Because of production constraints, many farmers are now migrating to the cities to work in an attempt to maximize their access to scarce resources and improve the lives of their families. For those who stay
behind, access to cash and a wage income is becoming as critical as access to land (ECOSOC, 1999a).
RISING FOOD DEMAND AND THE INTENSIFICATION OF AGRICULTURE
Demographic projections by the United Nations (UN), supported by findings of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), suggest that, over the next two decades, rural populations will continue to exceed urban populations in the developing countries. Moreover, food needs in the developing world could double over the next three decades (World Bank, 1999a). Since economic growth in the developing countries is correlated with agricultural growth (FAO, 1998), the pressure on agriculture to increase its output, and hence its productivity, will be enormous in the years to come. Production on existing land will almost have to double in order to provide the required food supply sustainably (World Bank, 1999a).
Contributory factors in the intensification and increase of agricultural productivity are thus likely to be research and the organization of research-supporting databases; new technology; the development of rural human resources, including the agricultural labour force (to be achieved through the targeting of small- and medium-scale farming operations); and the use of public environments as a forum for dialogue on policy issues. Clearly, all these developments will destabilize the existing division of labour in rural areas and will have important consequences for gender relations at the subnational and national levels.
Recent studies have shown that more varied employment becomes available as workers move out of agriculture and subsistence production and into paid employment in the expanding manufacturing and service sectors (Mehra and Gammage, 1999). However, this trend does not necessarily reflect healthy growth in the agricultural sector. Sooner or later, planners will be faced with the question of how best to invest in and maximize the productivity of the remaining human resources.
GENDER SEGREGATION AND LABOUR FORCE EFFICIENCY
There seem to be important gender deviations in the general trend of labour moving out of agriculture. A slightly increasing feminization of the agricultural labour force in most developing countries may reflect the fact that women are lagging behind men and abandoning agriculture at a slower rate (Mehra and Gammage, 1999). Furthermore, women tend to work in low-productivity jobs more often than men, especially those who remain in the agricultural sector.
Viewing workers as an important resource for agricultural development is economically advantageous. Efficiency losses related to sex segregation in agricultural activities may result in a reduction of total output as a consequence of labour force misallocation and the underutilization of existing gender-specific skills (such as women's traditional expertise in plant genetic resource management), or even loss of skills. Experts in estimating labour force efficiency have suggested that reducing labour force segregation by sex is not only an issue of redistributive justice, but can also have beneficial effects for both men and women in terms of welfare improvement (see Tzannatos, 1999, who claims that "the `size of the pie' increases with women claiming a bigger share"). From this perspective, policy interventions to improve women's productivity may involve more investment in women as agricultural producers and a reorganization of the gender-based division of labour.
WOMEN IN THE AGRICULTURAL LABOUR FORCE
In the developing world as a whole, agriculture accounted for about 63 percent of total female employment in 1997 (see Table 4, p. 14) and is still the most important sector for female employment in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. At the same time, the share of women's work in the informal sector, both urban and rural, remains high. Informal occupations provide the livelihood (paid or otherwise) of more than 80 percent of women in low-income countries and 40 percent of those in middle-income countries. These countries together account for 85 percent of the world's population (Chen, 1999; Mehra and Gammage, 1999). However, this work remains largely unrecognized because the informal sector (both within and outside agriculture) is often considered to be a "residual" category that is supposedly short-lived and does not contribute substantially to national economies in terms of output. Research in recent years has suggested that women's labour force in agriculture is often
substantially underestimated. For example, in 1994 the International Labour Organisation (ILO) reported that the difference between the employment rates registered through a narrow versus a broad definition of "work" in India amounted to 75 percent of the female labour force. The 1981 census in the Dominican Republic estimated a rural female labour rate of 21 percent, a figure corrected up to 84 percent three years later in a special survey that included activities such as gardening and animal care in the definition of "work" (Tzannatos, 1999).
THE SOCIAL DIMENSION
With globalization, rural planners face the challenge of how to account for (and rely on) the indirect effects of social factors on economic processes. For example, how can low-income countries afford to consider cash crop growth (involving expensive infrastructure) as a developmental priority if large rural populations remain constrained by low labour productivity in subsistence farming and thus are candidates for urban (un)employment in the near future? Indeed, they (primarily women) cultivate the food crops necessary for food security but, with no additional income, they cannot participate directly in development or derive benefits from it.
How can the two development processes - industrial cash crop expansion and subsistence farming - be combined without hindering one another? This may require the targeting of subsistence farming populations with specific programmes for sustainability and growth (such as microenterprise development) or learning how to assess the hidden work involved in coping strategies and the subsequent returns that are used informally by farmers.
As far as women are concerned, structural adjustment programmes have brought additional "pull-back" forces. A recent report by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the advancement of rural women stresses that the globalization and liberalization of trade may bring more difficulties than returns for rural women because of the reduction of international aid and, correspondingly, diminishing national social budgets in the poorest countries of the world (ECOSOC, 1999a). Capital disinvestment from the social sphere may have affected the working lives of women by adding additional constraints deriving from their household roles. For example, lower health budgeting is likely to increase the care-giving functions falling on women, while disinvestment from community infrastructure, such as water supply systems, is likely to increase women's household work. In development planning, it is of crucial importance to define the target population (by sex, age, sector of
agricultural production and type of occupation/work) in view of a specific development objective. However, this will be impossible if rural planners continue to base their decisions mainly on data relating to physical inputs and outputs, while ignoring the perspective of human resources: the human labour input and the social dimensions of agriculture.
<section>4</section>
The importance of sex-disaggregated data for agricultural and rural development
While in previous decades rural policy relied very much on central government, policy-makers are now facing three fundamental changes: the expanding role of the private sector; increasing decentralization in decision-making, with corresponding demands for and expectations of transparency; and increased stakeholder participation in planning and decision-making processes at all levels - community, regional and national. Small farmers and food entrepreneurs are becoming active stakeholders. These changes are directly related to the necessity for comprehensive and technically sound databases capturing the variety of economic activities through which rural people participate in the production process.
IMPROVING DATA COLLECTION AND STATISTICAL ACCURACY
According to a recent report by the World Bank (1999a), monolithic decision chains dominated by central governments are giving way to broad-based stakeholder participation and to a greater variety of disaggregated agricultural operations comprising smaller and more diverse components. Governments may have to shift from their traditional role of centres that define rural development to a new role where they are primarily administrative and trouble-shooting organizations, providing standards for development and control mechanisms. This new role cannot be performed without solid and broad statistical information about rural producers, both landowners and landless farm workers.
It should be emphasized, however, that the decentralization of policy-making for rural development will require not only more accurate and systematic statistics on rural producers, but also officially collected data that are more relevant to the needs and concerns of data users and producers' associations, academic institutions and public and private development practitioners at all levels. As stakeholders involved in the diffusion of information, communication and public representation of various development interests, these information agents will thus empower men and women from different social groups to participate in the development processes. In this respect, some fundamental issues are not adequately addressed in agricultural censuses and surveys; for example, sex differentiation in:
i) landownership and use;
ii) access to credit;
iii) training and extension services;
iv) technology; and
v) income.
Since these variables are usually ignored in the data collection and tabulation processes, censuses need to be supplemented by other socio-economic surveys in anticipation of stakeholders' increased need for information.
The production of more accurate estimates regarding the participation of men and women in the labour force, particularly in agriculture, not only generates sound statistics but also sound economics. Accurate information forms the basis of awareness about potential labour force misallocations and resulting welfare losses (such as loss of qualification or skill potential). In rural economies striving to maximize the use of available resources, skill loss would be a high price to pay, since skills and qualifications are directly involved in the development of new and more productive processes. Despite the mechanization and intensification of agriculture, agricultural labour is likely to remain the principal factor affecting food security and economic change in many developing countries in the foreseeable future. Over the past 20 years, agricultural planners have often overlooked the "human factor", while social planners may have overlooked production or market factors, possibly
because agricultural and social planners often belong to different ministries and their efforts are not easily coordinated. This indicates a limited use of information about social and human development in relation to the developmental priorities in agriculture. The lack of information on women's input in agrarian economies may be only one example of this misunderstanding of the role people play as human capital and agents of rural development in general. However, since the focus of this publication is the gender dimension, it concentrates mainly on issues related to the use of gender-related information for socio-economic development.
GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT: A BROADER APPROACH
The general approach in development strategy over the last 20 years has moved from women in development (WID) to gender and development (GAD). Thus, the focus has shifted from women in isolation to women in relation to men. Specifically, the gender approach considers the roles of men and women, how they differ, their interrelationships and the different impacts that policies and programmes have on them. In statistics, the focus has therefore moved from statistics on women to gender statistics. These changes in the conceptual framework and approach of gender and development represent a challenge for FAO to provide more gender-balanced policy and technical advice to address development needs in member countries.
Collecting gender-sensitive data is not an end in itself. There is increasing evidence that human capital - involving the efforts of both men and women - is a crucial factor in development, more important than the physical capital involved in the process of food production. But data on rural producers in general, and women in particular, are still regarded as being of only marginal relevance to policy-making. This may be a result of policies in agricultural development that are often narrowly aimed at product growth, overlooking labour input as a major factor and, hence, the importance of human resources as well as the social and welfare aspects of development. Collecting gender-sensitive data goes beyond the simple disaggregation of data by sex. It attempts to reflect the diverse and differentiated situation of men and women, their specific contributions to agrarian economy and the consequences of their traditional roles in different social and economic situations.
Agricultural development aims at increasing productivity and overall production while, at the same time, securing the preservation of natural resources, increased incomes, the creation of employment and the improvement of food security and adequate levels of nutrition. However, these objectives are often pursued in the face of serious economic constraints and resource shortages. Thus, agricultural planning should make full use of existing resources, in particular human capital. Development lessons from the past have revealed that the invisible input of women - when taken into account by rural planners and policy-makers - can produce tangible and sustainable improvements in the quality of rural life at the household and community levels.
<section>5</section>
Readily available data at the global and regional levels
This section describes the types of data that are readily available in FAO's statistical database, FAOSTAT, in order to illustrate the main point of this publication - basic information exists, but more detailed and disaggregated data are necessary for a responsible socio-economic analysis of the gender-related aspects of agricultural and rural development.
FAO's role is not to produce primary statistics, but rather to organize global databases, methodologies and analyses. As far as demographic and labour force data are concerned, FAO uses statistics compiled and disseminated by the United Nations and ILO.
The main body of statistics produced by FAO in house are based on national data provided by member countries. Such data are derived from periodic agricultural censuses and from yearly surveys of agricultural production, including forestry and fisheries. The objective of these data collection instruments is to monitor the inputs, outputs and management of agricultural holdings so as to formulate policy recommendations for sustainable development and reliable food production systems. However, FAO's databases do not - nor is it their purpose to - incorporate the detailed agricultural labour force data that are necessary to address broader social issues concerning agricultural employment and rural development in the context of the overall economy. To study these aspects, demographic and labour force data are compiled by FAO within the framework of an interagency working group including the United Nations and ILO.
A comprehensive picture of a population, presenting the rural/urban and male/female distribution as well as linkages with agricultural and non-agricultural activities, can be formed only on the basis of data from population censuses and labour force surveys that cover the whole population. Tables 1 to 4 present an overview of the population distribution in developing and developed countries and also show the relative importance of agriculture.
POPULATION GROWTH AND DISTRIBUTION
Table 1 indicates that, of the total 5.8 billion people in the world in 1997, 78 percent lived in developing countries. It also shows that, although the population growth rate is generally decreasing, the growth rate for the developing countries is more than three times that of the developed countries in the current decade; and that, of the 54 percent of the world population living in rural areas in 1997, more than 80 percent were dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.
TABLE 1
Total, rural and agricultural population
World/region Population (100%) Rural
population
(%) of total population Agricultural
population
Number (millions) Share in
world total (%) Average
annual growth
rate (%) % of total
population % of rural
population
World 5 849 1.7 1.5 54 44 81
Developed countries 1 299 22.2 0.7 0.5 27 9 31
Developing countries 4 549 77.8 2.1 1.8 62 54 88
African developing
countries 715 12.2 2.8 2.7 65 59 91
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 578 9.9 2.9 2.8 69 65 95
Asian developing
countries 3 335 57.0 1.9 1.6 66 57 87
Latin American
and Caribbean
developing
countries 492 8.4 2.0 1.7 26 22 86
Oceanic developing
countries 7 0.1 2.1 2.2 75 65 87
LIFDCs* 3 643 62.3 2.2 1.7 68 60 88
Low-income countries 2 056 35.2 2.4 2.4 72 60 83
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
GROWTH OF THE LABOUR FORCE AND THE RELATIVE SHARE OF AGRICULTURE
Table 2 indicates that the growth rate of the labour force in the developing countries is more than three times that of the developed countries in the current decade, which is similar to the difference in population growth rates in these two country groupings. It shows that, although the share of agriculture in the total labour force is declining, agriculture continues to be the main activity for the majority of the labour force in developing countries; and among the developing regions, sub-Saharan Africa has the highest percentage of labour force engaged in agricultural activities, i.e. almost three times that of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
TABLE 2
Total and agricultural labour force
World/region Total labour force Agricultural labour force
Number
(millions) Average
annual growth
rate(%) Number
(millions) Average
annual
growth rate (%) Share in total
labour
force (%)
World 2 827 1.7 1 302 0.9 49 46
Developed countries 642 0.7 52 -2.6 10 8
Developing countries 2 185 2.0 1 250 1.0 61 57
African developing
countries 307 2.8 189 1.9 66 62
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 257 2.8 173 2.0 71 67
Asian developing
countries 1 668 1.8 1 014 0.9 65 61
Latin American and
Caribbean
developing countries 207 2.4 44 -0.1 25 21
Oceanic developing
countries 3 2.4 2 1.7 68 65
LIFDCs* 1 790 2.2 1 113 1.2 67 62
Low-income countries 912 2.8 568 1.8 66 62
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE LABOUR FORCE BY SEX
Table 3 indicates that, in developing countries, there has been a steady increase in the proportion of women in the agricultural labour force. Moreover, the proportion of women in the total labour force of the developing countries is lower than that of the developed countries. However, the reverse situation is true for the agricultural labour force. Women constitute about 44 percent of the agricultural labour force in developing countries.
The Table raises further issues for consideration:
* the causes, consequences, patterns and extent of work-related male migration, which means farming being left in the hands of women, children and elderly people;
* the employment-recording system on two levels: in all sectors of agriculture in developing countries, and in the informal sector (where the majority of women work);
* the measurement and evaluation of women's labour on the farm and at home;
* the percentage of women's labour force in developing countries, differentiated by seasonal, part-time and full-time labour.
TABLE 3
Sex distribution of the total, agricultural and non-agricultural labour force
World/region Women's share in:
Total labour
force Agricultural
labour force Non-agricultural
labour force
(percentage)
World 40.0
Developed countries 43.4 44.2 38.4 36.7 44.0 44.9
Developing countries 38.8 39.3 42.9 43.6 32.3 33.7
African developing
countries 40.0 40.5 46.6 47.3 27.5 29.5
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 42.4
Asian developing countries 39.4 39.8 43.5 44.0 31.7 33.1
Latin American and
Caribbean developing
countries 32.6 34.1 16.9 17.0 37.9 38.8
Oceanic developing
countries 39.1 40.3 43.5 44.8 29.8 31.9
LIFDCs* 39.6 40.0 43.5 44.0 31.7 33.4
Low-income countries 36.2 36.9 41.3 42.1 26.0 28.4
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
DISTRIBUTION OF WOMEN'S LABOUR FORCE BY ACTIVITY
Table 4 shows that, in the developing countries, the majority of women in the labour force are engaged in agricultural activities. On the other hand, in the developed countries, only a small proportion is engaged in agriculture, and this share is decreasing over time. In 1997 only 7 percent of women in developed countries were engaged in agricultural activities compared with 63 percent in developing countries. However, Latin America and the Caribbean followed the pattern of developed countries; only 11 percent of women were engaged in agriculture in this region in 1997.
The evolution of the percentage of women in developed countries (decreasing) and i