<title>Participation and information - The key to gender-responsive agricultural policy</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION - THE ISSUE
The challenge of agricultural and economic policy-making and planning is to enhance productivity and output while maintaining the natural resource base, safeguarding and increasing rural incomes, generating employment and promoting the nutrition and food security status of households and individuals. There is increasing evidence and recognition that what is needed for development, even more than natural resources and physical capital, is for people to be effective and productive economic agents; in short, investment in human capital is what really matters.
Changes in the economy, especially in agriculture, affect women and men differently since the roles, responsibilities, needs and constraints of women differ from those of men. Although women play a central role in the economy, their contribution to agricultural production is largely invisible in national statistics and is thus overlooked in both economic analysis and policy formulation. This represents a significant obstacle to promoting gender-responsive sustainable development.
This paper discusses how participatory approaches and information can facilitate the formulation of gender-responsive plans and strategies. It also attempts to respond to the question of why a gender perspective is important for agricultural and economic development policy and planning. The underlying assumption is that such policy and planning would benefit from incorporating a gender dimension, yet lack of information is one of the main constraints to incorporating gender issues. Data on women are still seen as only marginally relevant to policy-making and reliable sources of such data, particularly in the agricultural sector, are generally lacking.
Gender biases are present at every stage from conceptualization and design to field interviews, analysis and implementation. This compounds the difficulties of data collection in rural areas, particularly in the informal sector. Data disaggregated by sex cannot alone provide insights into the processes that determine the differential impacts of policies on women and men.^1 For policy-making purposes the analytical framework necessary to understand gender relations must accompany these data.
The current policy environment advocates "involving women", but does not necessarily promote an analysis of gender issues in policy, programme and project planning and implementation. Gender analysis studies the different roles and responsibilities of women and men, the differences in women's and men's access to and control over resources, and their consequent constraints, needs and priorities. Incorporating gender analysis into the tools of participatory agricultural planning helps policy-makers and planners to understand how the structure of policies and programmes needs to be modified if women are to be involved equally with men. It can demonstrate why some projects and policies have negative consequences for women.
Well-planned macro and sectoral policy changes have the potential for stimulating growth with equity. They also provide the opportunity and the tools for rural women to improve their productivity in production, processing and marketing activities in the rural agricultural and industrial sectors.
Gender-responsive planning means first learning about how gender shapes the opportunities and constraints that women and men face in securing their livelihoods within each cultural, political, economic and environmental setting. Because women and men have different tasks and responsibilities, and different livelihood strategies and constraints, they must each be consulted. There is overwhelming evidence that development has to address the needs and priorities of both women and men in order to be successful.
1 Data disaggregated by sex refer to the collection of data by physical attributes. Gender-disaggregated data, however, are analytical indicators built upon sex-disaggregated data on social and economic attributes. The term "gender" in this context refers to a set of statistics derived from the results of social and economic analysis.
<section>2</section>
1. GENDER AND PARTICIPATION IN AGRICULTURAL PLANNING
Planners worldwide are increasingly called upon to engage in "bottom-up" participatory planning that will benefit women as well as men. However, participatory, gender-responsive agricultural planning is rarely practised. One reason for this is the question of method. It is not clear just "how" to conduct participatory planning or how to change current planning procedures in order to make them more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers. However, as a start, a review of the different steps and operations of the planning process is needed. This will also determine the nature and level of information required.
Agricultural policy-making
Policy-makers are the elected or appointed officials, high-level civil servants and, in some
* set goals for the agricultural sector (such as growth, food security, regional equity);
* develop strategies to pursue these goals (such as giving priority to export crops, commercial farms and smallholders); and
* set price, input, credit and land policies designed to induce farmers, technicians and others working in the sector to take decisions that will achieve the policy objectives.
Agricultural planning
Planners develop national, regional, district or investment plans and projects as well as line agency programmes that are compatible with the goals, strategies and policies set by policy-makers. Planners may be economists, social scientists or technical specialists employed in the planning units of the Ministry of Agriculture or its various line agencies, such as extension or livestock services, or in national or international development non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and agencies. Managers may also be involved in planning, especially in programme planning for line agencies.
Gender-responsive agricultural planning It is agricultural development planning that responds to the different priorities of diverse groups of farmers where these differences are based on gender and other socio-economic factors. Planners and policy-makers are aware of these differences and of how best to respond to them because these groups of women and men farmers have taken an active part in planning agricultural development activities. It is a process in which both farmers and planners are committed to following up plans together.
1.1 AN OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF AGRICULTURAL PLANNING
The structures, processes and relative importance of the various "levels" of planning differ from country to country. A basic familiarity with the common features of most agricultural planning systems can assist in determining where and to whom the information produced by gender-sensitive participatory processes can be directed in order to increase the responsiveness of planning to gender and other differences among farmers.
Development planning, including agricultural planning, may be divided into two basic categories: centralized and decentralized. In a centralized planning system all major policy, planning, programming and budgeting decisions for the sector as a whole and for subsector line agencies are made at the national level. In a decentralized system, responsibility for a large number of planning, programming and budgeting decisions is devolved to regional and/or district levels. A separate regional or district planning apparatus may be formed to develop an area-based investment plan. The decentralization of planning and agricultural administration tends to bring problem analysis and planning closer to regional and local realities.
Village- or community-level planning is still rare. As decentralization takes hold, however, village planning may well become increasingly important. It has two basic functions: i) to provide information for higher planning levels by means of participatory problem analysis; and ii) to set community priorities and formulate action plans that can be carried out either independently or with some outside assistance.
The increasing importance of decentralized planning is one of three main elements in the current context of agricultural policy-making and planning.
Major elements in the current planning environment
* new constraints, especially a squeeze on operational funding and the loss of staff in a wide range of government agencies as a result of structural adjustment;
* new approaches, government administrative decentralization, regional and district interdisciplinary planning; and
* new demands, for participation, "bottom-up" planning, and for taking women into account.
While all these elements do not necessarily "fit" in all countries, and every element is not necessarily "new" in all contexts, they are common enough to constitute a relatively new policy and planning environment. This environment presents an important opening for gender and socio-economic difference-responsive, participatory agricultural planning.
The challenge to planning to "become more participatory" has several sources. Among the most compelling is the failure of many development projects and programmes to meet their objectives when farmers have failed to respond as expected. The old habit of blaming farmer ignorance and backwardness has lost its appeal, especially in the face of evidence that many farmers, such as the resource-limited, women farmers and some pastoralists, face constraints that make it impossible for them to respond as expected. Moreover, successful community development programmes based on participatory planning, implementation and monitoring processes have demonstrated that rural communities are indeed interested in development and will work to make plans and projects succeed so long as those plans respond to local priorities. Finally, the push for democratization has added an important political dimension to the demand for more participatory, "bottom-up" planning.
The admonition to "take women into account" also stems in part from the lacklustre performance of projects that have ignored women's roles in farming systems. Two decades of gender-sensitive project evaluations have resulted in a growing recognition that many projects, while improving men's situations, have actually made women worse off. Other factors have gradually shifted attitudes at both international and national levels; among them, pressure on donors and governments to respond to women's needs as farmers, and the momentum created by major international conferences on population, the environment and women. The rapid growth in women's organizations throughout the world and their growing links with one another have added a political thrust.
A far less positive factor in the current environment is the often extreme pressure on governments to reduce their budgets in order to meet structural adjustment and stabilization targets. This factor weighs in at many levels, from cutting into planning funds and personnel, to prioritizing "men's" export crops and restricting funds for government services such as extension, marketing and credit for women farmers. The implication for gender-sensitive participatory planning methods is that much more attention must be paid to cost-effectiveness in generating and using information that can promote gender-responsive policy, programme and project development.
While the new voices in this complex "planning environment" have, in many places, evoked a positive political response, the question for planners is still, what exactly should be done? That there are no easy answers is obvious. There are, however, promising new approaches for involving different groups of farmers, including women and the poor, in agricultural planning.
1.2 PARTICIPATION
Participation is a term that is notoriously broadly interpreted. It may even be interpreted differently by different stakeholders in the same agricultural planning process. Stakeholders, a new notion in comparison to beneficiaries or partners, are all persons and organizations who stand to gain or lose from a particular policy, programme or project. Many people and groups have a "stake" in the results of agricultural planning, including women and men farmers from different socio-economic, ethnic or age groups. An FAO study of multilevel planning for agricultural development in Asia and the Pacific (FAO, 1995; p. 89-90, quoted in the box below) reviews the various ways that "participation" is practised in planning processes.
Levels of people's participation in agricultural planning
1. participation limited to elites only (mostly elected representatives);
2. participation in which people are asked to legitimize or ratify projects identified and formulated by government, but do not participate in the detailed planning and management of the project;
3. participation in which people are consulted from the start and also actively participate in planning and management of projects;
4. participation in which representatives from different strata of society/occupation groups find their places in all planning/coordination/evaluation mechanisms devised at the various levels including the highest policy-making level; and
5. participation in which representatives in (4) actually control the decisions at all levels.
The same FAO study points out that, as of 1995, "experience in the various countries shows that the modes of participation in (4) and (5) have not effectively materialized". While this may no longer be strictly true, participation even at level (3) is still quite rare. In promoting participatory agricultural planning, there is a need to analyse current levels of participation to understand better the changes that will be required to reach higher levels.
Participation is key in terms of involving rural people in the information collection and planning process. Participatory methods can be used to collect information on the activities and constraints of women and men farmers. This new information can then be shared with policy-makers and planners to allow the formulation of development plans that reflect the interest of the rural population and support a sustainable development.
1.3 TOOLS AND METHODS TO ANALYSE DIVERSITY
Projects to improve the responsiveness of agricultural planning to the priorities of women and men farmers from different socio-economic groups need to foster participation by as wide a range of stakeholders as possible. The ideal would be to have an active involvement in planning by representatives from all groups with a stake in the policy or programme.
Participatory rural appraisal (PRA)
Participatory rural appraisal, commonly known as PRA, is a set of tools to facilitate a research and action process managed by the local community. It is an exceptionally relevant and powerful method for involving communities in the information-generating, analysis and priority-setting phases of agricultural planning. Specific tools such as village resource maps, problem trend lines and institutional profiles assist in the analysis of community issues. Other tools such as farming systems diagrams, seasonal calendars, daily activity profiles and household resource maps can be combined with gender analysis to facilitate the study of livelihood systems of different socio-economic groups. A third set of tools helps communities and different socio-economic/gender-based focus groups to identify and prioritize their problems and resource needs and to develop group or community action plans.
Gender analysis
Over the past three decades, wider recognition has been given to the manner in which the structure of gender relationships and roles affects development policies, programmes and projects, irrespective of whether or not these activities are specifically targeted towards a particular sex. Moreover, there is a much wider understanding of the linkages between gender issues and general development problems such as poverty, lack of political power and environmental degradation. As both a cause and a result of this increased awareness, numerous methods and tools have been developed to facilitate the consideration of gender issues in the full range of development activities.
Gender analysis identifies established patterns of gender-based inequality in economic and social life. This can be threatening to more advantaged stakeholders in the agricultural planning process. Frequently, senior staff or policy-makers appear to be more resistant to undertaking gender analysis than farmers and government field staff. In some cases, the use of gender analysis tools at the community level may foster a level of conflict that can be inimical to women's interests. To avoid such negative outcomes, local women should decide whether or not specific gender analysis tools are best used in mixed sex settings or by women alone. Where gender relations are hierarchical (the vast majority of cases), participatory methods such as PRA should always include a separate "women's problems analysis" as well.
One example is FAO's Socioeconomic and Gender Analysis Programme (SEAGA), which emphasizes the fact that the outcome of development activities (in both public and private spheres) is affected by a range of factors that are, or can be, broader than those that are generally dealt with in the context of gender analysis. These factors include socio-cultural patterns, economic trends and political issues. In other words, the SEAGA approach recognizes that the issues that affect women, such as poverty, lack of power and vulnerability to environmental degradation, while partly attributable to women's inequality and traditional roles, are also related to the same social and economic factors that keep men poor and politically alienated.
The recognition and understanding of the processes, structures and linkages between these different levels is therefore central to the gender analysis process. It is simply not sufficient to focus, for example, on household and community issues, to the exclusion of important intermediate and macrolevel structures and institutions that significantly determine the overall social and economic position of women and men. Cross-sectoral issues and national development concerns are not sufficiently identified or addressed at the field level and thus hinder the identification of proper development strategies.
1.4 STRATEGY FOR GENDER-RESPONSIVE AGRICULTURAL PLANNING
An ideal gender-responsive agricultural planning process would entail the following elements:
* information flow up, down and across the planning ladder to provide valuable information to all stakeholders;
* dialogue, negotiation, consensus building and the creation of channels of communication that allow farmers and planners at all levels to take decisions together about appropriate actions;
* building linkages and partnerships among stakeholders at the same level (for example, among farmers themselves) as well as between levels;
* empowering women and men to express their needs and aspirations in institutional planning processes at all levels; and
* follow-up to community-based planning efforts and commitment of resources (both financial and human).
Planning is a forward-looking process that allows us to consider where are we now, where we want to be, and the best ways to get there. The process of strategic planning facilitates communication and participation, accommodates divergent interests and values, fosters wise and analytic decision-making, and promotes successful implementation.
Different entry-points, tools and methods for gender-responsive planning can include the use of focus groups, local cases for PRA training, methods to adapt PRA and gender analysis tools to local circumstances, statistical surveys to supplement PRA-generated information, participatory impact monitoring and methods to strengthen grassroots organizations. Capacity building is another important component where government officials, line agency officers and field workers can be trained in participatory methods and/or gender analysis. Capacity building will allow planners to capture better the information most relevant for agricultural planning and can thus improve the gender-responsiveness of policies and interventions and linking to the right sources for coordination and information sharing. There is also a need to establish a mechanism to respond to community-planning efforts and secure follow-up activities.^2
2 For case studies on best practices with regard to gender and participation in agricultural planning see FAO, 1997. Ten case studies are presented from Afghanistan, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Honduras, Namibia, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal, Tunisia, and India.
<section>3</section>
2. GENDER RESPONSIVE POLICY AND INSTITUTIONS
The fact that agricultural sector planners rarely take rural women's needs into consideration can have a serious impact on food security, for example, as agricultural training and services are not targeted at the rural women who grow a significant amount of the world's food. In many cases, planners lack information about the important role that women play in agricultural production and household food security. But, as mentioned above, more often than not they do not know how to learn from women farmers about their activities or how to respond to their needs. One way to address these problems is to improve information on the situation of rural women and men and to involve them in local processes of planning in the agricultural sector.
2.1 POLICY-MAKING
In many parts of the world, there is a renewed recognition of the crucial role that the agricultural sector can play in increasing export earnings, generating employment and improving food security. Within economic liberalization and privatization formulas, efforts to raise productivity, achieve food security and reduce poverty must consider the micro- and mesolevel institutional and cultural factors that mediate their impact at the local level. For the farming sector, economic policies should avoid giving a differential advantage to large-scale and commercial farming while largely ignoring the smallholder sector which is the most vulnerable and has the most impact on rural women's and men's work and lives.
Policies should recognize the need to place people at the centre of the development process. This promotes a gender-sensitive and participatory approach to development based on a cyclical and multidirectional flow of information between international agencies, governments, NGOs, research institutions, extension and community development services and individuals in rural households.
To take advantage of changing macroeconomic dynamics, rural workers need their governments and civil society to invest in human capital development, education, schools, vocational and technical training, and in the expansion and improvement of the rural infrastructure to serve agriculture and rural non-farm enterprises (e.g. roads, electric power, sewerage, health facilities, schools and marketplaces).
In most countries, there is still a need for proactive policy to ensure that women are a part of the dynamic process of change and that their requirements are addressed separately from men's, where necessary. This means that policies need to:
* encourage self-employment opportunities and small business creation through equal access to existing support measures such as credit, equality of opportunity and equal pay for equal work;
* enhance the legal and social position of women through measures such as joint or individual title to land, informing rural women of their legal status and rights;
* enhance education and vocational training and supporting services (day care, transport services, better sharing of domestic and family responsibilities).
Policy recommendations rely on up-to-date, accurate and detailed information. The present lack of a reliable assessment of the different contributions made by women and men to an economy represents a significant obstacle to promoting gender-responsive sustainable development. Action is needed to support the collection, compilation, analysis and diffusion of time and task allocation data disaggregated by sex as well as the development of indicators on women's participation in agriculture and the rural economy. Changes will first need to be made in mainstream data collection programmes by broadening the definitions of work to include both paid and unpaid work and women's and men's separate contribution to agricultural and non-farm output. It is also important to raise awareness among policy-makers of the utility of these data, and thereby create a demand for data collection and use.
2.2 INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIVENESS
Government ministries, financial and training institutions, research centres, NGOs and other social and economic structures that sponsor agriculture and rural development programmes need to reorient their operations so that they also target rural women as clients of human resource development initiatives and beneficiaries of development programmes. Several important issues need to be addressed through institutional reform, the most important of which is access to land. This determines self-employed women's access to credit and complementary services. Education and training are other critical areas where a major investment in women is needed, not only to increase women's participation in economic development but also to achieve important national development goals that are very much related to women's knowledge and skill levels (such as reduced fertility rates and increased household food security and nutritional levels).
Connecting development in the rural sector to the priorities of local women and men farmers entails a strengthening (or creation) of institutional mechanisms for learning and responding to diversity and change. The potentially powerful role that information and communication technologies can play in providing improved access to and sharing of information for gender-responsive planning needs to be further addressed. Particularly with regard to gender, there is a clear need to change the "rules of the game", i.e. the everyday rules and procedures of institutions, which reflect the physical and social needs and capabilities and political interests of those who designed them in the first place. Since women are rarely involved in political, economic and social decision-making, these rules of the game are currently stacked against them. The challenge is therefore to institutionalize gender-sensitive policy and approaches by making equitable forms of social interaction routine and
limiting the possibilities for choosing discriminatory forms of social organization.
The main thrust in supporting institutional change has been through sensitization and training of bureaucrats and technicians on gender issues and on the use of participatory approaches. The main objective of gender training is to help people in organizations to change the way they think by eliminating the stereotypical notions they hold about women's work and needs and consequently influence the way they act. Gender analysis training is also important to make allies and build support within the ranks by providing bureaucrats, policy-makers and planners with the knowledge and skills they need to deal with the conflict provoked by policy proposals to orient more resources to women.
In addition to training and sensitization, efforts to create gender-responsiveness should also be supported by:
* continuing the work to develop methodologies for integrating gender and the needs of women into the various phases of project and programme management - identification, formulation, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
* widely disseminating and promoting good practice methodologies in the integration of gender and women in rural development to encourage their adoption;
* technical assistance programmes aimed at the reorientation of operations to make institutional activities more gender-responsive; and
* building up a "critical mass" of women in public administration and rural organizations.
The existence of a policy environment that encourages planners at the local level in particular, extensionists, mid-level planners and other development agents to take an interest in gender-sensitive participatory approaches facilitates the institutionalization of projects and methods.
<section>4</section>
3. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC TRENDS AFFECTING AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT - IMPACT ON RURAL WOMEN'S LIVELIHOODS AND WORK
The economic crisis of the 1980s, structural adjustment programmes, armed conflicts and drought are believed to have affected women more severely than men. This has led to what has been termed by the United Nations as the "feminization of agriculture", that is, the increased concentration of agricultural tasks in the hands of rural women in developing countries. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, in his report to the Economic and Social Council's Substantive Session of 1999 on "Social and human rights questions: advancement of women", outlines the impact of global trends and their policy implications for the situation of rural women and considers questions of access to productive resources, inputs and services.^3 In the report, the Secretary-General states that the context within which the above issues are considered has changed significantly as the process of market integration that has characterized the global economy for some time has accelerated. The greater
interdependence among different national economies sets new priorities and poses new policy considerations for governments.
An understanding of the different elements and the situation of rural women can assist in the formulation of gender-sensitive policies and agricultural planning, responding to the needs and priorities of rural women and men.
3.1 SOCIAL TRENDS
Male labour force migration, displaced people (i.e. resulting from environmental and civil conflicts) and the breakdown in traditional family structures (increasingly high separation and divorce rates) deprive many rural households of male adult workers and leave women in charge of the day-to-day farm management and the support of their families. Wars and diseases such as AIDS also result in cases where women (wives, grandmothers and sisters) must assume complete responsibility for raising, feeding and educating young children.
Studies have shown that women heads of household tend to be younger and less educated than their male counterparts. They also generally have less land to work and even less capital and farm labour to work it with. With a shortage of labour and capital, women heads of household are often forced to make adjustments to cropping patterns and farming systems. These adjustments have resulted in decreases in production and, in some cases, shifts towards less nutritious crops. Not surprisingly, these households often suffer from increased malnutrition and food insecurity.
Microstudies on the gender division of labour and time use in farming systems generally substantiate the fact that rural women in poor households work longer hours than men and that their responsibility for domestic and agricultural tasks is considerable. Hence, for rural families primarily engaged in farming, male migration and other factors, which result in labour shortages, are often drastically changing the traditional division of labour. The net effect of this change is often to increase women's workload and, in some cases, lower agricultural productivity because of the shortage of male labour, especially for tasks that women now have to take on, such as clearing land and ploughing. Labour shortages in female-headed farm households may often hinder the adoption of new technologies or improved land conservation practices.
Women make up for the lack of male labour by organizing labour exchanges with other women, working longer hours themselves or, if they have the means from remittances and other income sources, they hire labour. They may tend to cope by adopting strategies such as reducing the area under cultivation or by switching to less labour-intensive but less nutritious crops, both of which may compromise household food security. In addition, environmental degradation and the scarcity of natural resources substantially increase the time needed for rural women to collect fuelwood and water and hence their total workload is increased.
3.2 ECONOMIC TRENDS
Economic, demographic and political trends are changing the rural landscape and affect