<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first workshop of Central and Eastern Sustainable Agriculture Network (CEESA) and these proceedings are the result of work and joint efforts of a number of people who have invested their enthusiasm and experience to the successful launch of the Network.
Professor K. Hagedorn of Humboldt University deserves a special recognition for having conceived this idea and for providing support throughout the process of its realization together with his associates A. Luetteken, B. Holthusen and R. Judis. Their work on development of the concept of the Network, moderation and leadership throughout the workshop, as well as review of country reports, was crucial contribution to the succesful launch of CEESA.
Intellectual input to the workshop provided by the authors of country reports and experiences shared by participants during discussions were vital for the creation of a cross-section picture on the relationship between the agriculture and the environment and the state of sustainability of agricultural and farming systems in participating countries.
Particular appreciation goes to Z. S. Karnicki, the former FAO Subregional representative, for his support to collaboration between SEUR and Humboldt University in preparation and implementation of the first CEESA workshop, as well as to his successor J. Suchman for his encouragement to the follow-up activities of the Network.
L. Podmanicky and his associates from Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, have provided excellent support in the organization and implementation of the first workshop.
Finaly, a note of appreciation goes to S. Tanic and D. Minoiu for final revision and editorial work, needed to publish these proceedings.
<section>2</section>
FOREWORD
This workshop has been an excellent example of growing cooperation between the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, who are faced with the absolutely unique challenge of transforming their economies from centrally planned to market oriented ones. This process by itself is not an easy one, but is even more complex due to the additional task of accession to the European Union. With closer integration into Western Europe where the environment, food quality and animal welfare are already prominent in the agenda of public concerns and are more and more included into agriculture and rural policies, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will have to pay far greater attention to these matters.
One fundamental issue very much related to the present changes taking place in Central and Eastern Europe, but also important in the global context, is the sustainability of agriculture. Many countries in Central and Eastern Europe are producing, or have the potential to produce, a surplus of some agricultural products which require sound long-term policies and strategies. Those policies and strategies have to be founded firstly on a reliable knowledge of intensive but sustainable production systems and secondly, on human capacity and on institutions needed to develop sustainable agricultural sectors of national economies. Therefore, sustainable agricultural development remains a cornerstone of food security in a given region and has been recognized as one of the priorities of FAO assistance in the Subregion.
One of the ways to assist in the area of sustainable agricultural development and building on past FAO initiatives, is to support the networks on sustainable agricultural development and sustainable intensification. I hope that the Central and Eastern Sustainable Agriculture Network will facilitate collaboration and help in both the collection of and the use of, knowledge concerning the compatibility of transition strategies and the idea of sustainable agricultural development in the participating countries.
This workshop was an example of excellent co-operation initiated by Mr Stjepan Tanic, Farming Systems Development Officer, during the mandate of my predecessor, Mr Zbigniew S. Karnicki, between the most prestigious agricultural research institutes from the region and the FAO, in particular the Subregional Office in Budapest. This is not only a good sign and a serious commitment, but also implies a responsibility to find ways in providing knowledge which could be transformed into strategies and policies leading to sustainable agriculture in the Subregion.
Jaroslav Suchman
FAO Subregional representative
for Central and Eastern Europe
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION
This workshop and its proceedings are the outcome of collaboration between the FAO SEUR and the Humboldt University of Berlin (HU), which was formalized in the Memorandum of Understanding on Collaboration Regarding Activities of Establishing the Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agriculture Network (CEESA). Based on the project proposed by HU, the FAO SEUR and HU agreed to collaborate in the preparation and implementation of the first CEESA Workshop as the initial step in establishing the Network.
The purpose of the project and the Network is to provide a framework for discussion and exchanges of opinion between interested professionals from CEECs on issues concerning and specific approaches to, the transition of the agricultural sector, which are needed to develop environmentally sound and sustainable agricultural and farming systems in CEECs. The expected result of this collaboration is the collection of and use of, knowledge concerning the compatibility of transition strategies with the idea of sustainable agricultural development in the participating countries.
The lecturers and discussion leaders came from HU. At the Workshop, the FAO was represented by participants from the SEUM, SEUP and TCAS. Organization and the implementation of the Workshop was entrusted to the Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Environmental and Landscape Management, and was coordinated by the Local Organizing Committee. The Workshop took place at the Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, Gödöll, Hungary, from the second to the seventh of March 1999.
Participants for the Workshop were selected on the basis of their professional interest and their experience in agri-environmental and sustainability issues from the following countries: Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine^1. These countries are expected to participate in future Network activities. Besides the selected participants, the Workshop was attended by several volunteering participants from CEECs and European countries.
From each of the selected countries, one person was the author of the country report prepared under the guidance of HU and the SEUR. All reports cover the following major topics:
1. The impact of transition and the structure of property rights (privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources, restructurization in rural areas and liberalization).
2. The development of the economic framework on the farm level (land market and development of input and output prices).
3. The impact of agriculture on the environment (environmental degradation caused by agriculture, agriculture and soil, water and air protection, agriculture and its impact on the protection of landscape, agriculture and biodiversity and effects of environmental degradation on agriculture).
4. The influence of society on the agricultural environment (institutional change within environmental policy, environmental policy related to agriculture, legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy, national measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices, the importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy).
5. Conclusions and proposals for future co-operation.
Country reports, as they were prepared by the authors, present not only a factual situation of these topics in individual countries, but can also serve as an indicator of the availability of relevant information and the state of conceptual knowledge about agri-environmental and sustainability issues.
1 Although selected and invited, the participant from Slovenia did not attend the Workshop and submit a paper. However, it is expected that Slovenia will take part in future Network activities.
<section>4</section>
OPENING REMARKS
Konrad Hagedorn
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of Agricultural Economics and
Social Sciences
Nearly ten years ago, transformation of the political and economic system started in the Central and Eastern European countries and at that point in time people in the former socialist societies were disappointed because of the failure of the old system, and most of them may simultaneously have had great expectations for the new system which was still to come. Hopes and fears, discouragement and new motivation were somehow mixed together. The struggles and upheavals which led to the fundamental changes in institutions and policies differed from country to country and were accompanied by tremendous insecurities. However, two points seemed to be rather clear for the politicians and the political advisors in transition countries:
1. The frame of reference for transforming the centrally planned economies had to be the western societies and economies because they had proven to be more successful. As a consequence, the rules and institutions of western democracies and economies, above all market mechanisms, had to be introduced.
2. Because of this clear objective, most of the politicians and economists were convinced that this change would be feasible within a limited number of years although it would take some time to complete the transformation. Only a few people predicted that there would be tremendous difficulties connected with the task of transforming deeply rooted norms, habits and informal institutions.
However, there is a German saying which goes: "Wenn man vom Rathaus kommt, ist man klüger". This means: "When you return from the town hall you are more clever". As far as the second point I mentioned is concerned, many of us were surprised how difficult and how slowly transformation of agriculture turned out to be.
In particular, the discussions among agricultural economists first focused predominantly on the farm level, and they mainly raised two questions related to the transaction costs economics of farm enterprises:
(a) Which farm size will emerge? To what extent will decreasing production costs - due to economies of scale - be accompanied by likewise decreasing transaction costs or, on the contrary, be outweighed by progressively increasing transaction costs?
(b) Which organizational structure of farming will be the most competitive, if production co-operatives, limited companies, joint-stock companies, partnerships, for example, are compared with family farms?
Then, however, many authorities recognized that this conception was incomplete: Which system of agricultural production will be dominant depends not only on the transaction costs in the farm enterprises. The level of transaction costs within these economic units is interrelated with the level of transaction costs in other areas of economic activity which are in permanent interaction with farms. Accordingly, institutional solutions to reduce transaction costs of agricultural production also have to take into account product markets, factor markets, the farm family, institutions to internalize external effects (with special reference to environmental problems), training and education institutions, price information systems, extension systems and many other agrarian institutions.
Nevertheless, yet another issue was more or less excluded. The evolution of agrarian institutions still appeared to be a question of minimising transaction costs by means of self-organization within the domain of private action. If this were true, the political economy of collective action would not play any role in this process. Since agricultural policies are strongly influenced by group interests, this assumption had to be dropped and political determinants of institutional change of socialist agricultural systems became a part of the game: electoral control and party competition, interpretation systems for legitimating agricultural policies, collective action by interest groups, coalition building, log rolling, bureaucracy, negotiation processes, only to mention some examples.
In other words, it may be reasonable to solely consider the farm unit as a transaction-cost saving entity if we are in a well-developed and stable agricultural sector which is not affected by major changes due to structural adjustment or reform policies. In a period of fundamental transformation of the farm sector, however, the whole network of relationships has to be taken into account. But after we have learned that we have to consider the whole network of interrelationships between the many institutional and political elements, what does this mean for the feasibility of transformation? This means that - if we take an idealistic view - all elements and relationships within the institutional network must change in a harmonious manner when passing from collective or state ownership to private land ownership or from collectivized to de-collectivized agricultural structures. Some of the components may have to change quickly, others more slowly, some may have to be reformed in
early, others in later stages of the process. This depends on the question of what kind of evolutionary interaction will maintain and improve the workability of the system. Furthermore, this means that all actors in the various parts of the system must be willing and must be able to perform these changes in a coordinated or even co-operative way and do not act against the transformation process. Most of the difficulties in the transformation process can be explained by the fact that such a harmonious change is nearly impossible.
As far as the first point I mentioned earlier is concerned, as a frame of reference for transforming Central and Eastern European countries, Western economies and societies appear to be a less reliable model which can be copied without any modification and additional considerations. This is due to the fundamental insight that the systems developed in the Western countries are not in accordance with the requirements of sustainability. In other words, not only the Central and Eastern European economies have to be transformed, but also the Western economies need fundamental transformation towards sustainability and, up to now, nobody has refuted the hypothesis that this transformation towards sustainability may be even more fundamental and more difficult than the transitions taking place in the former centrally planned economies.
In fact, the changes required to achieve sustainability may have been underestimated. This can easily be explained if we refer to Herman Daly, an ecological economist from Maryland, who likes to point out, as he for instance did in his book "Beyond Growth", that we as economists do have a stop rule in microeconomics, but have forgotten to establish a similar stop rule in the macroeconomic sphere. In microeconomics, we often have to make decisions on how far we should extend economic activity by applying the principle of equalising marginal costs and marginal yields. However, in macroeconomics we usually recommend maximizing economic growth and do not apply a similar stop rule. This appears to be only rational, because we conceive of the economy as being the only entity we have to take into account, an entity which has no relationships with other entities in our society.
But this is not the case. We all know that besides the economy there is the social system, the cultural system and above all ecological systems, nature and landscape. And, in principle, we also know that marginal gains in the economy are, in most cases, linked to marginal costs in the other areas I have just mentioned: loss of social cohesion and social hardship, destruction of natural capital and disturbances in the functions of the ecosystems, negative impacts on culture and on the identity of people concerned. Instead of concentrating on economic growth, decision makers should change to an integrated view on these different spheres of human activity and human well-being. And this integrating view is what environmental and ecological economists mean by "sustainability".
Sustainability as a new paradigm may also serve as the leading principle of our network. What is this network supposed to be: CEESA, that means Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agricultural Network, is intended to focus on countries in transition and to discuss the topic sustainable agriculture in these countries. It consists of agricultural and environmental or ecological economists and social scientists and it will hopefully stimulate research and communication among the members of the network and develop co-operative relationships with many groups and actors.
We will go into more detail about the goals and the structure of the network in the next session, but before doing so I would like to thank all those who helped to establish the network and made this first workshop possible. First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to Stjepan Tanic and all those people involved from the FAO/SEUR Budapest for providing the financial and organizational pre-requisites for this workshop. I am very grateful that we found such a friendly and constructive partner for the first step of the network's activities. I also want to thank the staff of the Institute of Environmental and Landscape Management from Gödöllö Agricultural University, in particular Laszlo Podmanicky, who acted as local organizer of this workshop and has done a lot of work in preparing this meeting. Let me also address all those of you who have prepared country reports and other papers for this workshop. We appreciate your co-operation very much. Without your papers about
the situation in the participating countries we would have no basis for our discussion. And last but not least let me mention the organising group from our institute at Humboldt University, the Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences and, above all, Ms Antonia Lütteken, who is a PhD student of mine and has very enthusiastically developed the idea of this network and has done most of the preparations in Berlin. She has received support from two people who have recently joined the group. These are Mrs Renate Judis and Ms Beate Holthusen, who are also involved in the sessions, in particular in activities of moderation and documentation.
I wish and I think, that we will have a very fruitful workshop, and that this will be the start of a co-operative network and that in the end we will have produced some results which can contribute to both scientific progress and applied solutions to our problems as well.
<section>5</section>
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE WORKSHOP
1. Participants agreed that this workshop was very useful:
* in establishing contacts between identified scientists and other professionals interested in sustainable agricultural development,
* in the exchange of experiences and opinions,
* in getting acquainted with the agri-environmental situation in the countries from the sub-region,
* in raising awareness of sustainability concepts and issues,
* in stimulating human capacity building,
* in identifying necessities and priorities for research on sustainable agricultural development in the sub-region.
2. The workshop helped to identify the most serious environmental problems; the main obstacles and the chances of reaching the goal of sustainable agriculture in the CEECs. The opinions of participants will be compiled by Humboldt University included in the proceedings of the Workshop (Table 1).
3. Differences between the countries with respect to their attained level of sustainable agricultural development are mostly caused by a different approaches to the rearrangement of property rights as the most important institutional arrangement in the reform process.
4. Common characteristics of the countries with respect to their achieving the objective of sustainable agricultural development, identified by participants were:
* While extensification in the use of inputs during the past period has led to lower pollution emissions, there is, however, no guarantee that this will lead to sustainable agriculture;
* Deep financial crisis in both agriculture and the economy as a whole restricts the introduction of sustainability-oriented technologies and practices and leads to the abandonment and or degradation of previous long-term investments in soil fertility and erosion-control measures. This, in turn, results in the degradation of natural resources and the environment.
* Current agricultural policies are oriented towards addressing short-term priorities, with emphasis given to intensification and increases in production, thus neglecting to give appropriate attention to the long-term interests of preserving natural resources.
5. The framework for future activities of the CEESA should include a strategy for research and communication that helps to:
* change the present situation in agriculture from an extensive one caused by difficulties in structural adjustment, to long-lasting, sustainable agriculture;
* propose corresponding incentive systems for the farmers by means of adequate sustainability-oriented policy instruments;
* promote the system of institutions during transformation that would lead to the improved protection of nature.
6. Based on the resource papers, during the discussions the participants agreed that the three main areas of activities and research treated by the CEESA should be sustainable farming systems, agricultural and environmental policies and the institutional concept of sustainability. For each of those areas a working group was formed together with a contact person responsible for preparing an initial draft concept of research and communication in the respective area.
7. To stimulate communication within the Network, it was agreed that participation in the CEESA should be extended to decision-makers and to other interested and qualified professionals. To further stimulate information exchange it has also been agreed that the CEESA needs to develop a networking capacity for distribution of information.
8. In order to assure envisaged future activities, representatives of the FAO and Humboldt University should take initiative to identify support for the future activities of the Network.
9. The reports presented at the workshop provide a good background as to the issues that were dealt with. Together with other papers presented at the workshop, country reports should be published by the FAO as the proceedings of this workshop and circulated as soon as possible.
Table 1: Major environmental problems, hazards and chances on the way to sustainability in Central and Eastern Europe
Country Most serious environmental problems Main hazards to sustainability Main chances for sustainability
Bulgaria Soil acidification Decreasing soil fertility Restoration of the full property rights Quality of natural and human resources 
Croatia Harmonisation of conventional and sustainable agriculture Soil degradation Trends to increase agricultural production Lack of awareness and knowledge Low level of contamination Favourable legislative basis
Czech Republic Water pollution Soil degradation Lack of communication between government, NGOs, farmers Property rights do not favour conservation Transition itself, i.e. choosing the right way EU integration, policy level + participation (NGOs)
Estonia Ground water pollution Land privatization Increase in quality of management Supportive economic regulations
Hungary Liquid manure ponds Old machines & technologies Lack of awareness Lack of capital Pressure from EU High level of education
Latvia Heritage of former period Lack of economic basis for sustainable agriculture Natural resources relatively preserved and diverse
Lithuania Degradation of drainage systems Afforestation Insufficient financial resources Culture, ethics 
Poland Soil erosion Water pollution Consumer habits Lack of institutions interested in sustainable agriculture Transition process Current situation in agriculture
Romania Soil degradation (erosion, humus) Water pollution Weak legislative framework, low funding Low coherence between sectoral policies and regional environment NGOs and government concern International agreements and environmental projects
Slovakia Industrial emission Soil erosion and acidification Conflict between environmental and production objectives Financial aspects Increase in GDP Good agricultural policy
Ukraine Destruction of nature's reproduction ability Lack of national policy for -balanced agri-cultural development Conflict between state policy and farmers' needs Land privatization Favourable ecological and economic regulations
<section>6</section>
BACKGROUND, SCIENTIFIC CONCEPT AND OBJECTIVES OF THE NETWORK
Konrad Hagedorn and Antonia Lütteken
Humboldt University of Berlin
Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences
INTRODUCTION
CEESA is intended to become a network of interested scientists and experts and is oriented towards the following objectives:
* It focuses on the topic "sustainable agriculture" integrating economic, social and ecological aspects of agrarian and rural development, but gives priority to environmental issues without neglecting the other ones.
* It consists of agricultural and environmental or ecological economists and social scientists, but also depends on the knowledge and cooperation of ecologists, agronomists and other experts.
* It stimulates research and communication between the members of the network by adequate activities like workshops, publications and networking and tries to develop cooperative relationships to other organizations.
In this paper, we will first point out how this idea came into being, for what reasons it was established, what the main goals are, which subjects of research are planned to be covered and how the process of communication will be scheduled over time. All these concepts should be regarded as preliminary suggestions which will be discussed and can be changed by the participants themselves.
BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT
Throughout the history of mankind, the economic activity has always relied on the availability of natural resources used for production and consumption and on a well-functioning ecosystem because its services were indispensable. Although traditional societies have also experienced many cases of ecological crisis, most of them developed norms and procedures that protected the natural environment. However, this has changed substantially since modern technologies have increasingly enabled economic and political actors to deplete natural resources and to disturb or even destroy elements of and relationships in the ecosystem. Agriculture and its ecological impact on rural areas has given many examples of this problem.
Since we know as economists that the emergence of ecological problems is closely connected with the fact that environmental goods are public goods which require collective action and are otherwise not provided, theoretical reasoning has led to a conclusion that appears to be logical: In the process of constant development of new technologies we expect the mechanisms of economic competition to be always able to select the most favourable ones among the new opportunities. However, these mechanisms have not only selected those options that increased productivity and efficiency, but often gave priority to those ones that only gave the appearance of economic progress because they burdened external cost on nature and ecosystems. From this we have learned that we have to redefine progress, and some members of our discipline argue that this simultaneously means to redefine economics to a large extent.
In socialist systems, the economic coordination was neither separated from the political system nor left to market mechanisms and other pluralistic arrangements, but was integrated into the hierarchies of central planning. In principle, this presents a governance structure which could more easily prevent external cost to be allocated to nature. However, the inefficiencies of the system often left little scope for avoiding environmental pollution and damage. Therefore, the above conclusion is in sharp contradiction to empirical findings. During the socialist era the idea of sustainable development was obviously even more neglected in the Central and Eastern European countries (CEE countries) than in the western industrialized countries, a phenomenon that also applies to the agricultural sector. At present, problems of environmental protection and nature conservation increase in importance particularly within the agricultural sector and have, therefore, to be taken into
account in the current long-lasting transition process. "Old" environmental issues deriving from the past and "new" problems of resource protection which result from the transition process itself have to be tackled simultaneously.
A variety of investigations regarding the environmental situation in transition countries demonstrate that there is considerable need for economic, institutional and political approaches in order to find adequate solutions that meet the requirements of sustainability. On the one hand, serious environmental damage have been documented in CEE countries, and also in the agricultural sector where particularly improper agricultural practices have caused severe environmental problems. On the other hand, areas showing a high biodiversity have been kept more or less untouched in economically less important regions. Some of them have now obtained a new status as protected areas.
The crucial question to be answered is whether and how the requirements of environmental protection and nature conservation will be taken into account in the process of restructuring the political and economic framework. This holds especially true of the agricultural sector. During the first years of transition, the impact of agriculture on the environment declined in most of the countries due to a lack of liquidity and other typical transformation problems like insecurity of property rights. After these difficulties have been overcome, economic recovery of the sector will lead to an increasing intensity of production. This will probably be correlated with the increase in negative impacts on natural resources if the process is not accompanied by adequate environmental measures and arrangements to achieve intensification in a sustainable manner.
The guiding question of our network will be whether the transition of the agricultural sector and the transition to sustainable development will be both achievable and compatible. The complexity of this subject can be highlighted by defining four main issues:
1. Can the transition process cope with the requirements of environmentally sound development? - This initial question refers to the above-mentioned observation that natural capital and ecosystem services may be neglected in the transition process. This could be due to the fact that economic and political actors are dominated by the motivation to distribute land and other assets which secure long-term private income streams, and forget about the importance of public goods and institutions for providing these goods. In this respect, they have to cope with the additional difficulty that such "institutions for sustainability" cannot simply be copied from the western world, but also here they are still to be designed ^2.
2. Does the transition towards a market economy simultaneously facilitate a change towards the paradigm of sustainable development? - This extended question can be considered as a response to the insight that environmental protection cannot be achieved against the economic, social, political, cultural and ethical convictions and interests of the groups and actors involved. Instead of an isolated view on environmental issues an extended perspective integrating these aspects is required, and the network's approaches and results on ecological and related economic questions must always be based on this understanding of sustainability.
3. Will the traditional and the transformed agricultural institutions both support this transition towards sustainability? - This question emphasizes a 