<title>Forest Energy Forum No 5. Forest Energy Forum Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
Many important events have occurred during this semester, as you will see when reading the different articles presented in this issue. Some of them are very positive, interesting and encouraging for those of us involved in bioenergy themes and aspects; others, however, are not so good.
I regret to report that among these was the death of David Hall on 22 August at the age of 63. David was a professor of biology at King's College London, from where he contributed to many issues. In particular, he made an outstanding contribution to our Wood Energy Programme in its work on bioenergy, and bioenergy and its interrelation with global climate change, energy and environmental policies.
It is really hard for me to describe my Latin feelings about David's outstanding ability to see, write and describe the bioenergy situation and contribution, and the connections and interrelations between different disciplines, technologies and policies. With his work and assistance David helped us, our partners and me in particular, to develop bioenergy to its present status as an environmentally friendly source of energy and as an option for the mobilization of investment for rural development.
However, it was in the early 1990s, when few people trusted wood energy as a modern source of energy, that David helped me and proved to be so useful. At that time, David used all his efforts and talent to support and promote bioenergy activities. Many thanks David. I, in the bioenergy community, will never be able to forget your dedication and great support for the inspiration of a new energy order. [See under Special Features for a tribute to Professor David Hall.]
During these past months we have seen the establishment of new bioenergy programmes, some of which will lead future bioenergy activities. For instance, the new plan established by President Clinton deserves special attention since it is quite clear that it will not only influence bioenergy activities in the industrialized world but also those in developing countries. [See under United States in our Country Compass section for more information.]
On the other hand, negotiations on climate change mitigation measures within the UNFCCC are proceeding very slowly and the COP-5 meeting in Bonn ended without any real important decision for us. One thing is becoming clear, however: the process is not going back and the use of environmentally friendly energy sources has encouraging perspectives.
In our specific area of work, I am pleased to announce that we have now finalized the third in our regional Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) studies "The role of wood energy in Africa", which presents woodfuel information and data for 55 African countries. According to the best current wood energy estimates, African woodfuel consumption reached 623 million m3 in 1994. The figures show that Africa has the highest per caput woodfuel consumption (0.89 m3/year) compared with other continents (e.g. Asia: 0.3 m3/caput/year) and that the woodfuel share ranges from 61 to 86 percent of primary energy consumption, with a major part (74 to 97 percent) consumed by households. Unfortunately, despite its important interactions with development, environment and social welfare, there have only been a few attempts in Africa to include woodfuels as a basic sector in the planning processes of forestry and energy agencies.
We are now preparing the fourth regional WETT study, covering the Latin American and Caribbean countries. More details will be given in our next issue.
Let's hope that forest energy continues to develop successfully in the new millennium!
Miguel A. Trossero
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
Professor David Hall
14 November 1935 - 22 August 1999
David Hall was Professor of Biology at King's College London, where he undertook research on biomass energy policy, environmental aspects, external costs, bioenergy in developing countries and the effects of climate change. He was internationally acclaimed for his expertise and experience in biomass. He was an adviser for the European Union and the United Nations, and travelled extensively in promoting the development of biomass technologies.
He was a leading contributor to two working groups of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and was Treasurer of the Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment and Director of the International Solar Energy Society.
As humanity grapples with one of the biggest transitions in its history, away from fossil fuels and towards clean and renewable energy, biomass will surely come to take its place as a prominent source of energy, especially in the tropics. Hall's work will always be acknowledged as a pioneering endeavour with major import for all our energy futures. He has left us at the height of his professional powers but, fortunately, with a bequest that should eventually enhance the lives of communities far and wide.
David was a good friend of FAO. He helped us develop our notions and programmes on bioenergy and always had the time and interest to discuss new ideas. His sense of humour, his unparalleled unselfishness and his love of life will always be remembered by those who felt and feel great pride at having known and worked with David, in the UN and in FAO.
David's friends in FAO
Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET)
The approach being used by FAO's Wood Energy Programme for the classification and differentiation of the various types of woodfuel, as well as its users and supply sources, was explained in the last issue of Forest Energy Forum. In this issue, definitions of the most important terms used in our proposed Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET) are described.
[See also the graph on page 3 of Forest Energy Forum No. 3, reproduced below.]
The basic idea behind UWET is to create an adequate framework to identify the amount and type of wood energy flowing from different supply sources to the final users. The fuel or product used to transport energy, therefore, is the basic parameter to be accounted and properly classified. Either by commercial or non-commercial ways, these fuels should always be considered as goods or commodities, worthy and able to solve any effective demand. UWET intends to make it easier to exchange the information and statistical data now available from different organizations, at both national and international levels, involved in the collection, collation and presentation of wood energy figures.
It is important to bear in mind that these definitions have been elaborated taking into consideration all the relevant definitions used, for biofuels in general and woodfuels in particular, and already agreed upon and discussed by different international organizations over the past 20 years.
Basic definitions
In a broad sense, energy is the capacity to promote changes and action (heating, motion, etc.) and biomass is all kinds of material coming directly or indirectly from contemporary photosynthesis reactions, such as all vegetal matter and derivatives: woodfuel, charcoal, paper, dung and a great portion of urban refuse. Bioenergy is the word used for energy associated with biomass, and biofuel is the bioenergy carrier, transporting solar energy stored as chemical energy. Biofuel should be considered as a renewable source of energy as long as there is sustainable biomass production.
The following are the main definitions to be used in UWET:
Woodfuels include all types of biofuels derived directly and indirectly from trees and shrubs grown in forests and non-forest lands. In the past, in FAOSTAT, fuelwood and charcoal included only what was derived from forest lands. WETT is trying to solve this problem using UWET. The definition of "forest" used in the FAO Forest Resource Assessment 1990 (FAO Forestry Paper No. 124, p. 7) is rather broad and includes lands with a minimum crown cover of 20 percent in developed countries and 10 percent in developing countries. Woodfuels also include biomass derived from silvicultural activities (thinning, pruning, etc.) and harvesting and logging (tops, roots, branches, etc.), as well as industrial by-products derived from primary and secondary forest industries which are used as fuel. They also include woodfuels derived from ad hoc forest energy plantations.
Woodfuel sources. Woodfuels can be divided into three groups according to their origin: direct woodfuels , indirect woodfuels and recovered woodfuels, defined as follows:
Direct woodfuels consist of wood directly removed from: forests (natural forests and plantations; land with tree crown cover of more than 10 percent and area of more than 0.5 ha); other wooded lands (land either with a tree crown cover of 5 to 10 percent of trees able to reach a height of at least 5 m at maturity in situ; or crown cover of more than 10 percent of trees not able to reach a height of 5 m at maturity in situ, and shrub or bush cover); and other lands to supply energy demands and including both inventoried (recorded in official statistics) and non-inventoried woodfuels.
Indirect woodfuels usually consist of industrial by-products, derived from primary (sawmills, particle boards, pulp and paper mills) and secondary (joinery, carpentry) wood industries, such as: sawmill rejects, slabs, edgings and trimmings, sawdust, shavings and chips, bark, black liquor, etc.
Recovered woodfuels refer to woody biomass derived from all economic and social activities outside the forest sector, usually wastes from construction sites, demolition of buildings, pallets, wooden containers and boxes, etc.
Direct woodfuels, indirect woodfuels and recovered woodfuels can be directly burnt or converted into another fuel, such as charcoal, pyrolysis gases, pellets, ethanol and methanol.
Woodfuel types. As regards the commodities to be considered for wood energy accounting, woodfuels can be presented in four types of product, fuelwood, charcoal, black liquor and other, defined as follows:
Fuelwood (or firewood) includes "wood in the rough" in small pieces (fuelwood), chips, pellets and/or powder derived from forests and isolated trees, as well as wood by-products from the wood products industry and from recovered woody products. It essentially preserves the original structure of wood and can be used either directly or after some conversion to another woodfuel, as charcoal. When needed, fuelwood can be prepared (without major physicochemical transformations) into more convenient products such as chips and pellets.
Chips are wood that has been deliberately reduced to small pieces from wood in the rough, or residues suitable for energy purposes.
Wood pellets can be considered as a fuel derived from the auto-agglomeration of woody material as a result of the combined application of heat and high pressure in an extrusion machine.
Charcoal refers to a solid residue derived from the carbonization, distillation, pyrolysis and torrefaction of wood (from the trunks and branches of trees) and wood by-products, using continuous or batch systems (pit, brick and metal kilns). It also includes charcoal briquettes, made from wood-based charcoal which, after crushing and drying, is moulded (often under high pressure), generally with the admixture of binders, to form artefacts of even shapes.
Black liquor is the alkaline-spent liquor obtained from the digesters in the production of sulphate or soda pulp during the process of paper production, in which the energy content is mainly derived from the content of lignin removed from the wood in the pulping process.
Other woodfuels include a broad range of liquid and gaseous fuels derived from fuelwood and charcoal basically by pyrolitic or enzymatic processes, such as pyrolisis gases, ethanol, methanol, products which are of growing interest but so far not very important as energy commodities.
Woodfuel users. Traditionally woodfuels were assumed to be used mainly by households. However, in some geographical areas, the use of woodfuels by the industrial and commercial sectors is also very important. Therefore, wood energy systems are not completely understood if the consumption side is not properly disaggregated by main users and/or consumption sectors.
Moreover, with the growing demand for woodfuel by new users of industrial wood energy, particularly for industrial power and heat, it is important to understand who is using woodfuels, how much they are using and where. This information is vital for analysing and planning sustainable and cost-effective wood energy systems.
For this reason, in our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS) woodfuel consumption data are categorized within the following main areas:
* residential sector (sometimes divided into rural and urban households);
* commercial;
* industrial; and
* power heat generation.
For more information, please contact Miguel Trossero.
[Information on units and conversion factors will be given in future issues of Forest Energy Forum.]
Bioenergy - encouraging perspectives
The multifunctional character of agriculture and land: bioenergy
Agriculture is intrinsically multifunctional in character. Furthermore, all agricultural activity and related land use lead directly to other non-agricultural functions ranging over social, environmental, economic and cultural goods and services, which can result in significant benefits or costs. However, there is abundant evidence that, beyond food security, the multifunctional character of agriculture makes significant contributions to achieving rural development, energy and environmental sustainability at the local, national, regional and global levels. An improved and more systematic understanding of this "multifunctional character" can lead directly to even greater benefits. Its significance constitutes a major issue for contemporary policy-makers and practitioners alike. This document is an attempt to assess the energy function of agriculture.
The role of agriculture as an energy consumer related to the energy needs for irrigation, fertilization, transport, processing and conservation is quite well documented, even if it is still necessary to view the energy/food nexus more systematically.
The role of agriculture as a major energy producer is neither recognized nor mobilized. Recent considerations regarding global climate change and the realization of the potential of biomass energy as a motor for rural development have triggered new attention. This study draws from these new concerns and understanding.
Bioenergy production and use is an important agricultural activity, particularly in many rural areas of developing countries.
Currently biomass energy provides about 55 EJ (equivalent to 25 million barrels per day of oil, and providing 14 percent of total global energy while being number one [34 percent] in developing countries as a whole), both in its traditional and modern forms. It can represent more than 90 percent of total energy use in many developing countries, and as much as 20 percent in some industrial countries. Much of this energy originates from various types of agricultural and forestry residues, although in the future various types of energy crops and plantations are expected to provide the main source.
Biomass was the main source of energy until the early twentieth century. It was only during the past few decades, the so-called "oil era", that biomass energy was less recognized and largely ignored by policy-makers and energy planners alike. Current trends indicate that the amount of bioenergy used remains stable (or even growing), with an increased use in industrial countries, such as European Union members and the United States, mainly for environmental rather than purely energy reasons. Since the early 1990s, the increasing interest in biomass for energy has been manifested in most energy scenarios showing biomass as a potential major source of energy in the twenty-first century, ranging from 59 to 145 EJ by 2025. This expected increase in biomass energy could have a significant impact on agricultural development.
Despite the high energy intensity of agriculture in industrial countries, in global terms the agricultural sector consumes little energy in comparison with other industrial sectors. In fact, in many developing countries these inputs are very low. This means that: first, by adopting western patterns for modernization of agriculture higher amounts of energy would result; and, second, the potential of carbon mitigation in agriculture from decreased energy use is much smaller than in other sectors. The combined potential of agricultural systems for mitigating CO^2 has been estimated at between 0.94 and 2.53 PgC/year compared with present global emissions of 7.0 PgC/year.
In the short to medium term, residues will continue to be major sources of bioenergy and thus would have less direct implications for agriculture than would be the case if large-scale energy crops and plantations were established on agricultural land. Thus, guidelines for residues use are urgently needed to determine what is and what is not renewable to ensure maximum environmental advantages, as has been done with energy forestry/crops/plantations. The large-scale use of animal manure for energy is questionable because the non-energy uses may have greater value, except in specific circumstances where surplus manure poses environmental problems for agriculture, such as in Denmark, where surplus manure is treated to produce biogas and also fertilizer as a by-product.
Energy technology has been improved over the past two centuries to meet certain economic and also environmental criteria but not for sequestering carbon. Large-scale use of bioenergy, when it reaches market maturity, offers the most effective alternative to carbon sequestration. The conventional view that use of biofuels was often a cause of land degradation, deforestation and health hazards is not supported by evidence. For example, health hazards of biofuels are a more direct consequence of cultural practices, underdevelopment and poverty than to the nature of biofuels themselves. Most of these negative impacts could be eliminated by improved socio-economic conditions (such as better housing) and improved technology (such as improved cooking stoves).
Agricultural development has been very unequal around the world, which is to be expected given the differing level of development, resource endowment, climatic conditions, policies, etc. In many developing countries a major reason has been the lack of political support to farmers for infrastructure, markets, R&D and extension, for example, despite the fact that agriculture is often the main source of livelihood for the majority of the population. Some of these shortcomings are now being addressed through more consultation with the farming community, greater recognition that traditional farming knowledge has a role to play, that modernization of agriculture needs good technical skills, and of the role of women in food production, etc. There is also greater recognition of the potential role of bioenergy in socio-economic development and in food production. Bioenergy can be a large (if normally secondary) source of employment and income for many farmers in remote rural areas.
The potential implications of large-scale production and use of bioenergy for the rural economy are significant and thus should not be overlooked.
Climate change and the potential implications for agriculture poses many questions for which there are still very few answers. Simply not enough is known to make any meaningful predictions. Much more long-term research is needed before any unequivocal recommendations can be made. The intricacies of land availability, food and fuel competition are being addressed more seriously, and it is now more widely accepted that land availability is not at the core of the problem but agricultural mismanagement, waste, land tenure, policy interference, etc. are more crucial problems. The potential role of bioenergy has been addressed more seriously since the early 1990s when global concerns about sustainability and environmental impacts of development were put high on the political agenda and privatization of the energy sector started to be a major issue.
Farmers have demonstrated their capacity for change and innovation if they see clear opportunities. With proper support (extension services, infrastructure, financial services, etc.), farmers will be able to produce far more food and energy, provided that the necessary changes are put in place. It is important to remember that production of food and energy in agriculture are mutually interrelated and complementary. Bioenergy programmes which couple with agroforestry and integrated farming can improve food production by making energy and income available, where it is needed, in a more environmentally and sustainable manner.
However, bioenergy production is a complex issue that depends on many and varying factors. Bioenergy should not be regarded as the panacea for solving agricultural and energy problems in the rural areas, but as an activity which can play a significant role in improving agricultural productivity, energy supply, the environment and sustainability. Its final contribution will depend on a combination of social, economic, environmental, energy and technological factors. The multifunctional character of agriculture and its potential role in bioenergy production should receive greater recognition, together with the need for positive political encouragement, and socio-cultural adaptations.
Policy recommendations
Policies and institutions should
* bring the vast potential of bioenergy for CO^2-mitigation, energy efficiency and rural development on the political agenda - particularly that of national and international agricultural authorities;
* stress the large potential role of bioenergy technologies in the transition process to a cleaner and more sustainable energy scenario using carbon substitution (substituting biofuels for fossil fuels) and the opportunities this represents for the agricultural sector;
* stimulate the integration of the energy aspect into the agricultural sector and the potential of bioenergy for the energy sector. International organizations such as the World Bank, FAO and other United Nations agencies should take the lead in this by allocating resources and personnel to the field of bioenergy and agriculture. Their example would help support similar actions by national governments, non-governmental organizations, etc.;
* support those countries with relatively limited capacity in the bioenergy field for assessing their bioenergy and agriculture potential and for negotiating investments. They might also be in need of support to acquire technologies, skills and investments (e.g. under the Clean Development Mechanism) to develop their potential fully in line with their country's needs. International organizations are in the ideal position to act as "honest brokers" and support them in this capacity-building process, for instance through the provision of information and technical assistance;
* use the existing trends of privatization and decentralization in the energy sector for stimulating research and investment in the production and use of bioenergy and agriculture;
* promote and formulate clear policies to promote bioenergy on an equal footing with conventional sources by internalizing the external costs of conventional energy, that is, ensuring that the polluter pays the full costs.
Research, development and extension should
* assess in greater detail the interrelationships between energy and agriculture for different agricultural systems, plants and management systems - especially in relation to climate change;
* study and promote the integrated management of energy and other inputs such as water and fertilizers to gain a better understanding of the synergies regarding natural resource management and to develop sound management practices and tools;
* develop tools for the rapid field assessment of bioenergy potential in agricultural production areas and transfer these tools to agricultural authorities and farmers;
* promote R&D of promising technologies for the production and use of biomass energy and conversion technologies and efficient energy flows.
Projects and financing should
* stimulate the implementation of existing commercially viable bioenergy technologies, such as cogeneration with agroresidues, sustainable charcoal making, etc. by making available capital, credit and tax incentives. These projects should be used to demonstrate to the world at large the potential and viability of bioenergy and agriculture;
* tap into existing mechanisms such as the Clean Development Mechanism and the Global Environment Facility to finance demonstration and research projects; and attract international finance for sustainable agroforestry projects in remote and underdeveloped areas that have the potential of producing energy and water for more developed areas.
(Extracted from: the executive summary of Bioenergy, a paper prepared by David Hall and Frank Rosillo-Calle of King's College London and finalized under the supervision of Gustavo Best, FAO's Senior Energy Coordinator. This paper represents one of the background documents of the FAO/Netherlands Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land [MFCAL], held in Maastricht, the Netherlands, 12-17 September 1999. The full paper is available for downloading at: www.fao.org/mfcal/pdf/bp_2_bio.pdf )
[See under Events for more information on the conference .]
Bioenergy is a means to achieve all of these objectives - to heat our homes, to fuel our vehicles and to power our factories while producing virtually no greenhouse gas pollution. To make the most of these opportunities, government and industry must work together, as partners. In "industry" I include agriculture and small and big business, government and everyone in the private sector who is involved in this. (Extracted from: President Clinton's speech at the Bioenergy Climate Change Event, United States Department of Agriculture, 12 August 1999.)
FAO, IEA and bioenergy
A draft Memorandum of Understanding between FAO's Forestry Department and the International Energy Agency (IEA) covering a programme of research, development and demonstration on bioenergy is under preparation.
A meeting with Mr J. Tustin, Secretary, IEA Bioenergy, was held at FAO in September 1999 when details were discussed about possible areas of cooperation to be established in the coming months. We expect that closer collaboration with IEA, and IEA Bioenergy in particular, will play a catalytic role in increasing the visibility of the use of biomass as an environmentally friendly source of energy.
For more information, please contact:Miguel Trossero.
[More information will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
Logo
FORESTS BRANCH OFF...
into carbon sequestration and substitution
FAO task force on the role of forestry in carbon sequestration
Mr Wulf Killmann, Director of the Forest Products Division, has taken over as Chairman of the FAO Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration. Mr Miguel Trossero will continue as Technical Secretary. Mr Killmann has kindly accepted our invitation to give us his views.
Carbon sequestration and substitution contribute considerably towards the mitigation of global warming and, thus, climate change. Forestry and forest activities play important roles in the process of carbon sequestration and substitution. There are a number of forestry practices helping to slow the accumulation of CO^2 in the atmosphere, and the Kyoto Protocol, with its three flexible mechanisms proposed in article 12, offers possibilities of funding them.
Although many of the details required to put the flexible mechanisms into practice (such as clear definitions, guidelines and carbon accounting schemes) are still to be defined and the Kyoto Protocol has not yet been ratified by the signatory nations, investment in forestry projects in developing countries with the purpose of carbon sequestration and substitution has already started. In fact, some joint implementation projects, such as those funded through the Dutch foundation, Forest Absorbing CO^2 Emissions (FACE), started in the early 1980s.
At present, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is preparing a special report to clarify some of these details. Members of the Ad Hoc Group on Climate in Relation to Agriculture and Food Security and the Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration were involved in the technical review of this report.
With its worldwide mandate, FAO can assist its member countries in making use of the opportunities opening up under the Clean Development Mechanism defined in the Kyoto Protocol. The function of the Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration will be to advise the respective forestry sector of the member country. In particular, it will:
* collect, compile and analyse information on the subject;
* prepare technical and position papers;
* make the information available to member countries, the public and the private sector and to non-governmental organizations (NGOs);
* facilitate the exchange of information and experiences between member countries; and
* liaise and network with other agencies, NGOs and the private sector.
We are looking forward to cooperating actively with all of you.
[See also Forest Energy Forum No. 3 for more information on this Task Force.]
Advisory committee on paper and wood products (ACPWP)
During the recent meeting of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP) in Brazil
(27-28 April 1999), the committee recommended that FAO should give more attention and resource allocation to activities on carbon sequestration and substitution, carbon accounting and a general follow-up of forestry issues in connection with the Kyoto Protocol. This will be followed up in the next session of the committee which is scheduled to take place in May 2000 in New Zealand.
As a consequence, FAO's Forest Products Division will employ a short-term expert to advise on the areas within this context where the FAO Forestry Department might contribute, taking into consideration the involvement of others within and outside FAO.
For more information, please contact: Mr Jacques Lahaussois, Technical Secretary, Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, Forest Products Division, Forestry Department FAO.
Boreal forests and forestry in the global carbon budget
The role of forests and forestry in the global carbon budget has become an important research issue. It is also of increasing international policy interest, as indicated by the inclusion of some forestry practices in the Kyoto Protocol. Nevertheless, there remains a diversity of scientific opinion regarding sinks and sources of greenhouse gases associated with forests and forestry practices, particularly in northern latitudes.
Forests in the boreal zone are an important part of the cultural and economic wealth of northern countries. Among the world's few remaining natural forests, boreal forests are known to be very large stores of carbon and play an important role in the annual exchange of greenhouse gases with the atmosphere. There is global concern about the increasing effect of greenhouse gases on our climate and continuing scientific debate about the role of circumpolar boreal forests as a sink or source of atmospheric CO^2, one of the prime greenhouse gases. A number of important scientific and forest management issues are attached to questions of climate change and the role of natural disturbances in the global carbon budget. How can these forests be sustainably managed as renewable sources of fibre and wood products while preserving their carbon storage abilities? Recalling the 1995 finding of the IPCC that boreal forests were perhaps the most vulnerable of the earth's forests, what
changes can be expected in the forest's carbon balance associated with climate change itself?
The Canadian Forest Service and the International Boreal Forest Research Association are organizing an international science conference on The Role of Boreal Forests and Forestry in the Global Carbon Budget, in Edmonton, Canada in May 2000. Discussions will focus on the current scientific understanding of forest carbon dynamics in the circumpolar boreal region, as well as the unique ecological, economic and social conditions that influence management decisions regarding carbon sequestration, 