<title>FAO - C 99/Report. Report of the Conference of FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
TWENTY-FIRST MCDOUGALL MEMORIAL LECTURE^1
1. Mr.Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, and a former United Nations Secretary-General, delivered the Twenty-first McDougall Memorial Lecture, in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization.
PRESENTATION OF THE B.R. SEN AWARDS 1998 AND 1999^2
2. The annual B.R. Sen Award, in honour of the late Mr B.R. Sen, who was Director-General of FAO from 1956 to 1967, is bestowed on an FAO field officer who has made an outstanding contribution to the country or countries to which he or she was assigned.
3. The 1998 B.R. Sen Award was conferred on Mr Eduardo Seminario Martín, a national of Peru, in recognition of his major contribution in developing and utilizing participatory approaches to integrated watershed management and environmental policy and planning in Burundi. Mr Seminario Martin contributed to the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as to improving the living conditions of rural populations in the country.
4. The 1999 Award was conferred on Mr Abdelouahhab Zaid, a national of Morocco, for his outstanding achievements on the Date Production Support Programme in Namibia. This highly visible Programme contributed not only to promoting food security and the fight against desertification, but also to poverty alleviation and creation of employment.
PRESENTATION OF THE A.H. BOERMA AWARD 1998-99^3
5. The A.H. Boerma Award for 1998-99 was presented jointly to Mr Patrick Luganda, Senior Features Writer of "The New Vision" newspaper (Uganda), for his contribution in increasing public awareness of the importance of food security in his country, and to Mr Alain Zolty as Chief Editor of "Afrique Agriculture", a specialized monthly magazine that had greatly facilitated the comprehension of food and agricultural issues in the world, particularly in the Africa Region.
PRESENTATION OF THE EDOUARD SAOUMA AWARD^4
6. The Edouard Saouma Award for 1998-99 was shared between two national institutions for their outstanding contribution to the implementation of TCP funded projects. At the invitation of the Director-General, Mr Edouard Saouma attended the ceremony and personally bestowed the Award to representatives of the institutions.
7. The Award was presented to the "Dirección Forestal, Ministerio de la Agricultura" in Cuba, represented by Mr Linares Landa Elías. This institution formulated forestry legislation that offered an improved framework for sustainable forest and encouraged people's participation in forestry activities (TCP/CUB/5612).
8. The Award was also presented to the "General Department of Plant Protection" in Yemen, represented by Mr Mohamed Yahya Ali Al-Ghashim. It had developed and implemented a control technology that effectively curbed the outbreak of an insect pest in stone and pome fruit (TCP/YEM/4555).
PRESENTATION OF THE MARGARITA LIZÁRRAGA MEDAL^5
9. The Margarita Lizárraga Medal for 1998-99 was presented to the non-governmental organization, National Fisheries Solidarity (NAFSO) of Sri Lanka, for its outstanding and pragmatic initiative in taking practical steps to have the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries translated into the Sinhala language and distributed to fish workers in the country, as well as in organizing meetings to promote a better understanding of its various aspects among poor, small-scale fishing communities that would not otherwise have had access to the Code.
IN MEMORIAM^6
10. The Conference observed one minute of silence in memory of those staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since the Conference had last met. The names of the deceased staff members were read out and are contained in the Verbatim Records of the Conference.
11. The Conference paid tribute to the memory of Mr Hans W.O. Röbbel, Director, Field Operations Division and former Director, Conference, Council and Protocol Affairs Division, and Assistant Secretary-General of the Council and Conference, who had passed away on 13 October 1999.
INTRODUCTION AND REVIEW OF THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSONS^7
12. The Council nominated and the Conference elected Benalia Belhouadjeb (Algeria) as Chairperson of the Thirtieth Session of the Conference.
13. The Conference approved the appointment of the three Vice-Chairpersons of the Conference recommended by the Nominations Committee, as follows:
Juan Nuiry Sánchez (Cuba)
Saeed Nouri-Naeeni (Iran, Islamic Republic of)
Jan Berteling (Netherlands)
APPOINTMENT OF GENERAL COMMITTEE AND CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE^8
14. The Nominations Committee recommended and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Seven Members of the General Committee 
Burkina Faso Estonia Sweden
China Mexico United States of America
Egypt 
Nine Members of the Credentials Committee
Australia Germany Iraq
Belgium Haiti Japan
Canada Indonesia Tunisia
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE SESSION^9
15. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this Report.
16. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairpersons, Vice-Chairpersons and Drafting Committees
17. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish two Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I and II of the Agenda.
18. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and Rule XXIV-5 (b) of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO), the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairpersons of the Commissions which the Conference approved:
Commission I Luigi M. Fontana-Giusti (Italy)
Commission II Bhaskar Barua (India)
19. Victor Manuel Rebolledo González (Chile) was elected as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee for Commission I with the following membership: Barbados, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Finland, Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, New Zealand, Syria and Thailand.
20. Renaud Collard (France) was elected as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee for Commission II with the following membership: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, France, Ghana, Iraq, Japan, Pakistan, Sweden, United States of America and Zimbabwe.
21. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 GRO, also appointed the following Vice-Chairpersons:
Commission I Ms Victoria Guardia Alvarado (Costa Rica)
Bob Jalang'o (Kenya)
Commission II Bill Doering (Canada)
Ms Anneli Vourinen (Finland)
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
22. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council to establish a Resolutions Committee of seven members, one from each region, and appointed the following:
Africa : Angola
Asia : Philippines
Europe : Finland
Latin America and the Caribbean : Nicaragua
Near East : Sudan
North America : Canada
Southwest Pacific : Australia
23. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee be chaired by Ronald Rose (Canada).
24. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as given in Appendix C of document C 99/16.
Right of Reply
25. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its 16 previous sessions to the effect that, when a Member wished to reply to criticisms of its Government's policy, it should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to speak.
Verbatim Records
26. As provided for in Rule XVIII-1 GRO, Verbatim Records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements could be inserted in the Verbatim Records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking into consideration, however, the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of Credentials
27. The credentials of delegations of 162 Members were found valid. The remaining Members did not submit valid credentials.
28. The credentials of the representatives of the United Nations, its Specialized Agencies and related organizations were duly deposited as prescribed under Rule III-2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
Voting rights
29. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III-4 of the Constitution, at the beginning of the session 38 Member Nations had no right to vote in the Conference, since the amount of their arrears of contributions to the Organization exceeded the amount of the contribution due from them for the two preceding years. Nevertheless, the Conference decided that all Member Nations in attendance be authorized to vote on 12, 13 and 15 November 1999.
30. Subsequently, four of these Member Nations (Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Niger and Suriname) made payments sufficient to regain their voting rights.
31. The Conference also agreed that voting rights should be restored to 22 Member Nations (Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Lithuania, Moldova, Nicaragua, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo and Yemen). Some Members disagreed with this decision since it was their general principle that voting rights should be restored only to those Member Nations which had requested and agreed to an instalment plan for repayment of their arrears. Some Members objected to restoring voting rights to Iraq because it would be inconsistent with action taken at United Nations Headquarters, New York.
32. The following 12 Member Nations (Azerbaijan, Comoros, Cook Islands, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, Turkmenistan and Yugoslavia) had no right to vote in the Conference because of arrears in contributions.
ADMISSION OF OBSERVERS^10
Applicants for Membership
33. The Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership to be represented by observers until a decision had been taken on their applications. The Conference approved the Director-General's invitation in respect of Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Niue, Palau and San Marino.
Admission of Observers from Non-Member Nations
34. The Conference confirmed the invitations issued by the Director-General to the Governments of Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Russian Federation and Ukraine to attend the Session in an observer capacity.
Liberation Movement
35. The Conference confirmed the invitation issued by the Director-General, at the suggestion of the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council, to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Intergovernmental Organizations and International NGOs
36. The Conference reviewed the list of intergovernmental organizations and international non-governmental organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Session, and confirmed the said provisional invitations.
REVIEW OF THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE^11
37. One hundred and thirty-three Heads of Delegation intervened on this agenda item. Delegates commented on the overall economic, agricultural and food security situation, as described in the Secretariat documents, and reported on the food and agricultural situation and related issues in their respective countries.
38. The Conference also heard addresses by the President of Brazil, His Excellency Fernando Henrique Cardoso (18 November 1999) and the President of Finland, His Excellency Martti Ahtisaari (22 November 1999).
39. The Conference noted with concern the slow progress made so far towards meeting the World Food Summit (WFS) objective of reducing by half the number of undernourished people by 2015. Delegates also noted several unsatisfactory features and trends in the situation of food and agriculture: the persistence of a large number of countries affected by severe food shortages; the poor growth in agricultural production in the developing countries in 1998 and 1999; the decline in international commodity prices, reduction in the export earning capacity of many developing countries; inadequate investment flows and resources for agricultural and rural development; and declining levels of Official Development Assistance (ODA). References were made to the effects of the international financial crisis, which had slowed progress in meeting food security objectives in their countries.
40. As regards the role of FAO, the importance of its assistance to developing countries in participating to the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations was emphasized, as well as the need for actively disseminating information on biotechnology/biosafety and on the benefits and risks involved in the adoption of new technologies. FAO should maintain balance and complementarity between its normative and operational activities. The importance of adequate budgetary resources for FAO to fulfil its mandate was recognized.
SUBSTANTIVE AND POLICY MATTERS
PROGRESS ON FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD FOOD SUMMIT^12
41. The Conference discussed the document Report on Follow-up to the World Food Summit Plan of Action^13 which covered two topics: (a) progress in implementation of the WFS Plan of Action and (b) specific actions taken by FAO.
42. Member Nations reaffirmed their commitment to achieving the objectives of the WFS Plan of Action. As such, they endorsed the measures taken by the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) in establishing reporting formats and a work plan on the implementation of the Plan of Action. To this end, the Conference urged all FAO Members and other countries that participated in the World Food Summit to submit their reports on implementation of relevant parts of the Plan of Action by the end of December 1999, in order to enable the CFS to fulfil the monitoring role which it had been assigned.
43. The Conference welcomed the active participation of other international organizations, within and outside the UN System, in supporting the implementation of Summit commitments and urged them to report on their activities to the CFS. The Conference endorsed the active collaboration among UN organizations at country level through existing mechanisms such as the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and the ACC Thematic Groups of Food Security and Rural Development.
44. The Conference noted with satisfaction the number of countries in which civil society was taking an active role in Summit follow-up activities, and the active involvement of civil society organizations, in particular NGOs, in the work of the CFS and in undertaking practical action at international, regional and country level aimed at relieving food insecurity, and encouraged them to report to the CFS.
45. The Conference noted that, according to the Secretariat's latest estimates^14, the number of undernourished persons in developing countries had declined from 830 million to 790 million in the period between 1990-92 and 1995-97, representing a decrease of some 40 million persons or 8 million persons per year. The Conference noted that the level varied from region to region and from country to country, and that such limited progress as had been made was certainly not sufficient to meet the WFS target. Several Members expressed the view that due to a number of factors, the real number of undernourished was currently increasing. In addition to the need for greater efforts in poverty reduction and assigning higher priority to sustainable agricultural and rural development, many Members underlined that peace and conflict resolution were preconditions for successful implementation of the WFS Plan of Action, and hence the achievement of food security.
46. The Conference acknowledged the contribution of FAO programmes to the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action. It noted that the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) was being implemented in 50 countries and under formulation in 25 others. In this regard, several Members expressed satisfaction with the contributions of the SPFS to increasing sustainable food production and rural income growth in developing countries, and acknowledged the important role of the associated South-South Cooperation initiative. Several Members called for additional assistance from FAO and donors for implementation of the SPFS and South-South Cooperation. Several Members stressed the importance of an early evaluation of the Special Programme.
47. The Conference noted that regional food security strategies and programmes had been prepared in collaboration with the appropriate regional and subregional economic groupings. In this respect, many Members observed that the regional strategies and programmes could be useful in mobilizing synergies and cooperation at subregional and regional levels in support of national efforts towards food security. The Conference recommended that arrangements be explored to further enhance the capacity of the Regional Conferences to contribute to the monitoring of the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action by the CFS.
48. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the progress that had been made in setting up Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems (FIVIMS) at national and international levels. The Conference urged all interested parties to provide resources to implement FIVIMS at country level and for the establishment of a global FIVIMS database.
49. The Conference strongly endorsed FAO's assistance to developing countries and countries in transition for the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations in the area of food and agriculture, including capacity-building under the "Umbrella" Training Programme.
50. The Conference, noting with concern the slow progress towards meeting the WFS target, called upon Governments, donors and international financing institutions to accord greater priority to food security and sustainable agricultural and rural development, paying particular attention to the countries with the greater extent of undernourishment.
51. The Conference acknowledged the existing collaboration among the three Rome-based organizations, which was essential for effective coordinated action towards world food security. The Conference encouraged further progress towards this end. In this regard, the Conference debated a Draft Resolution on an "Alliance on Food Security", but concluded that additional study was needed by CFS to develop the concepts further with a view to the possible adoption of a Resolution on this subject.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN FAO^15
52. The Conference indicated agreement with the four basic substantive areas of action that characterized the FAO Plan of Action. These included the continued development and dissemination of methods and tools to train and assist development specialists in FAO and its Member Nations in gender mainstreaming, strengthening the capacities of rural women to reduce the burden of their labour and to increase their economic gains, supporting the development and implementation of gender-responsive agricultural and rural development policies, and increasing the availability and use of accurate quantitative and qualitative data and information on the gender dimension of agricultural and rural development.
53. The Conference noted that some commendable achievements had been made in the implementation of the Plan of Action. However, with reference to the Programme Committee's review of the Corporate Progress Review on Gender Mainstreaming, and the Report of the Council on this item, as well as its own review of the Sixth Progress Report, the Conference noted its concern with the uneven progress across the Technical Divisions in the implementation of the Plan of Action. It endorsed the call for adequate attention to this important cross-sectoral priority and stressed the importance of putting in place effective supportive mechanisms and monitoring arrangements throughout the Organization.
54. The Conference endorsed the Sixth Progress Report on the Implementation of the Plan of Action on Women in Development, and it recommended that the Seventh and final Progress Report on the Implementation of the Plan of Action be presented to the Conference at its Thirty-first Session to report on progress made during the 2000-2001 biennium.
55. The Conference noted the outcome of the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information and stressed the need for more gender-disaggregated data. Several Members expressed concern that most of the gender activities had occurred through the use of extra-budgetary resources and asked the Secretariat to consider how such activities could be financed within the Regular Programme Budget.
56. The Conference supported the proposal made by the Secretariat to prepare a new FAO Plan of Action to be submitted for approval to the Thirty-first Session of the FAO Conference in 2001. It was recommended that the Secretariat seize the occasion of the new Plan to realign concepts, approaches and institutional mechanisms with the Gender and Development approach adopted widely in the UN System. Furthermore, the Conference recommended that the new Plan should not only incorporate lessons learned during the implementation of the current plan and the Beijing + 5 Review, but also take into account the results of the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information. Finally, the Plan should reflect the observations made by the Programme Committee, the Council and the Conference on the subject of Gender Mainstreaming in FAO.
57. The Conference considered a Draft Resolution requesting the Director-General to continue actively to redress current gender imbalances in the Professional and Higher Categories of the staff structure, in line with existing procedures designed to allow him to appoint staff meeting the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence, while responding to geographical requirements. The Conference noted that in the last six years, the number of non-represented Member Nations among Professional staff had been reduced from 54 to 21 countries notwithstanding the increase in the membership of the Organization. The Conference was also informed that, over the past five-year period, the percentage of women staff in the Secretariat had increased from 18 to 20 percent.
58. The Conference noted with concern that progress achieved to date in correcting gender imbalances and working towards the United Nations goal of 50 percent of Professional and Higher Categories^16 was too slow. It therefore called upon the Director-General to establish a programme focused on redressing the current gender imbalance. In this connection, the Conference took note of some suggestions for increasing the number of Professional female staff in the Secretariat, such as a pro-active recruitment of competent women professionals in the areas of agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources; utilization of strategies for retaining Professional female staff in the Secretariat; and encouragement to Governments to propose to the Organization more qualified female Professionals. The Conference stressed, however, that the paramount criterion for selection of staff to the Organization must continue to be efficiency and technical competence.
59. The Conference then adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 1/99
Correction of Geographical and Gender Imbalances in the Professional Staff Structure
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
that, in accordance with Article VIII.3 of the FAO Constitution "in appointing the staff, the Director-General shall, subject to the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and of technical competence, pay due regard to the importance of selecting personnel recruited on as wide a geographical basis as is possible",
Recalling
that Conference Resolution 50/55 requested the Director-General to take the proper measures to re-establish the necessary equilibrium within the Secretariat, bearing the principles set out in Article VIII.3 constantly in mind when filling vacancies that might occur in the various categories of Professional staff and any new posts that might be established,
Noting
that under the framework set out by the above provisions, the Council of FAO, at its Twenty-sixth and Twenty-seventh sessions, in June and November 1957, formulated criteria for the combined implementation of the requirements of "the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of competence" and of "selecting personnel recruited on as wide a geographical basis as is possible" and that, in line with these criteria, the Organization developed selection procedures for the combined application of those requirements,
Recalling
that the FAO Conference had, on various occasions, stressed the need to redress gender imbalances within the Secretariat in order to attain the targets set by the United Nations for women in the Professional category,
Recalling
in particular that, at its Twenty-fifth and Twenty-sixth sessions, in November 1989 and November 1991, when considering the Plan of Action for the Integration of Women into Agricultural and Rural Development, the Conference asked the Organization to increase the access of women, especially those from developing and underrepresented Member Nations, to Professional posts in FAO, with a view to making progress towards reaching the United Nations target for female staff by 1995,
Recalling
also that, at its Twenty-eighth session, in November 1995, the Conference adopted the revised FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001) providing that the Organization would increase its efforts in order to reach the United Nations target for women in Professional posts in the Secretariat,
Noting
with appreciation that the Director-General had been carrying out actively a substantial effort to redress existing imbalances in equitable geographical distribution within the Secretariat and that, since his appointment, notwithstanding the increase in the membership of the Organization, the number of non-represented Member Nations among the Professional staff had been reduced from 54 to 21 countries,
Noting
further with satisfaction that the Director-General was seeking actively to redress existing gender imbalances in the staff structure of the Organization in order to reach the target set by the United Nations,
Considering
that, in line with long-standing practice of the Organization, current selection procedures, whereby the Director-General appointed Professional staff on the basis of recommendations of the Professional Staff Selection Committee, were designed to allow the Director-General to appoint staff meeting the highest standards of efficiency and of technical competence, while responding to geographical and gender distribution requirements,
Considering
further that in the exercise of his full powers of appointment of staff the Director-General was under an obligation to give effect to the requirement of geographical distribution of staff set out in Article VIII.3 of the FAO Constitution and to relevant decisions by the Conference on gender distribution,
1. Confirms that, in the selection and appointment of Professional staff, the Director-General, while maintaining the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence, should continue to give effect to criteria of equitable geographical and gender distribution, through a combined application of all these requirements;
2. Requests the Director-General to continue actively to redress geographical and gender imbalances in the Professional and Higher Categories staff structure, with a view to fulfilling the constitutional requirement of equitable geographical distribution and the United Nations target for gender distribution;
3. Requests the Director-General to ensure that the selection and appointment procedures and the relevant Staff Rules and Manual provisions adequately reflect the wishes of the Conference, with particular reference to the need to give combined effect to the requirements of paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence and equitable geographical and gender distribution.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
INTERNATIONAL UNDERTAKING ON PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE^17
60. The Conference considered that the successful completion of the negotiations for the revision of the International Undertaking, as an international instrument for the conservation and sustainable utilization of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, and for access to these resources, was essential in ensuring global food security and sustainable agriculture for present and future generations.
61. The Conference considered that the Undertaking was at the meeting point between agriculture, the environment and commerce, and agreed that there should be consistency and synergy in the agreements being developed in these different sectors. It felt that early success in these negotiations should allow the agricultural sector to shape solutions that took its specific needs into account.
62. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the progress made in the negotiations by the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and its Contact Group during 1999, particularly in regard to the consensus reached on the text on Farmers' Rights. It considered, however, that much work was still needed in order to finalize the negotiations in the year 2000. It expressed its appreciation for the untiring efforts of its Chairman, Ambassador Fernando Gerbasi, and its desire that he carry the process through to completion. It agreed that the Chairman's Elements developed in Montreux, Switzerland, in January 1999 should continue to provide the framework in which to seek further consensus on the text of the revised Undertaking. It appealed for the Negotiating Parties to show flexibility and a spirit of constructive compromise in this regard.
63. The Conference agreed that a cornerstone of the revised Undertaking should be the Multilateral System for Access and Benefit-Sharing.
64. The Conference also confirmed that the negotiations on the revision of the International Undertaking would proceed on the basis that the Undertaking would take the form of a legally-binding instrument, closely linked to FAO and the Convention on Biological Diversity. It recognized that the full implementation of the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture would be greatly facilitated by the funding strategy of the International Undertaking.
65. The Conference expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Germany, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States of America for their generous contributions to the process in 1999.
66. The Conference requested that the text of the revised International Undertaking be finalized, as planned, for submission to the Hundred and Nineteenth Session of the FAO Council in November 2000. It appealed to all countries to facilitate this process. In this spirit, Members stressed the importance for countries that are developing relevant legislation to do so in such a way that would enable them to take into account and allow for the elements of this new international agreement.
67. The Conference recognized that progress was subject to the provision of extra-budgetary funds for further negotiating meetings of the Chairman's Contact Group and the Commission. It therefore appealed to countries to provide the funds necessary to prepare and run the meetings, and to facilitate the participation of developing countries. It expressed appreciation for Japan's announcement of a further contribution towards the costs of the next negotiating session of the Contact Group.
UNITED NATIONS/FAO WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME^18
68. Members were unanimous in the expression of their condolences to the family members, friends and colleagues of those who died aboard the WFP plane which crashed in Kosovo on Friday, 12 November 1999.
69. The security of humanitarian aid workers, as outlined in a United Nations General Assembly Resolution currently being fina