<title>Reforming FAO - Into the new Millenium</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
In recent years, global events have brought into focus the United Nations system as a whole, altering the general perceptions of its role and prompting reform. It was against this background that a review of FAO's programmes, structure and policies was initiated in early 1994. The review paved the way for a comprehensive and ongoing reform process, intended not only to adapt the Organization to the changing external environment but, above all, to enable us to assist our Member Nations more effectively.
The reform process has been dynamic and sustained, benefiting from extensive consultations with FAO's stakeholders and other international organizations, from opinions expressed by development experts at numerous meetings and from discussions with FAO staff. In embarking on such a formidable task, consideration was given to the strengths and achievements that the Organization had built up over 50 years of operation as a centre of excellence for agricultural and rural development, as well as to the constraints encountered in fulfilling its mandate.
Reforming FAO: into the new millennium presents the principles that have been followed, detailing the measures taken and the results achieved to date. The major surgery carried out on FAO's structure, governance mechanisms and operational and financial procedures has lent a much greater degree of coherence to our wide-ranging and multidisciplinary activities. Considerable progress has been made in improving the planning, coordinating, monitoring and auditing of FAO's action in priority areas. At the same time, a concerted effort has been made to cultivate constructive partnerships - within the intergovernmental community and with civil society - that contribute to the Organization's lead role in achieving global food security, and hence to the successful accomplishment of its mission. Finally, the reform process has led to a strategic vision for the future, documented in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015, the corporate blueprint that defines our core objectives and
strategies as well as providing a timetable and methodology for their implementation.
The guiding theme of reform has remained "food security", and this has ensured continuity of purpose as well as consistency with the mandate set out in FAO's Constitution. The process has focused on the Organization's dual role, clarifying the distinction between its normative and operational activities with a view to optimizing efforts to secure "food for all" as the common development goal of all Member Nations.
Effective development is achieved through improvements in the production and distribution of food and agricultural products, including greater access to supplies and higher nutrition levels and living standards of all people. I believe the reform process has greatly enhanced FAO's capacity to work towards this goal and to succeed in its mission: "Helping to build a food-secure world for present and future generations".
Jacques Diouf
FAO Director-General
<section>2</section>
Preamble
Dr Jacques Diouf was elected Director-General of FAO for a six-year term, beginning in January 1994, at a time of great change and high expectations. Accordingly, he was charged with the task of preparing FAO to face the challenges of a post cold war era.
In 1997, FAO published an interim document entitled Reforming FAO: the challenge of world food security. This reviewed the measures taken by the Organization to improve its efficiency and effectiveness, decrease costs and ensure the relevance of its work to the needs and expectations of Member Nations.
The present document complements the 1997 edition and extends the analysis to cover the initiatives taken and the changes made in key areas of the Organization over the 1994-1999 period. The information and analysis presented here reveal that the past six years of reform have resulted in a leaner, fitter and more focused organization. In partnership with Member Nations and civil society at all levels, a transformed FAO continues to strive towards the difficult but vital goal of universal food security. FAO is now better prepared for the challenges that lie ahead and is entering the new millennium with confidence. Nevertheless, the Organization needs to consolidate the changes made and to explore new opportunities for implementing its mandate better and for achieving, in particular, the goals set by the 1996 Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit Plan of Action as well as, more recently, those defined in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015.
<section>3</section>
The principles of reform
THE NEW EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
FAO'S INTERNAL STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
THE REFORM PROPOSALS
FAO/19578/G. BIZZARRI
<section>4</section>
The new external environment
FAO's reform is grounded in the trends and changes that are sweeping the global political and economic scene. While the trend towards more open and market-oriented economies continues, many countries, together with the international community, are also confronted with issues that cannot be fully addressed by market forces. These include:
* the security and stability of socio-economic systems, as witnessed in the incidence of recent conflicts and financial crises;
* non-economic concerns, including environmental sustainability and safety issues;
* technologies undergoing rapid developments, particularly in the areas of information, communication and biotechnology; and
* the increased audience and role of non-governmental groups, whether profit- or non-profit-making, national or transnational.
These developments have a direct bearing on FAO, a worldwide intergovernmental organization and part of the United Nations (UN) system which is, itself, redefining its role and undergoing reform following the collapse of a bipolarized and confrontational international system.
Successfully reforming FAO has demanded a clear understanding of this new environment, which will affect the Organization's operations in the years ahead as well as its capacity to contribute to the overarching aims of achieving food security for all. With regard to the changing global context, several salient factors are worth noting:
Transformation of the international economic system. Since the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO), trade and financial markets have become increasingly integrated and, concomitantly, regional and subregional trading arrangements have multiplied. International agreements are burgeoning as countries recognize the need for greater discipline and cooperation in addressing common issues. Such developments reduce the range of domestic policy options, and many developing countries are having to make difficult choices without the capacity to assess fully the possible options and their consequences. The application of internationally defined rules and mechanisms - of an increasing scope and technical sophistication - now requires countries to have more knowledge and analytical capacity in the legal, technical and economic aspects of diverse and complex matters.
Changes in international finance. International financial flows to development have undergone dramatic transformations and their erratic performance has occasionally led to severe economic shocks. Private financial flows have become the main source of development finance, but market forces have tended to concentrate these flows on a handful of countries and sectors with higher prospects for returns. In turn, official development assistance (ODA), which represents the critical source of finance for the remaining countries and sectors, has been on a steady decline, raising the risk of divergence between the world's wealthier and poorer economies. Agricultural development and support to food security in the low-income food-deficit countries (LIFDCs) are among the areas to have been most severely affected by reductions in ODA.
Non-economic concerns. Over the past two decades, many governments have pursued market-oriented policy reform and structural adjustment. Economic policy reform has often been accompanied by negative effects and high levels of risk, particularly for the poorer population groups, and this has stressed the social fabric beyond reasonable limits. Increasing recognition is given to the fact that market forces are not adequate for tackling some areas of concern, such as food security, environmental and safety issues and, more important, poverty.
Changing consumer demands and urbanization. While world food supplies are growing overall, there have been shifts in demand. In many developing countries, cities account for a rapidly increasing share of the population, which has major implications for food and agriculture both in rural and peri-urban areas. Consumer demand is diversifying more towards processed, convenient and safe products, while access to food is becoming more complicated as an increasing proportion of supplies is acquired through market exchange. The rapid urbanization under way calls for a reappraisal of urban-rural linkages, food security and social stability.
Growing pressure on natural resources. The sustainability of development activities is being challenged on many fronts. Both population and economic growth can have adverse environmental and ecological consequences, resulting in even greater pressure on the world's natural resource base. The main challenge is to increase food production to meet the needs of a growing population without threatening the world's climate or biological diversity or the availability and quality of its forest, fisheries, land and water resources.
Technology and information gap. Rapid scientific and technological advances, particularly in biotechnology and electronics, may widen the prevailing gap between developed and developing countries. The international implications of such developments are compounded by the issue of intellectual property rights. The information gap between producers and consumers also widens as food chains become more complex at the processing and trading stages, thereby raising concerns about food safety and human health and prompting calls for greater transparency and precaution.
Persistence of poverty and food insecurity. Despite increasing global food supplies, too many people continue to suffer from food insecurity, particularly in LIFDCs. While the number of undernourished people has decreased by 40 million since 1990-1992, a closer look reveals that this improvement has resulted from reductions in only 37 countries, totalling almost 100 million people. In another 59 countries across the developing world, the number of hungry people has actually increased by almost 60 million. In addition to the hundreds of millions suffering from undernourishment, various other forms of malnutrition affect an unacceptable proportion of the population. In a world where the population is growing by about 80 million each year and is likely to reach 7.3 billion by 2015, widespread food insecurity remains a major obstacle to development and a top priority for action.
Decline in official development assistance for agriculture
Relationship between security and food insecurity. The World Food Summit Plan of Action explicitly recognized that a peaceful environment is a fundamental condition for the attainment of sustainable food security. More recently, a report by the International Peace Research Institute, entitled To cultivate peace - agriculture in a world of conflict, identified the strengthening of agriculture in developing countries where it is the predominant economic activity as a prerequisite for development and, ultimately, for the reduction and/or prevention of conflicts that lead to warfare. The same message is evoked in an article by the former United States President Jimmy Carter (The International Herald Tribune, 17 June 1999), stressing the fact that agricultural development and access to food are not only technical, economic and ethical issues but are also at the root of peace and security.
Increasing number of food emergencies. Food and agricultural emergencies have multiplied over time as a result of natural disasters, such as droughts, fires, floods and pests and diseases, and disasters caused by human action such as war and internal conflict. Unforeseen disruptions to economic systems can also result in emergencies that have similar adverse impacts on local populations. The people most severely affected by disasters are often those living in rural areas, but the disruption of agricultural and food systems can have serious consequences for both rural and urban populations, and it is generally the resource-poor who are most vulnerable.
FAO/20668/E. YEVES
In the wake of war or civil strife, FAO helps
to rebuild food and agricultural production capacity
<section>5</section>
FAO's internal strengths and weaknesses
A reform of FAO was necessary not only in response to the changing global context, but also to accommodate changes in the Organization's internal environment. Members have been seeking a wider range of services and programmes, while the Organization's resources and capacity have been negatively affected by a declining budget.
When proposing the reform in June 1994, the Director-General explained that it was intended to put FAO in a better position to serve its Member Nations by restructuring the Organization, refocusing its priorities, increasing its global outreach, improving resource management and enhancing its efficiency.
Against this background, the strategy adopted was to build on the strengths of the Organization and to identify and overcome its weaknesses. FAO's strengths include:
* The confidence that Member Nations have in the Organization's expertise and experience in working towards the goals of its mandate; its ability to take a global view of problems; and its capacity to identify and argue for common solutions, independently of specific ideological or national perspectives.
* Together with its extensive field office structure, the Organization's worldwide networking capacity - based on direct links with government departments, academic and research institutions and other national and international bodies.
* The unique blend of operational and normative experience of the Organization's staff, dedicated to the cause of multilateralism in line with the principles of the International Civil Service.
* The technical assistance that the Organization offers to countries, without commercial or political bias. To provide governments with the support they need, FAO relies on the basic competence and specialized expertise of its core staff as well as highly qualified external experts - drawn from an extensive corporate roster - all equipped with the necessary technical, managerial and linguistic skills.
Despite these strengths, an objective analysis of FAO's first 50 years had revealed certain lacunae and weaknesses that needed to be addressed in the reform process. For example, an excessively fragmented and diffused organizational structure prevented the Organization from concentrating on key areas and detracted from its ability to achieve high-quality results. There was a need to set clearer priorities, to incorporate cross-sectoral issues such as gender and people's participation into mainstream activities, and to clarify the complementarity of its normative and operational activities. FAO was too centralized, with a large proportion of staff based at headquarters and therefore remote from the complex problems experienced in the field. The Organization was inadequately prepared for delivering services to its members in a cost-effective way because of its centralized and bureaucratic procedures and resistance to change, including the adoption of modern office and
communication technologies and new approaches to human resource management.
There was also insufficient recognition of how national management capacities in agricultural development had evolved, and the Organization was failing to take advantage of local expertise and human resources to improve its effectiveness through capacity building and cost reduction. Substantive dialogue was lacking among Member Nations and between the Member Nations and FAO's Secretariat. Moreover, the planning process was limited to the two-year budget cycle and a four-year Medium-Term Plan, and it therefore lacked strategic vision.
FAO/19270/R. JONES
FAO takes a global view of problems, identifying common
solutions independently of ideological or national perspectives
<section>6</section>
The reform proposals
In May 1994, the FAO Council considered the proposals put forward by the Director-General after his review of the Organization's programmes, structure and policies, as authorized by Conference Resolution 10/93. The Council approved the proposals, which consisted of:
* changes in organizational structure;
* new policies, including the implementation of progressive decentralization;
* shifts in programme priorities.
FAO/11763
Restructuring was intended to enable FAO to increase its
global outreach and serve its Member Nations more effectively
<section>7</section>
The reform and its results:
RESTRUCTURING
DECENTRALIZATION
MODERN MANAGEMENT
THE FOCUS - FOOD SECURITY
NEW PARTNERSHIPS WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS
INNOVATIVE APPROACHES
ENHANCING EFFICIENCY AND TRANSPARENCY
IMPROVED RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
<section>8</section>
Restructuring
To enable FAO to fulfil its mandate better and contribute effectively to the achievement of world food security - a goal conveyed by its slogan "Food for All" - FAO embarked on the most significant restructuring since its foundation. The aim was to remodel the Organization so that it could adapt to the changing external environment and be more effective.
DEFINING FAO'S DUAL ROLE
To start with, a clear distinction was made between normative and operational activities in the technical departments. In particular, to improve the coherence of services provided to Member Nations while also strengthening their country focus, the Development Department was transformed into a new Technical Cooperation (TC) Department. This department serves as the hub for operational work, provides policy advice, implements field operations, manages FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), provides investment support services through its Investment Centre Division (TCI) and mobilizes external resources. Within the TC Department, a Policy Assistance Division (TCA) was created to provide Member Nations - at their request - with policy advice related to national development policies, programmes and strategies in the agricultural and rural sector. In cooperation with other external partners in development, TCA assists Member Nations in the formulation or reformulation of
policies and strategies aimed at creating a favourable economic environment for food security and agricultural and rural development and at ensuring that agriculture receives adequate consideration in macroeconomic adjustment programmes. Policy training is also provided as part of national capacity building in the field of policy analysis and formulation. To ensure the coherence of services provided, the Organization has a mechanism whereby all its interventions in a given country are organized within a programming framework.
FAO cooperates with multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies, the private sector and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Within the TC Department, the Unit for Cooperation with Private Sector and NGOs (TCDN) was set up in 1994 to provide a focal point for policy matters and to coordinate cooperation with private sector and civil society organizations, including business associations at the national and international levels, multinational corporations and a range of independent supporting organizations and intermediaries.
In response to the need to concentrate on issues of sustainability and to follow up on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), FAO established the Sustainable Development (SD) Department. Formed from existing units in FAO's Agriculture and Economic and Social Departments, this new department combines expertise in gender and population issues, natural resource management, research and technology, extension and communication, human and institutional resources, and people's participation, making it a unique organizational resource for normative work in sustainable development.
Within the Economic and Social (ES) Department, in line with the priority set by the FAO Council on policy advice, the Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division (ESA) was established in 1995. It provides a focal point for economic and policy research and analysis, thus strengthening the Organization's normative functions. In collaboration with academic and research institutions, the division contributes to the generation of global knowledge and scientific thought concerning agricultural development and social issues. Through sector policy analysis and project appraisal methodologies, ESA also ensures a greater integration of concepts related to the environment, hunger and food security. It focuses on multidisciplinary analyses of agricultural and rural development programmes and projects, the role of agriculture in the development process and comparative agricultural development at the country and regional levels.
Also in 1995, the Office for Coordination of Normative, Operational and Decentralized Activities (OCD) was set up to facilitate the functioning of decentralized structures and ensure adequate substantive and administrative interaction between all geographical levels of the Organization.
Organization Chart (1999)
The General Affairs and Information (GI) Department underwent a major restructuring, with the introduction of new technologies and more emphasis on external contracting for translation and publishing. A resulting development in the area of corporate communication was the major reorganization of the Information Division (GII) in late 1998, which consolidated the former press, radio and television branches into a single Media Relations Branch. Media officers in the new branch received training so as to have the versatility to work with journalists in both print and broadcast media.
FAO/20800
Restructuring has strengthened the
country focus of FAO's programmes
<section>9</section>
Decentralization
The decision to pursue a policy of further decentralization was based on three objectives:
* to bring the Organization's technical and operational expertise much closer to those countries and regions where the need is greatest;
* to reduce costs; and
* to make the best use of national capacities, which had increased substantially over the last decades.
Decentralization prompted the Organization to find a new balance between competing requirements. The objective of moving technical expertise closer to where it was needed had to be balanced against the need to maintain a critical mass of expertise at headquarters so as to uphold FAO's role as a centre of excellence. This meant delegating authority to officers at decentralized locations while retaining adequate control and stewardship of resources and transparent reporting lines to senior management and the Organization's governing bodies. It also entailed relocating and retraining staff, but keeping reorganization costs to a minimum. New procedures were designed to ensure the availability of highly specialized expertise as well as facilitating interdisciplinarity as and when required. In view of these considerations, the process of decentralization was progressive and included the following components:
STRENGTHENING THE REGIONAL OFFICES
The first step was to strengthen the existing Regional Offices in Accra, Bangkok, Cairo, Santiago and, to a lesser extent, the Rome-based Regional Office for Europe. A number of functions of direct relevance to the respective regions were transferred to Regional Offices, including policy assistance, field programme development and most technical support services for ongoing projects. The Regional Offices also took on full responsibility for organizing Regional Conferences and meetings of other regional bodies. It proved more effective to undertake these activities from within the region than from headquarters, as the competent officers in Regional Offices can react to requests from the various parts of their region more quickly and more cost-effectively. Furthermore, the cost of support staff is generally much lower at Regional Office locations than at headquarters.
To allow the Regional Offices to undertake their new functions, a number of technical, policy and programme officers' posts were transferred to these offices in the course of 1995 and 1996, mainly from headquarters but also from FAO's former Joint Divisions with the regional Economic Commissions of the UN (these have since been replaced by other cooperative arrangements). Professional staff in Regional Offices were organized into technical groups, corresponding to each of the technical departments at headquarters, and into a Policy Assistance Branch. To ensure that activities at the regional level are fully integrated within the Organization's corporate programme and are of the required quality, Professional officers in the Regional Offices are selected by their respective "parent" division at headquarters. The parent division approves their annual programme of work and ensures the technical quality of their output.
Regional Representatives, together with their Deputies, are responsible for the management of their office, providing managerial and administrative leadership as well as ensuring interdisciplinarity in the preparation and implementation of programmes of work. To this end, they are delegated a substantial degree of authority. An Internal Auditor, reporting directly to the Inspector-General at headquarters, has been outposted to each Regional Office.
The Regional Offices have also been provided with the following essential tools and means:
* Electronic communication and information systems facilities, allowing Regional Officers to share information with each other through a local area network, and with headquarters through a wide area network. These were installed as part of the communication infrastructure project described in the section Modern office and information technology.
* Support staff, through a major recruitment and training effort.
* Clear instructions and guidelines, through the review of administrative and financial procedures, described in the section Replacement of administrative and accounting systems.
* Sufficient office space, with support from the host country. In Accra and Santiago, new premises were required, and these were generously provided by the Governments of Ghana and Chile.
FAO's network of decentralized offices
ESTABLISHING SUBREGIONAL OFFICES
Five Subregional Offices were established to assist clusters of countries that share similar problems and are located far from their Regional Office. After extensive consultation with the Member Nations and the host countries concerned, new offices were set up in: Harare (Zimbabwe) for Southern and East Africa; Apia (Samoa) for the Pacific Islands; Bridgetown (Barbados) for the Caribbean; Tunis (Tunisia) for North Africa; and Budapest (Hungary) for Central and Eastern Europe.
To minimize costs, all Subregional Offices, except in Central and Eastern Europe, were established in countries where FAO Representations already existed. Each Subregional Office is composed of a small, multidisciplinary team of technical officers, geared to the requirements of the subregion, and of a Policy Assistance Unit. As in Regional Offices, these technical officers work under the managerial and administrative leadership of the Subregional Representative. Their parent division at headquarters is responsible for their selection and for ensuring the technical quality of their work.
DECENTRALIZING OPERATIONS
After the initial stage, it became evident that it would be more effective to decentralize most of the Field Operations Division (TCO) to the Regional Offices - so as to create synergies and ensure that Technical Officers, Policy Assistance Officers and Operations Officers could work on field projects as a team, during both the preparation and the implementation stages.
This aspect of decentralization was progressively implemented over approximately two years, starting with the creation of an Operations Branch in Bangkok, in September/October 1996, and followed by the opening of Operations Branches in the Regional Offices in Santiago and Cairo during 1997 and in the Regional Office in Accra in early 1998. Interregional and emergency projects continue to be managed from headquarters, as do projects implemented in Europe.
IMPROVING LINKS AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Along with the expansion of expertise in the Regional and Subregional Offices, the following steps have been taken to make FAO Country Offices more effective by improving linkages with developing Member Nations while at the same time reducing costs:
* A more selective approach is being adopted in the recruitment of FAO Representatives (FAORs), with priority being given to candidates with advanced academic training and adequate professional experience in agricultural development or related fields. This will enable the Organization to provide high-level policy advice directly to governments and to provide leadership in food and agricultural policy matters within the UN Resident Coordinator System.
* In line with the Organization's policy to strengthen collaboration with key partners, FAORs have been encouraged to increase their contacts with the Ambassadors of Member Nations as well as with representatives of funding institutions and civil society organizations, such as the relevant committees of national parliaments, departments of commerce and agriculture, universities, the private sector and NGOs.
* The internationally recruited Programme Officers, previously assigned to Country Offices, have been replaced by National Professional Officers (NPOs), who have similar, and sometimes better, qualifications and are employed under local salary scales. With their knowledge of national conditions, NPOs enhance the content and impact of FAO's programmes.
* The General Service staffing structure of all Country Offices has been reviewed and rationalized, allowing the elimination of 81 posts.
* The number of countries with which the Organization maintains links through the accreditation of an FAOR residing in a neighbouring country has been increased, from 26 in 1994 to 30 in 1999.
* A National Correspondents scheme has been established for those countries where the Organization cannot assign an FAOR to reside in the country. National Correspondents are senior civil servants who devote a certain percentage of their time to assisting the Organization with a number of liaison functions. They are jointly designated by the Member Government and FAO and are allocated a limited budget to cover some operational costs. They also receive a modest salary supplement. As of October 1999, some 20 National Correspondents had been appointed out of a planned total of 35.
* The Small-scale Facility was set up in September 1998 to help FAORs obtain short-term but essential technical advice, which usually cannot be funded from other sources. With this facility, which permits the engagement of local consultants for short periods, the responsiveness of FAORs to the needs of governments has increased.
Distribution of budgeted posts^1 (all categories) before and
after decentralization and restructuring
Location
Category
No. of posts in
January 1994^2
No. of posts in December 1999^3
Increase/decrease
Country Offices
International Professional and higher categories
National Professional Officers
General Service
Liaison Offices
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Regional Offices, Subregional Offices and Joint Divisions
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Decentralized offices
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Headquarters
Professional and higher categories
General Service
All locations
Professional and higher categories
General Service
TOTAL
(Percentage)
Percentage of posts decentralized
Professional and higher categories
General Service
^1 To facilitate comparison, the figures include all budget sources, i.e. Regular Programme as well as other funding sources.
^2 1996-97 Programme of Work and Budget base, which restated the 1994-95 budget in terms of the new program