<title>THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2000</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The last years of the twentieth century were generally unfavourable for world food and agriculture. The State of Food and Agriculture 2000 reports only very modest growth in world agricultural production in 1998, and the estimates for 1999 do not appear to indicate any improvement. Particularly for the developing countries, where the performance of the agricultural sector is of special concern, prospects for 1999 are for a noticeable slowdown in crop and livestock production - reflecting a negative trend that is now in its third consecutive year. It has been a difficult period for many of these countries, which have been facing unusually adverse climatic conditions, together with the negative economic impact of the financial crisis that erupted in 1997, declining prices of several of their major commodity exports and, in a number of cases, political instability and conflicts. Food supply disruptions associated with these problems have led to the outbreak or persistence of
serious food emergency situations in a large number of countries - currently more than 30 - around the world.
The close of a millennium is an opportune time for studying the past with a view to seeking lessons for the future. In its special chapter, "World food and agriculture: lessons from the past 50 years", The State of Food and Agriculture 2000 reflects on humankind's achievements and failures in fighting poverty and hunger over the past half-century - a theme that stimulates both historic and prospective thought.
Overall, the past 50 years have been a period of unprecedented progress on many fronts. Major gains have been achieved by all developmental yardsticks - real income, life expectancy, infant survival and levels of education and nutrition. Science and technology have changed the daily lives of many beyond anything imagined in the mid-1900s; people with even modest means today can hope for better health care, mobility and communications than the richest in those days; some diseases that had afflicted humankind since time immemorial have disappeared; humans and their machines are now routinely voyaging into outer space; and innovations in computer and information technology are succeeding each other at a bewildering pace, at once offering answers to our practical problems and introducing profound changes to social and economic interactions and people's behaviour.
Among our achievements has been progress in fighting world hunger. Undernourishment, especially in populous Asian countries, has diminished, with initial constraints of gigantic dimensions and complexity successfully overcome. Famine, a threat that is as old as humankind and has claimed millions of deaths even in recent decades, now only occurs in exceptional circumstances - mostly in the case of war and conflict in countries already suffering from serious problems of undernutrition and institutional capacity.
Yet, the past 50 years have also left a backlog of unresolved problems, new challenges, risks and uncertainties. We must pose serious questions about the meaning and scope of our economic and technological achievements and their cost to us and future generations. Our technological and economic gains overall appear sadly ironic when contrasted with the squalor and hopelessness in which a large segment of humankind continues to live. More than 800 million people - 13 percent of the world's population - still lack access to the food they need and are therefore condemned to short and unfulfilled lives.
Observers of our time have termed it variously an "information", "atomic" and "globalization" age. It can also be characterized, sadly, as an age of "inequity". Indeed, it is difficult to find a more apt discription for a world in which disparities and inequities are as striking as they are unjustified - a world in which the poorest 20 percent of the population accounts for slightly more than 1 percent of global income, while the richest 20 percent claims 86 percent. We also find it hard to conceive of safe and civilized future societies in which such disparities would be allowed to widen further - a tendency that is, however, suggested by certain aspects of the evidence before us. For instance, between 1960 and 1994, the income ratio between the richest 20 percent and the poorest 20 percent inceased from 30:1 to 78:1.^1 Beyond these broad statistics are pervasive inequities and disparities - among and within countries - between rural and urban populations, between ethnic
and minority groups, between women and men. The concept of inequity can also be seen in its intergenerational dimension: the culture of consumerism, on the one hand, and survival strategies of the poor, on the other, have often resulted in environmental damage that compromises the capacities and potential of future generations.
Inequities can also be found within agricultural and rural societies. It is a well-known fact that the poorest tend to be concentrated in rural areas, and this feature stubbornly persists. Within agriculture itself, this publication highlights the growing technological, productivity and income gaps between modern and traditional farming systems - a process that is leading to a progressive pauperization of small-scale farmers, who cannot possibly compete with modern capitalized farms in an increasingly open world economy.
There are powerful forces behind the trend of growing inequality. The ongoing process of globalization and market liberalization may unleash opportunities for all, but more so for those who have the resources, information and expertise to benefit from them.
We are convinced, however, that the battle against inequity, poverty and hunger can be won. The State of Food and Agriculture 2000 advocates ways out of the "poverty trap" in which governments and institutional structures play a major role. It is fundamental that the public sector does not relinquish its role as provider of basic social services and does not neglect the poor and vulnerable, and it is crucial that it creates an institutional framework that unleashes and protects people's initiative and rewards their efforts. The publication also underlines the obvious but often neglected fact that, because the poor and undernourished are heavily concentrated in rural areas, any serious effort to alleviate their plight must necessarily begin with agricultural and rural development. The fact that many of the poor are staple food producers points to a clear policy orientation - that of helping the poor to produce more and better-quality staple food more efficiently in order to
take the first step out of poverty. Painfully learned lessons show the importance of observing these simple policy principles.
Amazing gains have been achieved in agricultural productivity over the past half-century, thanks to progress in technology and expertise. The major challenge now is to reduce the technological gap by adapting improved technologies, old and new, to the local conditions and needs of low-income food-deficit countries as well as to specific areas within countries.
This does not mean that scientific research for new technological avenues should not be intensified. Indeed, it should. Biotechnology, in particular, holds much promise for the future, and its application in agriculture is still in its infancy. Its development, however, must be undertaken with full consideration of ethical issues as well as of quality and safety-related risks.
The general conclusion to be drawn from our experience of the past 50 years is that much has been achieved in reducing hunger in the world, but still much more remains to be done if the scourge of hunger is to be eradicated. The necessary technology and sufficient resources exist today. Therefore, if we do not fulfil our commitment to eradicate hunger, we will have no excuse to offer to new generations other than that of ignorance, shortsightedness and selfishness.
Jacques Diouf
FAO DIRECTOR-GENERAL
^1 World Resources Institute. 1998. World Resources 1998-99, p. 145. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
<section>2</section>
Glossary
AsDB Asian Development Bank
BMI body mass index
BMR basal metabolic rate
CAP Common Agricultural Policy (EC)
CCP Committee on Commodity Problems (FAO)
CFS Committee on World Food Security
CGAP Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
CGIAR Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CILSS Interstate Committee for Combating Drought in the Sahel
CIMMYT International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center
CIS Commonwealth of Independent States
CSD Commission on Sustainable Development (UN)
DAC Development Assistance Committee
DES dietary energy supply
ECLA Economic Commission for Latin America (superseded by ECLAC)
ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
ECOSOC Economic and Social Council (UN)
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone
EGS Employment Generation Scheme (India)
EHDAEs economies highly dependent on agricultural exports
EU European Union
FAC Food Aid Convention
FDI foreign direct investment
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP gross domestic product
GIEWS Global Information and Early Warning System
GNP gross national product
HFA household food adequacy
HFS household food security
IARC international agricultural research centre
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICA International Coffee Agreement
ICCO International Cocoa Organization
ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
IDA International Development Association
IDA iron deficiency anaemia
IDD iodine deficiency disease
IDP internally displaced person
IFA individual food adequacy
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFF Intergovernmental Forum on Forests
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute
IFS individual food security
ILO International Labour Organisation
IMF International Monetary Fund
IPF Intergovernmental Panel on Forests
IPR intellectual property right
IRR internal rate of return
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ISA International Sugar Agreement
LIFDC low-income food-deficit country
MFO microfinance organization
MSA most seriously affected (country) (UN)
MTNs multilateral trade negotiations
NARS national agricultural research systems
NFS national food security
NGO non-governmental organization
NSSS national staples self-sufficiency
ODA official development assistance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
PDA Population and Community Development Association (Thailand)
PDI Population and Development International (Thailand)
PEM protein-energy malnutrition
PFP partial factor productivity
ROSCA rotating savings and credit association
SACCO savings and credit cooperative
SAP structural adjustment programme
TNS Technoserve (Ghana)
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNCLOS United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNRISD United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
VAD vitamin A deficiency
WCARRD World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
WFP World Food Programme
WHO World Health Organization
WTO World Trade Organization
<section>3</section>
Explanatory note
Symbols
The following symbols are used:
- = none or negligible (in tables)
... = not available (in tables)
$ = US dollars
Dates and units
The following forms are used to denote years or groups of years:
1996/97 = a crop, marketing or fiscal year running from one calendar year to the next
1996-97 = the average for the two calendar years
Unless otherwise indicated, the metric system is used in this publication.
"Billion" = 1 000 million.
Statistics
Figures in statistical tables may not add up because of rounding. Annual changes and rates of change have been calculated from unrounded figures.
Production indexes
The FAO indexes of agricultural production show the relative level of the aggregate volume of agricultural production for each year in comparison with the base period 1989-91. They are based on the sum of price-weighted quantities of different agricultural commodities after the quantities used as seed and feed (similarly weighted) have been deducted. The resulting aggregate therefore represents disposable production for any use except seed and feed.
All of the indexes, whether at the country, regional or world level, are calculated by the Laspeyres formula. Production quantities of each commodity are weighted by 1989-91 average international commodity prices and summed for each year. To obtain the index, the aggregate for a given year is divided by the average aggregate for the base period 1989-91.
Trade indexes
The indexes of trade in agricultural products are also based on the base period 1989-91. They include all the commodities and countries shown in the FAO Trade Yearbook. Indexes of total food products include those edible products generally classified as "food".
All indexes represent changes in current values of exports (free on board [f.o.b.]), and imports (cost, insurance, freight [c.i.f.]), expressed in US dollars. When countries report imports valued at f.o.b., these are adjusted to approximate c.i.f. values.
Volumes and unit value indexes represent the changes in the price-weighted sum of quantities and of the quantity-weighted unit values of products traded between countries. The weights are, respectively, the price and quantity averages of 1989-91 which is the base reference period used for all the index number series currently computed by FAO. The Laspeyres formula is used to construct the index numbers.
<section>4</section>
WORLD REVIEW
I. CURRENT AGRICULTURAL SITUATION - FACTS AND FIGURES
1. CROP AND LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION
World crop and livestock production in 1998 is estimated to have expanded at a very modest rate of only 1.1 percent, the lowest since 1993. This unfavourable outcome is to a large extent the result of a decline in output in the developed countries, estimated to be 1 percent. However, the performance of the developing countries as a group was also relatively disappointing during 1998. Their agricultural production expanded by only 2.6 percent, lower than the already relatively modest rate of 2.9 percent in 1997, although this slowdown follows a series of high rates, in the range of 4 to 5 percent, recorded from 1993 to 1996.
Estimates of agricultural production in 1999 are still provisional, but point to an expansion in global crop and livestock production of roughly the same limited order of magnitude, 0.9 percent, in 1998. For 1999, however, while the developed country performance appears to have improved slightly relative to 1998, the developing country group appears to have experienced a further deceleration in the rate of increase of crop and livestock production. If the provisionally estimated rate of expansion of 1 percent for the developing countries were to be confirmed, 1999 would be the third consecutive year of noticeable slowdown, representing the lowest recorded rate of growth in agricultural production in the developing countries since 1972.
A major factor behind the slower growth of output in developing countries is the worsening performance of the Far East and the Pacific developing region. Production growth in this region slowed to only 1.8 percent in 1998. Bad weather conditions, in particular torrential rains from June to September in some countries and El Niño-related droughts in others, were the main common factors behind the worsening performance. The provisional estimates for 1999 indicate that regional production growth may have slowed further, to only 1.2 percent. Such developments are, to a large extent, determined by the situation in China where, after six consecutive years of output growth at more than 5 percent, agricultural output growth in 1998 fell to a more modest 3.3 percent, as floods in the central parts of the country affected, in particular, the rice and wheat crops. Provisional estimates for 1999 point to almost stagnant production, with output increasing by less than 1 percent. In
particular, a slight reduction in paddy output is expected, partly owing to the lowering of the state purchasing prices for inferior quality grains and to crop damage caused by heavy rains in June and July. India recorded a slight reduction, of less than 1 percent, in agricultural output in 1998, while a modest recovery was expected to take place in 1999. Other larger countries in the region suffered either declines in agricultural production (Indonesia, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Thailand, Malaysia) or slowdowns in output growth (Bangladesh, Cambodia) in 1998. Resumed output growth was expected in 1999 in most of these countries, with the exceptions of Indonesia and the Republic of Korea. The production estimates now point to Viet Nam as the most consistently positive agricultural performer in the region, with rates of production growth near or above 5 percent for the past eight years.
In Latin American and the Caribbean, agricultural production also experienced slower growth in 1998, at an estimated rate of 1.9 percent. The slowdown is largely accounted for by a below average rate of expansion in Brazil, where crops were hit by droughts in parts of the country and rains caused exceptional damage, affecting wheat-producing regions in particular. The Andean region was affected by severe dry spells, which caused output to stagnate in some countries and actually to decline in others. Hurricanes George and Mitch caused immense human and material losses and also damaged agriculture in several countries in Central America and the Caribbean. On the other hand, strong output growth was recorded in Argentina. Estimates for 1999 point to an expansion in agricultural production at a rate only slightly higher than that of 1998. While performance in 1999 should improve markedly in Brazil and Peru, Argentina and Chile appear to have witnessed stagnating or slightly
declining levels of production and the rate of growth appears to have slowed in Mexico.
In sub-Saharan Africa, agricultural output recovered in 1998 from the small decline of the previous year and grew by an estimated 4.3 percent, largely owing to strong expansion of production in Nigeria, which followed the contraction in 1997. Particularly good performances were also recorded for Angola, Ghana, Mozambique and Uganda, while Ethiopia, Zambia and Zimbabwe witnessed a decline, estimated in the 3 to 5 percent range, and the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo saw stagnating levels of production. The provisional estimates for 1999 indicate that agricultural production growth may have slowed to less than 2 percent, with lower rates of growth in the strong performers of 1998 and actual declines expected in Angola, Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
Map 1: CHANGES IN CROP AND LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION
In the Near East and North Africa region, agricultural production in 1998 more than recovered from the decline of 1997, growing by an estimated rate of more than 8 percent. A major factor behind this was increased production in the North African countries - Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia - which had suffered a sharp weather-induced downturn in 1997. But performances also improved markedly, with strong expansion of production, in such other countries as the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey. In Egypt, by contrast, agricultural production is estimated to have suffered a slight decline. Estimates for 1999 point to another decline in agricultural production in the region, currently estimated to be 3 percent. The major factor behind this is another sharp decline in Morocco, where the cereal crop has fallen by almost half as a result of inadequate rainfalls and reduced plantings, and declines in production are estimated also for the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey.
The transition countries experienced a 6 percent decline resulting mainly from a further severe contraction recorded for the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), where many of the major producing areas were seriously affected by drought. Production declined significantly, inter alia, in the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Kazakhstan. Outside the CIS, a major decline in agricultural production was also recorded in Romania, while strong output growth was recorded in Poland. Estimates for 1999 point to a marginal increase in production in the transition countries as a group, with further slight declines expected for the Russian Federation and Ukraine, strong recovery in Kazakhstan and more modest output growth in Romania. Only relatively minor variations in agricultural production have been estimated for the remaining developed country groupings in 1998 and 1999, with only North America recording increases in production in both years.
2. FOOD SHORTAGES AND EMERGENCIES
The number of countries facing food emergencies as of February 2000 is estimated to be 32, compared with 38 in February 1999.
In East Africa, substantial food assistance will be required throughout 2000, mainly because of drought-induced crop and livestock losses. Successive poor rains in most pastoral areas of the subregion have severely affected pastures and livestock, resulting in acute food shortages and the migration of thousands of people in search of water and food. Past or ongoing civil conflicts have also seriously disrupted food production and distribution in some areas, causing food shortages and mass population displacements. In Somalia, poor Deyr season rains have exacerbated food supply difficulties in some southern regions. In Kenya, food assistance is urgently sought for more than 2.7 million people in the drought-affected Northern Plainlands and North-Eastern Province. In Eritrea, nearly 600 000 people, affected by the war with Ethiopia and by drought, need urgent food assistance. In Ethiopia, the food supply situation is very tight for more than 8 million people, including some
400 000 displaced by the border war with Eritrea. In the Sudan, despite a stable food supply situation, about 103 000 tonnes of food aid is needed for some 2.4 million people affected by drought and the long-running civil conflict. In the United Republic of Tanzania, localized crop failures have affected thousands of people in several central and lake regions. In Uganda, despite an improved food supply situation in most parts of the country, serious food shortages owing to drought are reported in the eastern Karamoja region, while food assistance is being provided to people affected by persistent insurgency in the north and west of the country.
In West Africa, following two consecutive above-average crops in 1998 and 1999 in most countries of the Sahel, the food supply situation is stable and markets are well supplied. Households and national food security stock managers have been able to replenish their stocks. However, some areas were affected by floods in September and October 1999, notably in Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal. In coastal countries along the Gulf of Guinea, floods also affected northern regions of Benin, Ghana, Nigeria and Togo. Following many years of civil strife, Liberia and Sierra Leone remain heavily dependent on international food assistance, despite some improvement in food production in Liberia.
In the Great Lakes region, food shortages persist in several countries. In Burundi, the food supply situation is tight following reduced harvests caused by dry weather and persistent civil strife. In particular, the food and health situation is critical for some 800 000 displaced people in camps who have no access to their fields. In Rwanda, despite an improvement in food production, food shortages persist in certain areas that were affected by drought. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, severe food shortages and malnutrition are reported among large numbers of the displaced population, mainly in the northeastern Katanga and south Kivu areas, which remain inaccessible owing to insecurity. The security situation is improving in the Congo, but displaced populations are still vulnerable.
In southern Africa, the worst floods in 40 years struck Mozambique, South Africa, Botswana and Swaziland in early February, leaving tens of thousands homeless and causing considerable damage to infrastructure. In Mozambique, the worst hit country, the number of people severely affected by the floods and in urgent need of emergency food assistance is currently estimated to be 300 000 but is still rising. In Angola, emergency food aid continues to be needed for 1.1 million internally displaced people as a result of the protracted civil conflict; food aid is also required by large numbers of Angolan refugees in neighbouring countries.
Map 2
In the Near East, food production in Afghanistan is likely to be constrained by serious shortages of agricultural inputs and population displacement. In Iraq, despite recent beneficial rains, prolonged drought conditions and shortages of agricultural inputs continue to affect cereal production. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, which were affected by drought last year, crop prospects have improved recently following favourable rains.
In Asia, vulnerable populations in a number of countries continue to be affected by serious food supply difficulties resulting from past disasters and the effects of economic turmoil. Two large natural catastrophes affected the region in 1999. The first was the cyclone in northeastern India, which covered the states of Orissa, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh and had a severe impact on household food security. The second disaster was in Viet Nam, where the worst flooding in decades affected central coastal areas in late October 1999. In the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the food supply situation continues to give cause for concern as domestic food production remains well below needs, while economic problems are heavily constraining the country's capacity to supply essential inputs to agriculture and to import commercially. In East Timor, overall food supply prospects in the medium to long term are less gloomy than envisaged at the height of the crisis following the
August 1999 referendum. Concerns persist regarding the plight of refugees still in West Timor, with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) reporting moderate to severe malnutrition in camps. In Mongolia, the transition from a centrally planned to a market economy has resulted in the dismantling of various state structures, including state farms. As a consequence, productivity and production have fallen, resulting in deterioration in food security among vulnerable groups.
In Latin America, unusually adverse weather phenomena have affected the whole region in the last few years. A prolonged drought in 1994 inflicted severe damage on the important first-season cereal and bean crops in Central American countries. Losses in the range of 25 to 30 percent of anticipated production were incurred. Hurricanes Lily (1996) and George (1998) in the Caribbean were followed by hurricane Mitch, one of the most destructive natural disasters of the century which swept across Central America in late 1998, devastating all crops along its path and leaving a large number of victims and immense damage to housing and infrastructure. To date, countries are still in the process of reconstruction. Furthermore, and most important, virtually the entire region was severely affected by the El Niño phenomenon for a long period, extending from early April 1997 to late September 1998 and resulting in diverse negative effects such as torrential rains, flooding, severe
droughts and extensive forest fires in parts of the region. Finally, in December 1999, incessant torrential rains in Venezuela resulted in deadly slips and mudslides, aggravated by very serious flooding. There were more than 30 000 casualties and extensive damage to housing and infrastructure.
In Europe, several of the Balkan countries remain affected, to a lesser or greater extent, by a decade of civil unrest which culminated most recently in war in Kosovo Province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the first half of 1999. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia now has more refugees than any other European country and is in a state of acute economic crisis. This is characterized by, inter alia, the deterioration of public utilities, the destruction of fertilizer and fuel plants and the virtual collapse of social services. At the beginning of 2000, there are estimated to be more than 1.1 million refugees, internally displaced and economically and socially deprived people receiving food assistance in Serbia (excluding Kosovo Province) and Montenegro while, in Kosovo Province, a further 1 million persons are receiving food aid. Assistance continues to be provided also in Albania and The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for remaining
refugees and other persons rendered vulnerable by the Kosovo
war in 1999.
In the CIS, civil strife in Chechnya has led to the destruction of the capital, Grozny, other villages and basic infrastructure. The situation in agriculture is critical, with severe damage inflicted on livestock and the grape growing industry and mined fields. Hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced, either within the country or to neighbouring autonomous states, particularly Ingushetia, a small country of some 300 000 inhabitants who are hosting about 200 000 refugees. The food security of the civilian population trapped in Chechnya is rapidly deteriorating and the outlook for winter grain and fodder crops is bleak. Elsewhere in the CIS, economically vulnerable people and internally displaced or refugees in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Tajikistan continue to need food assistance. In these countries, gross domestic product (GDP) is recovering, but slowly, from a level of less than half of that in 1990, but their economies remain fragile. The devaluation of
the Russian rouble in August 1998 and the associated cutback in trade have slowed recovery. Many vulnerable people, notably the aged, disabled and recent refugees, are not in a position to benefit from market reforms, and targeted food aid is likely to be necessary in the years to come. In Tajikistan, serious crop losses caused by the infestation of wheat by yellow rust and smut in 1999 will need to be addressed if cereal output is to recover in successive years.
3. WORLD CEREAL SUPPLY SITUATION AND OUTLOOK^1
World cereal production in 1999 reached 1 865 million tonnes (including rice in milled terms), slightly below the previous year's level but above the average of the past five years. The decline was mostly a result of lower wheat and coarse grain production. Global wheat production fell in 1999, for the second consecutive year, to about 589 million tonnes, down 2 percent from 1998. Severe drought in the Near East and parts of North Africa, as well as excessive rainfall at planting time in northern Europe, were the main causes of the decline in 1999 wheat production. A 5 to 10 percent rise in compulsory set-aside in the European Union (EU), combined with planting cutbacks by several wheat growers in response to low prices - particularly on winter wheat plantings in the United States - also had a negative impact on global production. However, the decline was partially offset by favourable weather and higher yields in a number of other countries, including Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, China, India and the Russian Federation.
At an estimated 876 million tonnes, global output of coarse grains in 1999 was about 4 percent below the previous year. Smaller harvests were gathered throughout all regions of the globe with the exception of Central America, where production remained unchanged, and Europe, where it increased marginally. Significant declines occurred among some of the major producers, including Argentina, China, the EU, India and the United States. In several countries, such as China, exceptional dry conditions during the growing season were responsible for the reduction in output, while in the United States planted area declined but the yield was above average.
World paddy output in 1999 is estimated to have returned to the trend prevailing in the 1990s, after the disappointing 1998 season caused by weather problems in major produci