<title>From farmer to planner and back: Harvesting Best Practices. </title>
<section>1</section>
preface
THE INFORMATION USED AS THE BASIS FOR THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN BROUGHT TO US BY DEDICATED AND DILIGENT FAO FIELD PROJECT STAFF WHO ARE DIRECTLY INVOLVED WITH THE ACTIVITIES OF WOMEN AND MEN FARMERS. THESE HIGHLY TRAINED, ENTHUSIASTIC PROFESSIONALS WERE PARTICIPANTS IN THE FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK: HARVESTING BEST PRACTICES WORKSHOP HELD IN ROME FROM 8-12 DECEMBER 1997. THE OBJECTIVE OF THE WORKSHOP WAS TO HARVEST THE PARTICIPANTS' BROAD-BASED, HANDS-ON KNOWLEDGE AND USE IT AS THE BASIS FOR A PLANNING FRAMEWORK THAT WOULD FACILITATE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PLANNING PROCESSES IN WHICH RURAL WOMEN AND MEN ARE ENSURED A VOICE.
From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices reflects the long-standing and active commitment of the Women in Development Service of FAO's Women and Population Division to identify, develop and disseminate methodologies for gender-responsive rural development approaches that are equitable, participatory and sustainable.
With this publication, we introduce you to the workshop participants, through a photo-essay introduction. We give you an overview of their activities and contributions through The Key Issues paper that draws upon information from case studies written about their projects, and we introduce The Responsive Planner, the planning framework that is based on the best practices and lessons learned in the field projects.
The workshop, funded by the Government of Norway, was part of the Service's overall effort to implement FAO's World Food Summit Plan of Action and its Plan of Action for Women in Development, 1996-2001 which promote food security and improved rural livelihoods through agricultural and rural development.
We are pleased to share what we have learned from those who are listening to women and men farmers and working to strengthen their voices at every level of agricultural development planning. It is our hope that their knowledge of what works and what does not work at field level will provide us, and other partners in rural development, with a more realistic understanding of rural people's capacities and constraints, so that we in turn, may offer them better support through agricultural development programmes and services that meet their specific needs and priorities.
Sissel Ekaas
DIRECTOR · WOMEN & POPULATION DIVISION
Sustainable Development Department
<section>2</section>
introduction
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, THE POMEGRANATE (PUNICA GRANATUM) HAS BEEN AN IMPORTANT SYMBOL IN MANY CULTURES. THE ANCIENT BABYLONIANS CONSIDERED THE EVERGREEN POMEGRANATE TREE A SYMBOL OF EVERLASTING LIFE. THE ROMANS, ESPECIALLY IN MEDIEVAL TIMES, CONSIDERED THE POMEGRANATE TREE SYMBOLIC OF PARTNERSHIPS. IN SANSKRIT WRITINGS, THE TREE REPRESENTED THE VEGETABLE WORLD AND SYMBOLIZED SUSTENANCE. THE SANSKRIT ASSOCIATION WITH SUSTENANCE, THE BABYLONIAN SYMBOL FOR EVERLASTING LIFE AND THE ROMAN ASSOCIATION WITH PARTNERSHIP CAN BE MODERNIZED TO EQUATE WITH FOOD SECURITY, SUSTAINABILITY AND WORKING TOGETHER FOR DEVELOPMENT.
With this in mind, the pomegranate was chosen as the symbol for a unique workshop held at the Rome headquarters of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The workshop was called From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, and was funded by the Government of Norway. The workshop brought together field-level participants from 12 FAO field projects throughout the developing world to discuss best practices for incorporating gender issues into development planning.
In still other cultures, the open pomegranate fruit with its hundreds of seeds, represents fertility and abundance. This means more than fertility of soil, plants, livestock and oceans. It also represents fertility of the mind. This workshop was all about harvesting fertility of the mind, i.e. the participants' collective knowledge and experience in participatory planning. It was about using the abundance of that harvest as the basis for a framework that would offer guidance on how to make planning in the agriculture sector more responsive to gender and how to ensure that rural women and men have a voice in these planning processes.
This publication offers a three-tiered look at the harvest of the workshop. It starts with a glimpse of what happened at the workshop itself with a photo essay that conveys the excitement and intensity of the participants as they worked, shared and learned together. This is followed by two substantive documents: The Key Issues paper which synthesizes and analyses case studies from the field projects whose representatives participated in the workshop and The Responsive Planner which offers a refreshing, new framework for participatory, gender-responsive agricultural development planning, based on the issues and the best practices that were highlighted and discussed during the workshop.
<section>3</section>
AND EXPERIENCE
THE FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK: Harvesting Best Practices workshop represented the mid-way point in a long process of testing methodologies for involving rural women and men in agricultural development planning. It grew out of preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women when FAO's Women in Development Service provided funds for national committees to prepare sector reports on the situation of rural women to include in the national reports each country was required to prepare for the Conference.
A review of the reports found several constraints to improving the situation of rural women that were common to every country. All of the reports recognized that there is very little gender disaggregated data and information available to planners and policy-makers. Moreover, rural people are rarely involved in planning processes and thus planners and policy makers do not know what women's and men's most pressing problems are. There is a lack of formal mechanisms to inform planners of rural people's needs, or to create a space where rural men and women can express their views and participate actively in decision-making on how agricultural projects, programmes and policy are formulated and carried out.
In an effort to fill these gaps and support local planning processes in which rural people - especially rural women - would have a voice, FAO launched pilot projects in Namibia, Nepal and the United Republic of Tanzania as part of an inter-regional project "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender-Sensitive Planning", financed by the Government of Norway.
The goal was to improve communication channels among men and women farmers, extension agents and planners by using participatory research and supporting consultative planning processes. This required training planners and extensionists to work in a participatory manner with rural people, to help them solve problems of food insecurity and rural underdevelopment.
More than 200:
flip chart sheets were produced by the participants who enjoyed the opportunity to work informally within small groups.
The challenge was how to communicate field-based information about rural peoples' needs to the planners. The microlevel processes and gender relationships had to be made visible to planners at all levels, with the expectation that such information would influence how they think and, more importantly, how they set policy and plan interventions.
As the three projects got underway, useful lessons began to emerge. These were among the first FAO projects that tested gender-sensitive participatory rural appraisal (PRA) and explored how to set up mechanisms for needs-based planning processes. In order to evaluate these experiences, the Women in Development Service organized the workshop to bring together nationals who had worked on the three pilot projects.
When the small
groups made their reports to the plenary, their words and thoughts were simultaneously recorded in three languages on flip charts by the facilitators. This allowed for easier compilation of participants' ideas about best practices so that their collective knowledge could be used to develop the global participatory and gender-responsive agricultural development (PGRAD) planning framework, known as The Responsive Planner.
While planning the workshop, the Service discovered that other FAO pro-jects were experimenting with similar issues of gender, participation and planning. It was obvious that representatives of these other projects should also participate in the workshop. As a result, with the benefit of funding from the Government of Norway, the workshop was able to invite field staff from 12 FAO projects to come to Rome to discuss and share their experiences. The Service also asked staff of 11 of the projects to prepare case studies looking at the lessons learned, describing how project staff conducted participatory planning and/or describing their efforts to make planning procedures more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers. The case studies analysed several challenges to gender-sensitive and participatory planning such as entry point, tools, capacity-building, linkages and institutionalization of the approaches.
Twenty field staff
from the FAO projects participated along with 15 staff members from the Women and Population and other FAO technical divisions, as well as international consultants who had been involved in the projects and had written the case studies. The field participants had an average of ten years of hands-on practical experience. It was a week-long blending of working groups and plenary meetings.
The Key Issues paper, written as a synthesis of ten of the case studies, reviews and analyses the lessons learned and places them in the context of the larger planning picture.
Gender and participation are two ideas that have been used in development processes around the world for more than two decades. Each has generated new ways of thinking and working, in consequence of which there is now a wealth of literature and a vast array of methods, all aimed at achieving similar goals of social inclusion and empowerment.
Yet it is only recently that gender analysis and participatory development came together. And as was seen by the enthusiasm of the participants at this workshop, gender and participation make a powerful team. The problem is that rhetoric has run far ahead of meaningful application.
The working
group sessions were facilitated by FAO staff members. The overall task of the FAO projects was to involve rural women and men in agricultural planning processes. But the specific objective of the workshop was to provide the opportunity for participants to share their experiences with others working in similar situations and facing similar constraints, and to use that information to develop a framework that would provide a guide to planners.
There have been several years of exploration and experimentation with plenty of failures. But, as FAO and these workshop participants recognized, there has also been a rich harvest of successes.
Simultaneous translators
also joined the group sessions, to allow the participants to express themselves freely. This resulted in a very positive geographical mix at each table where global experiences could be shared.
It is imperative that both the successes and failures be recognized and used as a basis for further progress. Understanding gender issues is fundamental to understanding the overall equation for food security. Building on the knowledge and experiences of rural women and men when planning agricultural programmes and services has never seemed more promising than it is today. Gender-sensitive use of participatory tools and approaches not only provides useful information to agricultural planners, it strengthens women's voice in the planning process.
The discussions
sought answers to three central questions: How to conduct planning processes that fully involve both rural women and men? How to influence current planning procedures to make them more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers? How to get agricultural planners and field-based workers to respond to the priorities of different groups of men and women farmers?
With this workshop, gender issues, participatory methods and agricultural planning were given a unique venue. With this publication, The Key Issues are presented for further study or analysis and The Responsive Planner, the framework that grew from the workshop, will enable field workers and planners to share the harvest - a harvest of best practices.
The workshop
convened in Rome 8 to12 December 1997.
A note about workshop participation:
The participants came from FAO projects in the following countries: Namibia, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, Nepal, India, Honduras, Costa Rica, Tunisia, Pakistan and Afghanistan. In addition, the Improving Household Food Security and Nutrition project in Luapula Valley in Zambia sent its National Project Director using its own funds, and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) sponsored a representative who had worked on the FAO Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries (IDAF) in West Africa. Unfortunately, representatives of the Afghanistan project and one participant from the Pakistan project were denied entry visas into Italy and were unable to attend. Although 11 case studies were prepared, The Key Issues paper only includes the findings from ten of the studies, because the study from the United Republic of Tanzania project was not available at the time the analysis was written.
The best practices
brought to the meeting by the participants were harvested through: exercises to clarify the preliminary elements of the proposed framework; dividing into small groups with each assigned a different perspective to discuss (small-scale farmers, district-level planners and implementers, or national-level planners); and plenary sessions to integrate and share the working group findings.
There were no
speeches from international experts. The aim of this workshop was to allow the participants to come up with their own answers. And they did.
The workshop had
scheduled time to plan follow-up activities in each country, but the participants were so enthusiastic with their unhindered three-language communication, they chose to continue their group work. They unanimously decided to postpone the follow-up planning until after the workshop.
A basket of fresh
pomegranates always in view to remind the participants of the theme of the workshop - Harvesting Best Practices.
<section>4</section>
PARTICIPATION IN
AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT
PLANNING
PLANNERS THROUGHOUT AFRICA, ASIA, LATIN AMERICA and the Near East are increasingly called upon to use methods that are participatory, that are bottom-up, and that will benefit women as well as men. But this rarely happens, mainly because it simply is not clear just how to conduct participatory planning or how to change current planning procedures to make them more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers.
But the experience of the From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices workshop shows that progress is being made. There were 12 FAO projects represented, each actively involved in testing and/or using participatory planning tools and methods to find solutions for diverse agricultural development needs. Gender needs were also recognized, in the sense of ensuring that both women and men had a voice in the planning exercise and that their needs were recognized.
The workshop organizers recognized that in order for the participants to get the full value of their workshop experience, they needed an understanding of how their work fit within a global picture. Case studies were commissioned from each project, with authors asked to follow prescribed outlines which would give an overview of the projects themselves, the types of tools and methodologies being used, the levels of success or degrees of problems encountered. The hope was that by sharing this information, other participants as well as other interested groups could learn from the trials and errors.
Each of the case studies included: i) an overview of the national situation, including geographical and historical information as well as information about the policy environment for agricultural development, gender and participation; ii) a project summary, including its objectives, rationale and strategy; iii) a chronology of important activities and how they were implemented; and iv) lessons learned, including a critical analysis of what contributed to the shortcomings and successes of the project, with a focus on the gender-participation-planning nexus.
Within the "lessons learned" segment, the case studies reported specifically on six inter-related areas: the entry point at which the project became involved in the agricultural planning process; the tools and methods used; capacity-building, especially training in gender analysis and participatory methods; the gender information produced; the linkages with planning processes and related organizations; and institutionalization.
This paper reviews ten of those case studies, from the projects listed below, and provides an analytical overview of the roles of gender and participation in planning. It provides specific information on the good practices and problems revealed by the case studies, with the hope of promoting a wider dialogue on how best to pursue the goal of increasing responsiveness of agricultural planning to the priorities of different groups of farmers, women and men alike.
Africa
Ethiopia "Improving Client Oriented Extension Training in Ethiopia" (GCP/ETH/051 /NET)
Namibia "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning" (GCP/NAM/005/NOR) and "Training for the Integration of Women in Agriculture and Rural Development" (TCP/NAM/ 4451/NAM)
Senegal "Reboisement villageois dans le Nord-Ouest du Bassin Arachidier" (Previnoba) (GCP/SEN/029/NET)
Asia
India "Development of Small-Scale Livestock Activities in Sikkim" (TCP/IND/ 4451(A))
Nepal "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning" (GCP/NEP/051/NOR)
Latin America
Costa Rica "Apoyo a las Mujeres Productoras del Area Rural en el Marco de un Enfoque de Genero" (TCP/COS/4552 (T)
Honduras "Apoyo a la Mujer Rural Para su Acceso a Recursos de Producción" (GCP/ HON/017/NET))
Near East
Afghanistan "Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan" (TCP/AFG/4553(T))
Pakistan "Participatory Upland Conservation and Development" (GCP/INT/542/ITA)
Tunisia "Définition d'une politique et elaboration d'une stratégie et d'un Plan d'action en faveur des femmes rurales" (TCP/TUN/4555)
Gender and participation in agricultural planning
ANSWERING BACKGROUND QUESTIONS
This section provides background information for discussion of the case studies by briefly describing the major processes involved in agricultural planning and by explaining what "gender- and difference-sensitive participatory agricultural planning" actually means.
Although there are important linkages between agricultural policy-making and agricultural development planning, the two are quite distinct. This paper focuses on agricultural planning.
Who is involved?
* Agricultural policy-makers are the elected or appointed officials, high-level civil servants and, in some cases, aid donors who wield the political and financial power to:
* set goals for the agricultural sector (such as growth, food security, regional equity);
* develop strategies to pursue these goals (such as giving priority to export crops, commercial farms, smallholders);
* set price, input, credit and land policies designed to induce farmers, technicians and others working in the sector to make decisions that will achieve policy objectives.
Agricultural planners develop national, regional and district plans, programmes and projects that are compatible with the goals, strategies and policies set by policy-makers. Planners may be economists, social scientists or technical specialists employed in the planning units of ministries of agriculture or their various line agencies, such as extension or livestock services, or in national or international development non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and agencies. Managers may also be involved in planning, especially in programme planning for line agencies.
In addition to governmental institutions, planning takes place in international organizations (e.g. FAO) as well as in private agencies, NGOs, commercial establishments and on individual farms. Thus, to some extent, everyone involved in the agricultural sector is a planner. Nonetheless, to be clear, in this paper the term "planner" is reserved for government planners.
Stakeholders are all the people and organizations who stand to gain or lose from a particular policy, programme or project. They are all actors and interest groups in the agricultural sector who are not planners. Many people and groups have a "stake" in the results of agricultural planning, including men and women farmers from different socio-economic, ethnic or age groups, livestock owners, commercial farmers, agricultural wage labourers, fishers, employees and owners of agricultural processing or marketing enterprises, farmers' organizations, elected officials, civil servants and representatives of international agencies.
Farmers, as referred to in this paper, are men and women who engage in small-scale, livestock, crop and fish production and processing as their primary economic activity and who have limited land, capital, educational and labour resources.
How has agricultural planning evolved?
In the 1960s and 1970s, macroeconomic national planning was heavily promoted and widely practised. National plans set growth targets, broke them down by sector, analysed macroeconomic constraints on growth, and developed national and sectoral strategies. Large-scale public, parastatal and private-sector projects were often included in the ubiquitous five-year plans, but projects were rarely planned in detail since their funding was usually not assured. The lack of planners trained in project preparation was an important constraint on overall agricultural planning (FAO, 1984: 8). Large projects were often included in a plan specifically to attract international financing.
National and agricultural sector plans often included price, input, research and extension policies designed to promote rapid economic growth. The emphasis on growth kept the focus on better-endowed regions, large commercial enterprises and export sectors, sometimes exacerbating regional and local income inequalities and often failing to alleviate poverty (Labonne, 1988; FAO, 1985). The smallholder subsistence sector was generally neglected.
This situation changed in the 1970s when major donors began to favour a new breed of integrated rural development (IRD) projects. IRD projects included both social and economic activities and usually focused on the smallholder sector, sometimes even on subsistence-oriented farming systems. The major objective, however, was still to increase the amount of marketed output. Nonetheless, there was a new focus on targeting specific population groups - the poor, the landless, women and the young - with a wide array of services. In some cases, especially in Latin America, these groups were expected to participate in the design of the services they needed (Young, 1993: 47). In most cases, however, participation was not carried down to the village level, and most "services" targeted at women were related not to their productive activities, but to health, education, water supply, etc. - in other words, to their reproductive concerns.
A new form of rural development research, the farming systems research and extension approach (FSR/E), was also developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, bringing a call for interdisciplinary and more participatory methods to the agricultural research establishment. The impact of FSR/E on agricultural planning and on major agricultural sector projects was, however, limited. This was because most large-scale agricultural projects either targeted or worked mainly with so-called "progressive farmers", who were almost invariably better-off male smallholders or larger commercial farmers. Furthermore, FSR/E was rarely able to integrate all members of the farming household into its analysis or to consider male-female relations at the intra- or interhousehold level (Young, 1993: 52).
Feminist critics of male-biased development projects found inspiration in the FSR/E approach for their work in developing gender analysis. So did the proponents of participatory methods who were seeking ways to make project planning more "bottom-up" (Young, 1993: 47-48). This resulted in the beginnings of gender and agricultural literature and gender and planning literature, as well as the beginnings of a process that was to transform many of the methods and tools of rapid rural appraisal (RRA) into a method that became known as participatory rural appraisal (PRA).
In the 1970s, concern with both poverty and inter-regional disparities also led to the emergence of decentralized, area-based agricultural planning (regional and/or district planning), beginning in India and other parts of Asia in the 1970s and moving to Africa and other parts of the developing world in the 1980s (FAO, 1985; Labonne, 1988). The objectives of area development planning are combined growth and poverty alleviation, and regional "balance" or equity. Participatory planning methods, however, have rarely been used in decentralized planning processes. National plans and projects, regional and district plans, and IRD projects have all usually been developed in a top-down manner (Maetz and Quieti, 1987; Belshaw, 1988; Bendavid-Val, 1990 and 1991).
The debt crisis of the 1980s shifted the emphasis of government policy (with considerable encouragement from international creditor agencies) back to growth, which was pursued by focusing development efforts on regions, farm enterprises and crops with the highest "growth potential", i.e. private-sector commercial agriculture and export crops. This time, however, growth was to be pursued by changing the structure and reach of the government itself, specifically by reducing government involvement and shifting many of its functions to the private sector. Thus, demands for stabilization and structural adjustment, led by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, resulted in widespread reductions in government budgets and staff. Major efforts at national planning were discouraged.
The resurgence of policies that favoured commercial and export agriculture again exacerbated disparities among regions and households. Eventually, the serious negative effect that many "adjustment" policies had on the poor was recognized. This stimulated interest in local area planning and generated proposals for microprojects to alleviate poverty. Among the methods advocated to plan both medium- and small-scale area-based projects were RRA (Conyers, 1993: 108-9) and, more recently, PRA.
RRA methods involved consultation mainly with village leaders and local informants from district line agencies, resulting in a strong male bias. The same was true of early efforts to use PRA, although this situation is changing. However unintentional, a male bias has also permeated in regional and district planning (Maetz and Quieti, 1987: 37-8; Bendavid-Val, 1990: 7 and 1991: 49).
By the late 1970s, it had become clear that growth-focused policies and projects had negative effects on women and this produced a feminist critique that was soon extended to a comprehensive critique of planning itself (Palmer, 1979; Buvinic, 1986). The critique was often accompanied by suggestions for new approaches to planning, complete with a set of tools for gender analysis and gender-sensitive planning (Overholt et al., 1984; Poats et al.,1988; Young, 1988; Feldstein and Poats, 1989; Ostergaard, 1992; Moser, 1993; Young, 1993). The projects represented at the workshop drew both inspiration and methods from this work.
During the 1980s, increasing concerns about poverty and the need to understand its effects on local communities led to a reworking of RRA methods and the development of a new set of planning tools called PRA.^1 The feminist development community quickly realized the power of PRA methods for highlighting gender issues and in the 1990s produced the PRA gender analysis literature (Feldstein and Jiggins, 1994).
Mainstream agricultural planning literature, although it promotes decentralized area planning for poverty alleviation and participatory methods for better integration of local priorities into area plans, has rarely taken gender-focused literature into account (FAO, 1986; Maetz and Quieti, 1987; Belshaw, 1988; Bendavid-Val, 1990 and 1991). A few works mention the importance of women, but do not integrate gender into the body of analysis or into the methods advocated. Similarly, "women's components" have often been attached to projects that otherwise ignore gender issues.
In fact, gender analysis has rarely, if ever, entered the planner's tool kit. Neither has PRA, except in a very limited way that tends to confine participation to the official village leadership. In agricultural planning, decision-makers and senior planners have been far more highly trained in the technical aspects of projecting supply and demand, setting targets and allocating resources, than in taking account of socio-economic and gender differences among farmers. The case studies confirm that many people from the older generation of decision-makers are sceptical of bottom-up planning and especially of the need to integrate gender analysis into agricultural planning processes. Several case studies remarked that agricultural officers and field workers had never previously been exposed to either PRA or gender analysis.
The projects described in the case studies demonstrated the relevance of these tools for gender-responsive planning. The next challenge is to work out how to adapt planning procedures so that they are more responsive to the information these tools can generate.
What are the different types of agricultural planning?
The structures, processes and relative importance of the different levels of planning vary from country to country. Any project attempting to work with a particular system needs to study it in its local context. Nevertheless, a basic familiarity with the common features of most agricultural planning systems helps to determine where and to whom the information produced by gender-sensitive participatory processes can be directed in order to increase planning's responsiveness to gender and other differences among farmers.
Development planning, including agricultural planning, can be divided into two basic categories: centralized and decentralized. In a centralized planning system all major policy, planning, programming and budgeting decisions for the sector as a whole and for subsector line agencies are made at the national level. In a decentralized system, responsibility for a large number of planning, programming and budgeting decisions is devolved to regional and/or district levels. A separate regional or district planning apparatus may be formed to develop an area-based investment plan. The decentralization of planning and agricultural administration tends to bring problem analysis and planning closer to regional and local realities.
The decentralization process is of particular relevance to participatory planning. It is spreading geographically (particularly in Africa) and intensifying in areas where it is already established (parts of Asia and Latin America), and decentralization is often introduced with the explicit goal of increasing farmers' participation in planning.
In a decentralized system, the national level focuses on setting goals and targets and on formulating agricultural policies to guide government agency programming and project planning and to influence decision-making in the private sector. National planners also provide budgetary and technical support and coordination, as well as monitoring and evaluation services, for lower levels of planning. They are often involved in designing large-scale projects at national and regional levels.
Regional or area planning is the middle level of a decentralized planning system. This is where plans and programmes initiated at lower level