<section>e</section>
RINDERPEST
Fifth Coordination Meeting of the IAEA Regional Model Project RAW/5/004 - Support for Rinderpest Surveillance in West Asia, 9-15 October 1999
Livestock production is of great importance for the well-being of the inhabitants of this region and livestock trading contributes very significantly to national economies. Hence rinderpest eradication is a major concern for the countries participating at this meeting. The 1999 meeting was held in Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic and provided the opportunity for veterinary scientists engaged in rinderpest diagnosis, surveillance and control to review progress in rinderpest eradication and consider strategy options.
The project has been an outstanding example of the value of the close working relationship that exists between the countries, IAEA, the Joint FAO/IAEA Division and FAO EMPRES. It has made a very significant contribution to the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme (GREP) in West Asia through its activities extending from Turkey to the Arabian Peninsula and the Near East to Afghanistan and the Central Asian republics. In addition to transferring diagnostic technology for rinderpest diagnosis and surveillance, the project created an enabling environment for application of the technology in making progress towards the final goal of verified freedom from rinderpest.
Participants this year were drawn from the Syrian Arab Republic, Jordan, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Turkey, Yemen and Kazakhstan, with Pakistan an observer as in earlier meetings. The contribution of the participants from the SRAI Laboratory in Kazakhstan was particularly valuable as the laboratory provides advice on rinderpest strategy to the Central Asian countries. Formerly this laboratory was designated as the prime rinderpest laboratory for the USSR.
The project area covers what are almost certainly the last two strongholds of Asian lineage rinderpest virus - Pakistan and Afghanistan and Yemen. Despite this and accruing evidence of rinderpest absence in most areas, progress in reflecting rinderpest freedom in official OIE declarations is slow and many countries continue with routine blanket vaccination programmes. Primarily this is because of lack of confidence on the part of senior veterinary managers in some countries that the disease has indeed been eradicated from most of the area. However, progress is being made, as is illustrated by the OIE Declarations of Provisional Freedom from Rinderpest from Turkey and Jordan, with other countries expected to follow suit in the near future.
During the meeting, there was considerable discussion on the need to rely for safety on strengthening surveillance and emergency preparedness, rather than to attempt mass vaccination, while focusing eradication by intensive vaccination in areas of virus persistence defined by active disease surveillance. This strategy recognizes that routine vaccination programmes that achieve suboptimal herd immunity levels cannot be relied on to eradicate rinderpest from areas of endemic persistence. In rinderpest-free areas, such low immunity levels do not prevent the spread of rinderpest but serve to slow down its spread and make the disease more difficult to detect. This results in a false sense of security.
Two areas of uncertainty, in particular, inhibit progress in abandoning reliance on mass vaccination programmes. The first is seen by some countries (notably the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and Iran) to be the unproved freedom from rinderpest of the countries involved in the "Kurdish triangle" where infection is thought to have persisted until 1996. The second involves the long-held suspicion by the Central Asian countries (and the Russian Federation) that a reservoir of rinderpest infection still persists in Mongolia and northern China. Both issues need resolving if progress towards verified freedom is to be achieved in a timely manner.
All countries expressed the urgent need to redouble efforts to eradicate the last remaining foci of endemic rinderpest persistence in Asia which constitute a threat to all countries in the region, several of which have been free from the disease for many years. In the last five years the project has been a most valuable mechanism for dissemination of information and coordination of activities in rinderpest eradication. It has provided virtually the only coordinating forum for the region since the West Asian Rinderpest Eradication Campaign (WAREC) ended in 1994. Unfortunately, this was probably the last meeting of the project and its termination leaves a void in the region. For GREP to progress satisfactorily, a means must be found to enhance technology transfer, technical support and coordination activities to build on the achievements of what was truly a "model" project.
Declaration of Nigeria
A representative from the Ministry of Agriculture declares the country "provisionally free" from the disease.
(Summary of two communications received by OIE on 2 August and 22 November 1999 from Dr T.O. Abedunge, Department of Livestock and Pest Control Services, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Abuja)
* At its meeting held in Sokoto from 26 to 31 March 1998, the National Council for Agriculture, the highest national policy-making body on agriculture in Nigeria, approved the recommendation that Nigeria be declared provisionally free from rinderpest with effect from 1 April 1998.
* The vaccination figures contained in Nigeria's country report to the OIE for 1998 (see the OIE publication World Animal Health in 1998, p. 264) were recorded before the meeting of the National Council for Agriculture in March 1998.
* The necessary strategies for surveillance for rinderpest and rinderpest-like diseases have already been put in place according to the relevant OIE guidelines.
* Extra surveillance is being maintained along the international borders with Cameroon and Chad.
* Nigeria's disease reporting system has been significantly improved together with the setting up of four strike forces for the prompt investigation of all suspected cases of "3Ds" (diarrhoea, ocular and nasal discharge, death).
Declaration of the Niger
The Niger confirms its status of country "provisionally free" from the disease.
(Text of a fax received by OIE on 22 October 1999 from Mr Aminou Tassiou, Minister of Agriculture and Animal Production, Niamey)
In recent decades, the rinderpest control strategy in the Niger has been based mainly on immunization of cattle during the annual mass vaccination campaigns throughout the country. Since 1990, control has been conducted within the framework of the Pan African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC) financed by the European Development Fund (EDF). The PARC has, in addition, enabled serological surveys to be carried out and, more generally, the intervention capacities of the Veterinary Services to be strengthened.
No cases of rinderpest have been recorded in the Niger since 1986, and the risk of the disease occurring is now low. This is due in particular to:
* the epidemiological status of the country;
* the epidemiological status of the countries of western and central Africa;
* the existence of a specific sanitary cordon in central Africa; and
* the availability of an emergency vaccination scheme and an emergency fund against the disease on a continental scale.
In November 1997, the Niger declared itself provisionally free from rinderpest, with a cessation of vaccination throughout the country with the exception of the department of Diffa (see Disease Information, 10 [44]: 156, 7 November 1997). Given the epidemiological situation referred to above and in accordance with the relevant provisions of the International Animal Health Code, the Niger has decided to extend the cessation of rinderpest vaccination to the entire country with effect from 1 November 1999 and hereby confirms its declaration as a country provisionally free from rinderpest.
The measures accompanying this decision are as follows:
* Vaccination of sheep and goats against peste des petits ruminants with the exclusive use of a homologous vaccine.
* Organization of the Veterinary Services by means of networks to provide epidemiological surveillance for rinderpest and other major epizootic diseases (foot-and-mouth disease, contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, peste des petits ruminants, etc.). The main types of epidemiological surveillance will be carried out (active surveillance, passive surveillance, targeted surveillance).
* Setting up of an emergency intervention plan.
Declaration of Sri Lanka
The delegate declares the country "provisionally free" from the disease.
(Text of a communication received by OIE on 16 November 1999 from Dr S.S.E. Ranawana, Director General, Department of Animal Production and Health (DAP&H), Peradeniya)
After 40 years of freedom from rinderpest, Sri Lanka became infected in 1987. This infection affected most parts of the island. Enzootic infection became established in North-and-East Province (NEP) up to February 1994. Sporadic outbreaks in other parts of the country were observed only up to 1992. The disease situation was reviewed by a joint FAO/EU mission in 1994. This mission suggested the need for a short-term containment, subsequently approved for implementation under the FAO-funded Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project TCP/SRL/4554. This project was designed to contain rinderpest in NEP and to strengthen rinderpest control nationwide, laying the foundation for progress towards eradication within the context of OIE guidelines.
The conditions stipulated in section 3a (ii-iv) of the recommended standards for epidemiological surveillance systems for rinderpest (see International Animal Health Code, Appendix 4.5.1.1) cannot be strictly observed in NEP owing to the ongoing civil war. Intensive surveillance was conducted in NEP for six months (from April to September 1999) and DAP&H is confident that the existing veterinary service - through 31 Government Veterinary Offices (GVOs) - would have detected any outbreak of disease if it occurred. Therefore DAP&H feels confident that no clinical case of rinderpest has occurred since February 1994.
A serosurveillance programme, which has already been conducted in the rest of the country, has commenced in NEP.
The requirements laid down by OIE in order to justify the declaration of provisional freedom from disease have already been fulfilled in seven provinces, namely North-Central, North-Western, Central, Western, Uva, Sabaragamuwa and South, as indicated below:
* The last clinical case in these zones was detected in November 1992.
* There are 163 GVOs in these zones, each staffed by a qualified veterinarian andthree to six Livestock Development Instructors. Furthermore, these areas are supported by five Veterinary Investigation Centres for monitoring the health situation.
* The field veterinarians in the above areas investigate all clinical cases of ocular/nasal discharges, diarrhoea and death.
* Rinderpest is a notifiable disease in Sri Lanka. The field veterinarians report the occurrence of any notifiable disease in a Preliminary Report format, followed by a weekly disease return to the Division of Animal Health at the DAP&H. Furthermore, information on the animal disease situation is submitted by the field veterinarians in the monthly progress report to the DAP&H. These data from the field are compiledin a monthly disease situation report at the Division of Animal Health and circulated within the country. The Director of the DAP&H reports the disease situation to OIE in the monthly animal health status report.
* Being an island, Sri Lanka has no international borders. Moreover, the health requirements stipulated for importation of bovines and goats into the country do not permit the importation of these animals from countries infected with rinderpest.
* Vaccination against rinderpest in these seven provinces has been stopped since March 1993. As from December 1998, vaccination also ceased in NEP.
Sri Lanka now declares itself provisionally free from rinderpest.
Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme (GREP)
I am pleased to announce the following key appointment within the Infectious Diseases-EMPRES Group.
The Director-General has appointed Peter Roeder as Animal Health Officer (Virology), a post which carries with it the responsibility of being the GREP Secretary, with effect from 1 January 2000.
Until his new assignment, Peter was responsible for infectious disease emergencies within the EMPRES Group. He joined FAO in 1993 as Chief Technical Advisor to the Philippines Animal Health Center project before transferring to FAO headquarters in Rome in September 1994 to join the newly constituted Infectious Diseases-EMPRES Group. Since joining the team in Rome, Peter has visited more than 50 countries in the course of his work, so I am sure that he is well known to many of you.
Peter is a graduate of the Royal Veterinary College, London, with a master's degree in Tropical Veterinary Science from the Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine of Edinburgh University and a Ph.D. in Veterinary Virology from London University. Before joining FAO, he undertook several long-term overseas assignments working in disease investigation in Botswana, Ethiopia and Nigeria for ten years and also spent ten years in applied research at the Central Veterinary Laboratory and at the Pirbright Laboratory in the United Kingdom.
This appointment gives added emphasis to the importance of the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme and highlights the final thrust to eradication which is under way.
Mark Rweyemamu
Senior Officer, Infectious Diseases-EMPRES Group
<title>Empres Transboundary Animal Diseases Bulletin No. 12</title>
<section>1</section>
AFRICAN SWINE FEVER
The epidemiological situation appeared to be stable, with no reports of further outbreaks since October 1999. However, on 15 December a suspicion was reported from Burma Camp, a military camp within an infected district of Greater Accra. Two pigs were presented to the laboratory for necropsy and tests carried out with FITC reagents and microscope suggested that the samples were positive for ASF (Dr G. Opoku-Pare, personal communication). For confirmatory diagnosis, the samples were sent to the Exotic Diseases Division of ARC-Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute for confirmation by PCR and bone marrow culture.
There were no reports of infection from previously unaffected areas.
Following the outbreak of ASF in Ghana, a TCP project was implemented to control the spread of the disease. The major training activity of the project was a workshop which was held at Kumasi on 21 December, attended by two representatives from each region. The workshop was opened by Dr Agyen-Frempong, who stressed the economic importance of ASF. The programme was divided into three parts.
The first part consisted of lectures on ASF - its epidemiology, diagnosis and control - followed by the viewing of a video on ASF produced by FAO. Participants were then divided into four groups to develop action plans on field recognition and diagnosis of ASF, tracking the origin and spread of outbreaks, control and eradication, and early warning and emergency preparedness. The results were presented at a plenary session by the rapporteurs. The third part of the programme consisted of the presentation of the questionnaire and information material. The questionnaire was discussed in detail. Questionnaires and material were then distributed to the representatives of each region.
The information material consisted of a poster, an illustrated brochure, a handbill and a pamphlet produced by consultant Dr Mary-Lou Penrith to accompany the brochure. Farmers will receive brochures, pamphlets and handbills when they are interviewed for completion of the questionnaire. The proceedings of the workshop are to be collated and circulated by the National Coordinator.
A questionnaire designed to collect as much information as possible about the pig industry was distributed to all regions in the country. Training in the use of the questionnaire was carried out during farm visits in Greater Accra, Sekondi-Takoradi and Ho.
In summary:
* The ASF situation in Ghana appears to be fairly stable. No new areas have become infected since October 1999. There may still be some disease activity within at least one of the infected areas.
* Visits to a limited number of farms in the Western, Ashanti and Eastern regions did not reveal that any problems had been experienced or reported in those regions.
* Pig farmers in the formal sector are generally well aware of the dangers of ASF and have protected their herds successfully. Outside Accra, there is a need for the consolidation of the industry by the formation of farmers' organizations.
* Informal pig production poses a threat to the safety of pigs in Ghana since the existence of small-scale pig farms, and the presence of ASF on those farms, may not be known to the Veterinary Services. It is hoped that the questionnaire survey will assist in addressing this problem.
* The stamping out of pigs in infected foci is progressing satisfactorily, but problems are experienced in catching and eliminating free-ranging pigs.
* The number of pigs in a prescribed radius around the infected foci was seriously underestimated, and the compensation allocated would not cover the compulsory slaughter of all of the pigs. There was no evidence that infection of the commercialfarms inspected had occurred, and it was therefore recommended that the pigs on those farms, if well isolated and protected, should not be subjected to compulsory slaughter and destruction.
* Illegal trade in pork is believed to be widespread, and was exacerbated by the approach of the festive season and the fact that Accra is the preferred market. A protocol for controlled slaughter and sale of pork in the affected zones was therefore produced for consideration by the veterinary authorities, to alleviate the plight of the farmers and to provide competition for the illegal trade. The only alternative to permitting controlled sale would be to divert some of the fundsearmarked for compensation to subsidize feed for the farmers affected.
* Poor farmers (in particular women and youths raising pigs on a small scale) will require some form of assistance to recommence pig production, as most of them are not liable for compensation, or have only one or two pigs which will be slaughtered and destroyed. Their plight after the epizootic is pitiable.
* Road blocks were evaluated and it was concluded that their efficacy in preventing illegal movement of pigs and pork would be very limited.
* The circumstances in West Africa are such that early warning and emergency preparedness will be a prerequisite in all countries in the subregion, even those that remain free or have achieved eradication.
Number of pigs destroyed during the period under review
By the end of 1999 a total of 6 451 pigs have been destroyed with the payment of US$185 000 in compensation to the pig farmers.
A SUSPECTED NEW CASE OF ASF
Deaths of pigs were recorded at Burma Camp within the Accra Metropolitan Assembly area. Samples were collected and preliminary findings from the Accra Veterinary Laboratory showed the cause of deaths to be African swine fever.
Details of the ASF outbreak at Burma Camp
Number of pigs affected: 86
Date of detection: 14-12-99
Date of confirmation: 16-12-99
Number of natural deaths: 2
Number destroyed: 84
Date of destruction: 17-12-99
Samples collected from dead pigs were sent to the laboratory at the Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute in South Africa through the international consultant on ASF eradication, Dr Mary-Lou Penrith, for sequencing of the virus.
All of the pigs (a total of 84) on the affected farm at Burma Camp were destroyed on 17 December 1999.
<section>2</section>
BLUETONGUE
In July-August 1999, bluetongue was reported in Bulgaria where serotype 9 was isolated by the OIE Reference Laboratory, Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright (see EMPRES Bulletin No. 11).
More recently, in December 1999, an outbreak of bluetongue was reported in Tunisia for the first time after detection of antibodies and the observation of clinical signs in sheep. The outbreaks were located in seven districts (Ouardanine, Jemmel, Bembla, Zeramdine, El Djem, Sousse and Sfax south) in the governorates of Monastir, Mahdia and Sfax (see map) and involved 8 924 small ruminants. A total of 829 cases were seen, of which 325 animals died.
A thorough epidemiological investigation will be necessary to determine the full extent of the outbreak, its origin and the distribution of the vector responsible for the transmission of the disease. Furthermore, the serotype responsible for the disease must be identified before considering the implementation of any vaccination campaign. So far, the following control measures have been taken.
In the outbreaks:
* Imposition of quarantine in the affected farms;
* Identification of animals by ear-tagging;
* Burial of carcasses;
* Cleansing and disinfection;
* Insecticide applied on animals and premises.
Around the outbreaks:
* Clinical surveillance of the farms;
* Periodical inspection of flocks;
* Clinical examination of animals.
BLUETONGUE
Bluetongue is an arthropod-borne viral disease of ruminants. The disease is of variable clinical severity and is characterized by catarrhal inflammation of mucous membranes with widespread haemorrhaging and oedema. All ruminants are susceptible (sheep, goats, cattle, buffaloes, antelopes and deer), but among domestic animals sheep are the most severely affected. In acute cases, the lips and tongue become very swollen and oedema may extend over the face to include the ears and the intermandibular space. The clinical feature that gives the disease its name - a deeply cyanotic tongue - occurs only in a small percentage of cases.
<section>3</section>
RIFT VALLEY FEVER
Rift Valley fever in Mauritania
Following the outbreak of Rift Valley fever in Mauritania in September 1998 (see EMPRES Bulletin No. 9, p. 6), a joint FAO-OIE mission visited Mali, Mauritania and Senegal to assess the situation in the region and help those countries control the disease more effectively.
In accordance with the mission's recommendations, FAO decided to finance an emergency TCP project in Mauritania, starting in May 1999 (TCP/MAU/8923 - Mise en place d'un système d'alerte et de contrôle de la fièvre de la Vallée du Rift et de certaines maladies transfrontalières). The main objective of the project is to strengthen the capability of the Veterinary Services to detect the early signs of the disease in order to react promptly and implement appropriate control measures.
All project activities are being implemented within the framework of the newly established network of animal diseases surveillance, REMEMA (Réseau Mauritanien d'Épidémiosurveillance des Maladies Animales), and in close collaboration with institutions involved in Rift Valley fever surveillance and research-related activities such as the Institut Pasteur in Dakar, the Institute of Research for Development (IRD), IAEA and French Cooperation.
Three international consultants' missions were carried out between July and November 1999:
Pierre Formenty, an epidemiologist at WHO, participated actively in the elaboration of a sensitization campaign against Rift Valley fever, carried out a field mission to visit sentinel herds in high-risk areas and finally assessed the feasibility of implementing a vaccination trial with vaccine strains currently available.
Yaya Thiongane, a virologist and Head of the Virology Section of the Central Veterinary Laboratory of Senegal (LNERV), undertook the training of laboratory staff in the various diagnostic techniques of RVF.
Bernard Mondet, an entomologist at IRD, Montpellier, France, assessed the relevance of using vector control to reduce viral amplification in domestic animals and consequently prevent the spread of the disease to humans.
These consultancies were successful in obtaining a better understanding of the current situation and highlighted the major constraints of Rift Valley surveillance in Mauritania. Indeed, even if the surveillance of the disease can be considerably improved through the support of REMEMA activities (staff training in disease recognition, sampling procedures, disease reporting and database management), defining a control strategy remains a major problem with the means currently available.
In fact, the relatively low safety of the live Smithburn vaccine, which can cause abortions in pregnant animals, does not allow the establishment of a massive vaccination campaign in rural areas where the individual status of each animal is not known precisely. The Smithburn strain of RVF modified live virus vaccine (MLVV) has been modified in virulence by serial passage in infant mouse brain and is widely used as a vaccine for African livestock. The vaccine is protective against disease and abortion in cattle, sheep and goats, it is extremely cheap to produce and protection is attained within a few days of vaccination. It has the disadvantage, however, that it can cause foetal death and abnormalities following vaccination of pregnant, susceptible breeds of sheep. This may be an acceptable hazard to livestock owners, who have experienced the total loss of neonatal lambs and abortions which follow infection with RVF virus. Many sheep owners routinely vaccinate breeding ewes
after weaning to avoid this problem. The vaccine has not been shown to revert to virulence in the field or to be associated with any RVF virusactivity when used in interepidemic periods. However, this possibility cannot be totally discounted and vaccine should not be used in livestock to be exported to an RVF-free country. Several candidate vaccine strains have been tested for use as alternatives to the Smithburn strain but so far they appear to be poorly immunogenic or suffer other disadvantages.
Furthermore, validated predictive epidemiology could allow early warning so that mosquito control and vaccination of humans or livestock could be carried out in advance of RVF epidemics. However, the biology of the vector responsible for RVF transmission in Mauritania is not well enough known to establish a vector control strategy. Ongoing research activities carried out jointly by the Institut Pasteur in Dakar and IRD should considerably improve our knowledge in this field.
All of these issues will be more specifically addressed in a regional TCP project on Rift Valley fever that FAO has decided to finance (TCP/RAF/8931 - Mise en place d'un système de surveillance et de contrôle de la fièvre de la Vallée du Rift et des autres maladies transfrontalières). This project, to commence shortly, will focus mainly on coordinated activities to be carried out at the regional level and will try to establish a strategic plan for controlling the disease.
<section>4</section>
FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE
In 1999, FMD type O outbreaks were reported from Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
FMD type A outbreaks were reported from Georgia, Iran and Turkey. The WRL has reported that a new type A strain (A/Iran/99) has been identified in Iran. Its characterization by nucleotide sequencing indicated a significant difference in the sequence of the genecoding for the structural protein, VP1, in comparison with previous isolates, including A/Iran/96. The new type A (A/Iran/99) outbreaks in Turkey were located close to the borders with Iran and Georgia and were significantly different from the A/Iran/96 virus which is still causing outbreaks in Turkey and the standard vaccine strain (A Mahmatli) that is used in Turkey. The All-Russian Research Institute for Animal Health (ARRIAH), Vladimir, Russian Federation reported that the A virus responsible for the outbreaks in Georgia was analogous to A/Iran/96.
FMD type Asia 1 outbreaks were reported in Iran in September. This is the first report of Asia 1 in Iran since 1991. Asia 1 has also been reported in Turkey: first in Agri Province close to Iran in November and two outbreaks in Ankara Province in December.
FAO and the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease have taken action to prevent further extension of the new virus westwards and northwards. A US$340 000 joint TCP project for Iran and Turkey was started in December 1999 to reinforce and coordinate measures for the control of FMD in the two countries by improving surveillance, vaccine quality and global control strategy.
The European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease and the EC are providing financial support (US$340 000) to ARRIAH for the establishment of a buffer zone in the Caucasian region. Preventive vaccination zones against types O and A were established in 1999 in the Caucasian republics of the Russian Federation and in the districts of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia along the borders with Turkey and Iran. Vaccination against Asia 1 should also be carried out in the spring of 2000. Activities in the region are coordinated under the FAO/EC/OIE tripartite group, as shown in the figure above. (Source: EUFMD.)
<section>5</section>
TADINFO
In EMPRES Bulletin No. 11, readers were introduced to the new TADinfo software of EMPRES. As was mentioned in that issue, TADinfo has to be specifically customized for a country wishing to use it, as it is GIS-based and uses an underlying geographic database specific to the user country. FAO will be able to provide a customized and ready-to-use version of TADinfo on official request from the national Chief Veterinary Officer (CVO). However, before installing TADinfo, there are some issues of which Veterinary Services should take note.
Before attempting to install TADinfo, potential users must know that . . .
TADinfo is used to record individual disease events, meaning that an event-based or observation-based reporting system must be in use in the country. The reporting system must be structured, and each event must be reported separately, giving details of the date of observation, species affected, tentative diagnosis and geographical location. TADinfo cannot be used for recording monthly summaries of information given per district, for example, nor can it be used to record narrative reports of disease problems.
TADinfo is currently a Windows-based program, and it requires users to have a good knowledge of the Windows 95/98/NT mouse-driven interface and file management. In other words, the program operator should have extensive experience in using the latest Windows technology, and experience in the DOS or Windows 3 environment will probably not be very useful. Inexperienced computer users will not be able to install and configure the software for use.
TADinfo needs to be under the supervision of an experienced epidemiologist who understands the issues related to data collection, input and analysis, and there must be an identified staff member (data input clerk or technician) who can handle the data input.
The current version of TADinfo requires, in addition to MS Windows 95/98/NT, the installation of two ancillary pieces of software: MS Access (specifically version 97) and ArcView 3.0 or higher. MS Access is needed for the data input, storage and analysis functions of TADinfo, while ArcView is required for the mapping functions. (FAO is currently working on the creation of a simple map viewer to replace ArcView; and eventually Access will also be replaced with a built-in database system.) All of this implies a fairly powerful computer system with high hardware specifications (100-200 MB free hard drive space; a minimum of 32 MB RAM, preferably 200 MHz or faster CPU and 17-inch SVGA monitor).
In order to create maps of disease distribution, TADinfo also requires electronic/digital maps of the country with its internal administrative boundaries in ArcView ("shape files") format. FAO/EMPRES does have these maps for some countries, but many of them are outdated. Countries requesting TADinfo may have to find these maps (usually kept by university Geography Departments or Transport Ministries) and send them to FAO together with their software requests.
The current version of TADinfo is also not a network application. It is a single-user system that must be installed on a single PC in the national epidemiology unit. Although FAO hopes to have a network version available by the end of the year, users must realize the limitations of the present software. TADinfo has an "installation ID" for each version, which means that users can only insta