<title>Stratgy For Action. GENDER AND FOOD SECURITY The role of information</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
As the new millennium dawns, the issues of food security and equal access to economic and social benefits remain as topical as ever. The Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 specifies that the number of chronically undernourished people in developing countries is now estimated to be 791 million for the 1995 to 1997 period .... Unless major efforts are made to improve food supplies and to overcome inequities, in 2015 the incidence of undernourishment may still be as high as 30 percent of the population.
One of the main underlying causes of food insecurity is poverty, which affects rural women in particular. One of FAO's strategic objectives is "contributing to the eradication of food insecurity and rural poverty", while guaranteeing "sustainable livelihoods and more equitable access to resources". Before policies that will achieve this objective can be designed, the necessary decisions must be supported by relevant and updated information. "It is therefore essential to maintain and improve the coverage, quantity, utility, timeliness and accessibility of the information collected and disseminated ...."
The information and communication technology revolution has greatly increased the possibilities for disseminating and sharing knowledge. But disadvantaged segments of society are excluded from information and communication flows, raising the question of how best to exploit technological developments in a way that prevents them from creating and further increasing inequalities. This is a particularly important issue for FAO at a time when rural populations, particularly subsistence farmers, are having to cope with difficulties that are caused by ongoing economic and social changes and that are considerably more serious for rural women.
The Strategy for Action is designed to support the formulation of agricultural and rural development policies and programmes that will address the challenges of food security and gender equality. The Strategy for Action was discussed and examined at the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information organized by FAO in Rome on 4 to 6 October 1999. Since then its contents have been revised, with the aim of reflecting as faithfully as possible the wealth and diversity of the contributions made by the participants in the debate.
This Strategy for Action does not aim at addressing every aspect of the vast area of gender equality. Information is only one of the elements that are necessary in responses to the issues that arise from such complex and diverse fields as employment, political representation and law.
I am, however, convinced that it is essential to have comparative information on men and women, and statistics disaggregated by sex that highlight the specific problems of each, so that the appropriate action can be taken. I also support the implementation of two-way information flows: for decision-makers at all levels, to enable them to act with the support of all the facts; and for rural women (and the men with whom they work in an inseparable partnership), to give them a better understanding of their own development and the capacity to take responsibility for it. Last, I believe that disseminating information through the media is an avenue that must be explored and better exploited in order to lift the veil that distorts our view of the world, and to acknowledge the differences that demand tailored solutions.
I trust that the implementation of this Strategy for Action will help increase awareness of the importance of accurate, plural and multidimensional information, and enable all stakeholders to play a full part in designing and planning agricultural policies. This would mark a major step forward towards attaining food security and sustainable development, and would provide an objective foundation for future action.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
An initial version of this Strategy for Action was examined and discussed by delegations at the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information held in Rome at FAO headquarters on 4 to 6 October 1999.
The opinions and ideas of participants have been analysed and, as far as possible, taken into account in this document.
It should be borne in mind that information is only one of the many components that are relevant to the challenges of achieving food security and gender equality. For this reason, the FAO Conference, at its 30th session in November 1999, recommended that this Strategy for Action be incorporated as an integral part of FAO's next Plan of Action (2001-2006) on gender, food security and sustainable development. This Plan of Action will be submitted for approval to the 31st session of the FAO Conference in November 2001.
High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information
Breaking the chains of underinformation is part of the struggle we must lead with determination, courage and faith to empower rural women. This is a struggle for equal rights, for human dignity and for freedom: in short, a struggle to promote a life of complete self-fulfilment, a life of happiness and harmony.
Elisabeth Diouf, former First Lady of Senegal and President of the International Steering Committee on the Economic Advancement of Rural Women (ISC)
We can [therefore] affirm that there will be no food security without rural women .... Gender-disaggregated information is essential if appropriate policy recommendations are to be made .... A gender-based differentiation of allocation of labour and resources must be taken into account if technologies are to be developed, targeted and transferred appropriately.
Jacques Diouf, Director-General, FAO
Ms E. Diouf and Mr J. Diouf during the opening session of the High-Level Consultation
- FAO/11872D-1
At the opening session, Ms L. Balbo addressing the plenary, and Ms A. King from UN
- FAO/11872B-29A
In many parts of the world today there is an increasing trend towards the "feminization of agriculture", and this takes place under extremely difficult conditions .... Behind this process, the international dimension is a key factor, both because of the growing interdependence of financial, economical and trading practices and of the fact that the main political decisions are made by a very limited number of countries.
Laura Balbo, Minister of Equal Opportunities, Italy
However, unless means are devised to reach out to the many women who are active in the rural economy, many of the failures of the traditional growth model of development will be repeated, and the ranks of the absolute poor, among whom women constitute the majority, will be further swollen. Neglecting the energy and ingenuity of the women whose unpaid work subsidizes all forms of society's wealth is not only short-sighted but also self-defeating.
Message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations, delivered by Ms Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
Men and women farmers in a wheat field after the harvest in Myanmar
- FAO/19710/G. BIZZARRI
Rural women at a meeting with extension agents in a field in the Potosi area, Bolivia
- FAO/16134
<section>2</section>
Relationship
between food security
and information
For the last two decades, the issues of sustainable development and recognition of women's economic and social roles in society have been attracting increasing attention from civil society, international organizations and governments alike. The interest shown by these bodies is partly linked to a phenomenon that emerged towards the end of the twentieth century: the exponential growth of information and communications technologies. The wide variety and diversity of information and the speed with which it circulates have had an undeniable effect on the mechanisms of social control and regulation.
Recent international conferences, such as the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) and the World Food Summit (Rome, 1996), have addressed these issues. The relationships among sustainable development, food security, gender equality and information have been analysed, making it possible to identify some of the factors that contribute to increased poverty and exclusion. These factors include:
* limited access for subsistence farmers, particularly women farmers, to all resources;^1
* scarce attention paid to the roles and responsibilities of men and women when formulating agricultural and rural development plans and policies;
* inadequate gender-specific data and information, hindering decision-making aimed at improving gender equality and political, economic and social equity;
* exclusion of a large part of the population, including rural women, from information flows, communication processes and, thus, decision-making.
The conferences provided an opportunity to stress that subsistence farmers are the most vulnerable to impoverishment and the most exposed to food insecurity because of their limited access to resources. The most seriously affected and deprived in this respect are women farmers,^2 despite the paradoxical fact that in developing countries they produce more than half of total food crops.^3
One of the causes of this situation is the globalization of the economy, which often has negative repercussions on small farmers and disadvantaged segments of the population. Small-scale production systems are being thrown off balance by the liberalization of trade, the privatization of resources and services, structural adjustment policies, the marketing and modernization of agriculture, and other socio-economic factors such as HIV/AIDS. Effects include the rural exodus of men in search of paid employment and, hence, the increase in number of female-headed households. These households have to manage on fewer resources, because the men's wages rarely make up for the loss of agricultural income. In developing countries, the feminization of poverty and of agriculture are two of the most visible consequences.
Methods of development policy planning and evaluation were also debated at the international conferences, and two key issues were highlighted:
Since women play a major role in producing food worldwide, and are therefore a vital component of food security, globalization is directly relevant to them; politics must therefore take account of the specific repercussions of globalization on their work, their living conditions and their decision-making opportunities.
Delegate of Costa Rica
The formulation of development policies is frequently based on the misconception that the needs and interests of all the farmers within the same production system are similar. As a consequence, when production systems are being assessed and analysed prior to defining action priorities and resource allocation, the differences and complementarities of the roles and tasks undertaken by men and women are neglected. However, it has been demonstrated that, if the contributions of men and women are taken into account equitably when allocating productive resources, agricultural production can rise.^4
Planning procedures are changing rapidly as a result of reduced finances, increasing decentralization and the growing influence of civil society. The potential of human resources in this new environment must be appraised so that each individual can become fully involved in the development process. Gender-specific information and sex-disaggregated data are therefore crucial, as is the use of participatory approaches.
Sex distribution of the total, agricultural and non-agricultural labour force
Region or group of countries
Women's percentage share in:
Total labour force
Agricultural labour force
Non-agricultural labour force
Developed countries
Developing countries
African developing countries
- of which sub-Saharan Africa
Asian developing countries
Latin American and Caribbean developing countries
Oceanic developing countries
Low-income food-deficit countries
World
Source: FAOSTAT, 1999.
Distribution of women's labour force by agricultural and non-agricultural activities
Region or group of countries
Agricultural activities (%)
No agricultural activities (%)
Developed countries
Developing countries
African developing countries
- of which sub-Saharan Africa
Asian developing countries
Latin American and Caribbean developing countries
Oceanic developing countries
Low-income food-deficit countries
World
Source: FAOSTAT, 1999.
When examining the degree of women's access to communications technologies and the role of media in disseminating information, several international conferences have noted the following:
The exchange, mobilization and outreach capacities offered by information technologies are of little benefit to women, particularly in developing countries. The many reasons for this include: lack of training in the use of these technologies; the low percentage of women working in the media; the physical, social and psychological isolation of women; the lack of infrastructure; and limited financial resources.
The image of women that is portrayed in the media is very often limited to their traditional reproductive role. Such an image is simplistic and often produces negative results, particularly in commercial and advertising messages.
No vocational training or personal self-fulfilment is possible without information. This basic fact, which was valid yesterday, is even more relevant today at a time when communication, information and sensitization lie at the heart of all development projects ....
Elisabeth Diouf, ISC
Technological progress in the information and communications field could make it possible for women to perform activities that foster and strengthen their power, through launching information campaigns, creating interactive communications networks, spreading distance learning opportunities, etc.
In view of this situation, and by using information as a decision-making tool, a means of empowerment and a means of negotiation, a better understanding of the economic and social contributions of men and women, their respective roles and the ways in which they interact becomes both possible and urgent. Current data on these issues are incomplete and do not adequately illustrate the effects that new trends in society have on rural populations' livelihoods. Governments, in close collaboration with the rural population, should be able to collect, analyse and check the validity of information, in order to determine economic and social priorities and to decide on investments and actions to be taken.
^1 These include: productive resources (land, water, inputs, etc.); technological resources (tools, machines, etc.); educational resources (extension, vocational training, teaching, literacy); social resources (health care, social services and allowances); economic resources (capital, credit, jobs, wages, etc.); and political resources (information, decision-making, management, representation etc.).
^2 FAO. 1998. Rural women and food security, current situation and perspectives. Rome.^
3 FAO. 1995. A fairer future for rural women. Rome.
^4 World Bank. 1999. Gender, growth and poverty reduction. Washington, DC. In this report on poverty in sub-Saharan Africa in 1998 it is shown, for example, that production in Burkina Faso could be raised by 10 to 20 percent if the resources in each household were shared between the men's and the women's plots. In Kenya, harvests from women's plots could increase by more than 20 percent if men and women had access to identical quantities of inputs.
Women do the bulk of nursery work in the Syrian Arab Republic
- FAO/20590/M. MARZOT
A class of rice growers with FAO training staff in Viet Nam
- FAO/17931/L. DEMATTEIS
<section>3</section>
Framework of the Strategy
for Action
The Strategy for Action is based on the recommendations of variousinternational conferences, including the Fourth World Conference on Women. It falls within the framework of the follow-up to the World Food Summit and of the Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015. It elaborates on one of the elements in the current FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development which was approved in 1995,^5 namely, the availability, accuracy and use of quantitative and qualitative data and information on rural women. It also consolidates the other lines of action in the Plan: development and use of methodologies; enhancement of rural women's skills; and support for the formulation of gender-sensitive policies.
Although there is now a general acceptance and understanding of gender mainstreaming, there is still a gap between awareness and concrete integration of gender aspects in the projects.
Delegate of Finland
The Strategy for Action is based on the assumption that the achievement of gender equality and food security are closely linked to one another. Knowledge of the relationships between the different roles and responsibilities of men and women within the agricultural production process, as well as an understanding of the mechanisms determining access to and control of resources, are both essential elements in this.
The goals of the Strategy for Action are to:
* contribute to the production and dissemination of information and data that highlight gender-specific features which will facilitate the formulation of gender-responsive agricultural and rural development policies;
* support and stimulate communication among all stakeholders in order to strengthen the decision-making and management capacities, as well as the power, of rural populations, especially women.
In one area of the Himalayas in India, on a 1 hectare farm, a man works for 1 212 hours a year, a pair of bulls for 1 064 hours and a woman for 3 485 hours. The woman's average working hours are 640 for breeding, 384 for irrigation, 650 for transporting organic manure, 557 for sowing and 994 for harvesting and threshing.
Delegate of India
The objectives will use participatory approaches at all decision-making levels^6 to:
* provide policy-makers and planners with relevant information regarding the economic and social contributions made by men and women farmers to agricultural outputs and rural development, so that productive resources can be allocated and managed on a more equitable basis;
* identify and meet the information and communication needs of the rural population, in particular those of women, so that strategies that keep up with emerging economic and social trends can be elaborated and implemented;
* strengthen the relations between rural populations, especially women, and policy-makers, so that they can work together to reach solutions that serve the interests and needs of all involved;
* intensify the visibility of rural women's contribution to food security, so that actions that recognize women as full partners can be implemented.
The stakeholders involved in the Strategy for Action include a wide spectrum of actors, from individuals, women's associations and other civil society organizations, to the private sector, development agencies and government institutions. Each of the parties may be involved in the production, dissemination or use of information, or in a combination of the three. Nevertheless, in the policy-making process, regardless of whether or not it is decentralized, main stakeholders can be identified for each function.
The problems of rural women cannot be solved by feminists' groups and women's organizations alone. The involvement of every sector is necessary. Most important, however, is political commitment and support.
Delegate of the Gambia
Production of information
Rural populations, men and women, who provide primary, especially qualitative, data.
Statisticians, researchers and development specialists, who collect, process, analyse and present secondary qualitative and quantitative data.
Dissemination of information
Civil society organizations, which stimulate exchanges of information between the rural population and policy-makers and often act as spokespeople for both.
Media, which convey information to mobilize public opinion and bolster advocacy activities.
Rural women need information. They need to know what information is being disseminated about them, and to influence that information. We must enable these women to speak out, increase the number of fora for them to exchange their views and experiences, and we must promote the leadership of women.
Delegate of Burkina Faso
Use of information
Men and women farmers, who use information to analyse the possibilities for improving their livelihoods and to empower themselves in order to assume responsibility at different levels of the decision-making, management and planning processes.
Currently, the lack of information on the role of rural women in development has a detrimental effect on how social and economic decisions are taken, which in turn exacerbates the spread of poverty and undermines food security.
Delegate of Ireland
Policy-makers, planners and international development agencies, who use information to identify development trends and prospects and to conceive policies.
The Strategy for Action is governed by a number of basic principles , which take a gender-sensitive view of development while reiterating the need to foster peace, social justice and respect for human rights. These principles include the following:
* Right to freedom of speech. Freedom of speech facilitates the formulation of policies that are responsive to the priorities of all the stakeholders involved.
* Right to information. Observance of this principle can, to a certain extent, contribute towards weakening the mechanisms of domination, removing discrimination and reducing exclusion.
* Right to communication. Access to modern and traditional information technologies broadens training and education opportunities and provides great potential for the exchange of knowledge, points of view and experiences that strengthen alliances and extend the benefits of development.
Use of gender analytic tools and participatory approaches would enhance the bottom-up programme planning with community involvement in problem identification and in seeking solutions to the problems ... (and) would help to collect qualitative information for developing gender responsive interventions.
Delegate of Malawi
The Strategy for Action outlines guidelines for action , which aim at giving agricultural producers, both men and women, equal access to resources and provide specific support in the following areas:
* Diversity of information. This will be achieved by a holistic approach that exploits different disciplines and areas of action to highlight the linkages (illustrated by sex-disaggregated quantitative and qualitative data) among the situation of the rural population, food security and development processes.
* Pluralism of information. This will be achieved by using a variety of different sources, contents,
Brazilian farmers meet with an extension agent
- FAO/18194/G. BIZZARRI
media and forms of dissemination, which leads to an understanding of the mechanisms that create gender inequalities and to proposed strategies for overcoming them.
* Innovation in dissemination. This will be achieved by using diverse channels, technologies, information and communication methods to establish accessible networks of information producers and users that reach the public at large and target audiences.
The Strategy for Action applies a number of methodological tools , which facilitate sustainable activities in the following areas:
Partnership for action. This contributes to strengthening women's participation and establishing the type and scope of the information on, for and with rural women.
Socio-economic and gender analysis. This strengthens the capacity for formulating gender-responsive policies for achieving food security.
Strategic planning. This helps in the participatory design of realistic plans of action that are consistent with the expectations and priorities of all partners involved.
^5 FAO. 1995. Plan of Action for Women in Development. Conference document C95/14-Sup. 1-Rev. 1. Rome.^
6 Decisions may be taken by an individual (man or woman), a household, a community, a firm, a government department, a non-governmental organization (either national or international), etc. A decision-maker can therefore be any individual or group of individuals capable of intervening in a decision-making process, the scope of which may be individual, family-based, community-based, national or international, etc. A decision-maker may therefore be one or more women, one or more communities, one or more political leaders, etc.
Processing data on fishing catches in Senegal
- FAO/15541/R. CANNARSA
Ugandan women attending a village meeting to discuss cooperative problems and their solutions
- FAO/17507/R. FAIDUTTI
<section>4</section>
Information as a
decision-making tool
As globalization evolves, concern about the risks it generates is resulting in increasing demands for policies and actions to be focused on human beings and their needs. At the same time, liberalization of the economy continues and the exclusion and impoverishment of particular groups is a growing source of concern. Furthermore, the break-up of political models is leading to a renewed interest in local socio-economic issues.
Faced with these paradoxical situations, the reconciliation of macro- and microeconomic dimensions is worth exploring in the search for solutions that reduce disparities, fulfil society's expectations and satisfy the increasing demand for people's participation (men and women). In order to strike a better balance between these two economic dimensions and to make decisions that are more informed, it is essential, inter alia, to have detailed gender-specific information on human resources and livelihoods.
The right hand must know what the left hand is doing: macroeconomic policies have to be in line with micropolicies and planning ....
Delegate of Finland
It is necessary to carry out research and analysis that can be used to generate gender-specific information regarding the value, importance and nature of the work done -whether remunerated or not - and to develop indicators regarding changes in access to and control of resources. Gender-sensitive information can give a clear demonstration and illustration of the relationships among increased agricultural production and productivity, sustainable natural resource management and equal access to resources.
Such research and analysis can only be achieved if all stakeholders are truly convinced of the usefulness of gender-specific information and if the working methods are thoroughly reviewed. A higher return on investments made in improving agricultural production and productivity, as well as an equal acquisition of the social and economic benefits, both depend on this.
A woman selling radishes and spring
onions at a market in Tajikistan
- FAO/20631/E. YEVES
Decision-makers and information producers, from the grassroots to the highest levels, need to adopt an attitude that is free of gender biases. They also need to acquire the methodological and technical knowledge that will allow them to assess men's and women's contributions to the rural and agricultural economy. Training in gender analysis and participatory approaches is essential.
Furthermore, for optimal availability and use of gender-specific information, the information must be generated within official information production systems (censuses, agricultural surveys and other national statistical instruments). The effectiveness of current methods and tools for gathering, processing and analysing information also needs to be reviewed. This approach will facilitate the revision of production processes and the introduction of innovative methodologies.
Successful production and dissemination of information depend on the combination of a wide range of different economic and social skills and on cooperation between producers (statisticians, researchers, development specialists, etc.) and users (planners, development agents, rural populations, etc.). It will then be possible to identify needs and shortcomings better and to use complementary methods for gathering, analysing, presenting and disseminating information.
The production of information that is relevant to decision-making on sustainable and gender-responsive policies and strategies depends on the following measures.
The costs of collecting data on gender are insignificant compared with our increased understanding of women's roles in agriculture.
Agnes Quisumbing, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
THE MISSING WORKERS
Small farmers in Nicaragua plant trees as part of a reforestation and soil protection project
- FAO/20219/L. DEMATTEIS
Two decades ago, when the official statistics were recording a decline in women's participation in the agricultural sector, which was especially sharp for Central America (from 6.3 percent in 1960 to 3.6 percent in 1970), a field survey conducted in the western region of Honduras showed that these statistics grossly undercounted women workers. Counting hired female farm labour in tobacco plantations and coffee farms, there was a sizeable discrepancy with the agricultural census for the region. In one district, the survey counted 11 640 women hired labourers. The census had recorded 642 women working in agriculture; 10 998 women workers were missing.
The reasons included problems with census definitions of principal economic activity, the inclusion of the category of unpaid family labour, the short time frame used for census questions, the concept of work, which excludes informal sector activities, and the perception of both women and census takers that women are not economically productive.
Progress is slow in changing the way work is measured. Two decades later, official statistics still undercount women's productive work in agriculture and off the farm, as is reported in an Inter- American Development Bank/Inter-American Institute for Cooperation in Agriculture (IDB/IICA)-sponsored study that did more than 2 000 interviews with rural women in 18 countries in 1991-1993. While official statistics had recorded an increase in women's presence in the rural labour force, from 13 percent in 1970 to 20 percent in 1990, this study raised the latter percentage to 37 percent - or 16 million women working in the agricultural sector. The 1990 census had missed counting 7 million women workers.
Source: Adapted from Mayra Buvinic. 1999. The missing workers: women in the rural economies in Latin America and the Caribbean. Presentation made at the High-Level Consultation panel discussion on Gender and Equality in Policies and Planning: Nature and Scope.
Immediate measures
Training of both planners and information producers at each requisite level in socio-economic and gender analysis and participatory approaches.
Identifying information requirements of all stakeholders, both for policy-making and for implementing productive activities.
Carrying out a critical assessment of available information (content and format), actors involved in the process of production, dissemination and use of information and target groups.
Identifying the gap between existing and required information.
Setting up multidisciplinary teams of information producers and users in order to:
- analyse the needs of and shortages in existing sex-disaggregated data;
- review the results of agricultural censuses and population surveys in order to extract gender-specific information on farmers;
- define guidelines to bridge the gaps and adjust methodological misconceptions, which are sometimes caused by gender biases;
- establish the most appropriate means of presentation and dissemination of the information obtained and publish it on a regular basis.
Conducting detailed surveys with a gender perspective on the division of productive and reproductive labour, time use, responsibility sharing and access to and control of resources.
Exploiting existing sex-disaggregated data and gender-sensitive information when planning resource allocation at the policy and institutional levels.
FIGURE 1: Women's labour rate in relation to the concept of work
Creating networks of specialists and partners from different backgrounds concerned with gender issues and interested in
improving and disseminating gender-specific information.
FIGURE 2: Women and men in the agricultural workforce in selected countries
Longer-term measures
Revising statistical methods and tools by defining or redefining the concepts and establishing the variables needed for obtaining data disaggregated by sex.
Developing indicators that measure and compare men and women farmers