<title>Non-Wood News No. 7</title>
<section>1</section>
EDITORIAL
Another year has passed, dense with developments and activities in the field of NWFPs. It is becoming harder for us to keep Non-Wood News to a reasonable size while still trying to report on some of the main developments (events, publications of interest, new projects, emerging research topics) as well as giving our readers an opportunity to see their contributions included and shared - that "networking" role which we consider so important.
This year, Non-Wood News gives ample space to the important and controversial subject of "bioprospecting"' and to the various ethical issues linked to it. The ethical issues related to the marketing of NWFPs are also the focus of an increasing number of organizations which promote fair trade.
Social and ethical issues are also important in the consideration of the role of NWFPs in securing access to food. The need to concentrate efforts on the malnourished and the food vulnerable people is a priority of FAO in all fields, including forestry. NWFPs and food security is one of the special features of this issue.
The information in this issue on the potential of NWFPs as a source of food in Africa results from the collection of quantitative and qualitative information on the exploitation practices and production levels of major NWFPs which we have carried out in collaboration with 52 African and Caribbean countries. Last year, the preliminary results were discussed in five regional workshops in Kenya, Zimbabwe, Gabon, Côte d'Ivoire and Trinidad and Tobago. The feedback regarding the need for and the contents of national data collection on NWFPs is of great relevance and will have important bearings on FAO's work in this field. One aspect which has emerged is the importance of reporting on the service values of the forests in national forest statistics and, therefore, the need to put some fresh efforts into this aspect (in terms of developing a definition and classification of forest services, assessment methods, etc).
Being multidisciplinary by nature, NWFPs will benefit from the joint efforts of different actors. FAO is moving more and more into the establishment of interdepartmental interest groups on various aspects of NWFPs that will draw on the expertise of a wide range of technical staff.
Medicinal plants will be the first group of NWFPs to be the subject of an FAO interdepartmental group.
Thank you all for your support, comments and contributions, which we hope will continue into this millennium.
Non Wood Forest Products consist of goods of biological origin other than wood, derived from forests, other wooded land and trees outside forest.
Non Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) is another term used frequently to cover this vast array of both animal and plant products but in this case includes small wood and fuelwood. However, these two terms are used throughout this bulletin as synonymous. Other terms, such as "minor", "secondary" or "speciality" forest products, are sometimes used to keep original names and/or titles.
[Contents]
<section>2</section>
* FOOD SECURITY ISSUES
* COMMERCIAL USE OF BIODIVERSITY: ETHICAL AND LEGAL ASPECTS
* DEFINITION OF NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
FOOD SECURITY ISSUES
FAO and food security
The success of the World Food Summit, at which 186 countries (of which 112 were represented at the level of Heads of State or Government) made a solemn commitment to the eradication of hunger, has now been reflected in FAO's Strategic Framework, which provides a long-term perspective to guide its actions until 2015. This now provides the framework for the medium-term plans and the biennial Programmes of Work and Budget.
One of FAO's new programmes is the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS). The SPFS is now operational in 51 countries and under formulation in 25 others. It has succeeded in mobilizing almost US$50 million from bilateral and multilateral donors and financial institutions, as well as an equivalent amount from the governments of the countries concerned.
Forests, trees and food security: the SPFS perspective
The projects developed within the framework of the Special Programme aim mainly at increasing food production in the participating countries. Recognizing the various contributions of forests and trees to the diversification and sustainability of the farming systems, the SPFS considers the introduction of a forestry/agroforestry component among the project activities as an essential step towards food security.
Introducing tree planting and agroforestry activities is seen to contribute to three major sets of objectives: (a) those contributing to the sustainability of the farming system through reduction of silting and sanding processes and any other soil degradation process that affect fertility and the growth of crops, including the negative effect of winds, especially in intertropical zones; these activities may contribute, after a minimum of five years, to around 20 to 30 percent increase in yield; (b) those contributing to direct production of non-crop items, such as timber, seeds and nuts (e.g. cashew nuts); in such cases tree planting provides fuelwood and charcoal for domestic energy and/or income; timber and poles for income; and (c) those related to environmental improvement. This is very important in all subsumed to arid African countries, where hot winds may affect habitat and comfort of dwelling. This environmental improvement has significant economic consequences since
some other productive activities, such as apiculture, can be promoted.
In many instances, the various roles of trees and forests overlap, and trees planted for conservation works may also produce fodder, edible seeds (seeds of Sisyphus mauritiana; leaves of Cratoeva religiosa in the Senegal river valley, for example), provide forage for bees and increase honey production, and contribute to a number of other local uses and needs.
(Contributed by Mr. El-Hadji Sene, Director, Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department.)
The ACC Network on Rural Development and Food Security brings together main development partners for focused and coordinated action at country level. Established in April 1997 by the United Nations Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC), the ACC Network has been endorsed and supported by the UN Secretary-General and the Heads of 20 UN organizations. It is jointly managed by FAO and IFAD, in close cooperation with WFP.
The ACC Network is a mechanism for World Food Summit follow-up and aims to:
· mobilize support for government efforts to implement the World Food Summit Plan of Action and rural development and food security programmes;
· reinforce ties between UN organizations and other stakeholders;
· foster synergy and avoid duplication of efforts; and
· exchange and disseminate information, experiences and best practices.
www.accnetwork.net/
(More information on another of FAO's Web sites covering food security, namely Gender and Food Security, can be found in this Special Feature.)
FAO's Forestry Department and Food Security
A forthcoming issue of Unasylva, the international journal of the FAO Forestry Department, will focus on forestry and food security. The issue will look at forestry within the larger context of food security, specifically concerning the role that forestry plays in food security. It will explore several aspects of forestry and food security, focusing among other things on policy, globalization, local level multisectoral approaches, privatization and environment. See the Unasylva home page at: www.fao.org/forestry/FODA/UNASYLVA/unasyl-e.stm
The 1989 Forestry Paper (no. 90) on Forestry and Food Security is being revised and updated in order to take into account the important developments in this field and the World Food Summit in 1996.
The Forestry Department's NWFP Programme and Food Security
The NWFP programme will be channelling its efforts in 2000 into developing and maintaining a comprehensive information base and Web site documenting the role of NWFPs in food security.
A series of country profiles on the status of NWFPs are being prepared. The first set, covering English-speaking Africa, is now ready and will be posted shortly on our NWFP home page. Extracts from some of these profiles covering the contribution of NWFPs to food security follow.
(Country profiles covering Latin America and the Near East, as well as French-speaking Africa, are almost completed.)
FORESTS AND FOOD SECURITY IN AFRICA
The contribution of forests and trees to food security in Africa is important, diversified and valuable. It ranges from the direct production of food items to the provision of jobs, income generation, and support to the sustainability of farming systems.
Food from trees and forests is a regular item in the African diet, and the variety and abundance of plant and animal products found in African markets are proof of this. African populations have learnt to exploit all types of vegetation. Looking at the various ways plants are used in medicine and food production, one can assert that almost any tree, shrub or grass species in Africa is used in one place or another for food and nutrition. In villages and small towns, in particular, foods from forests and trees are essential to improve the nutritional status of the people by providing vitamins and other elements, which are not found in food, produced by agriculture. Thus a number of nutritional deficiencies associated with the monotony of the diet in many areas in Africa are avoided thanks to this «hidden harvest» from trees and forests.
In spite of the importance and richness of food from forests in Africa, progress has been very slow in considering measures and programmes to increase the contribution of wild plants and animals to food production and food security. Currently this contribution is hardly sustainable. It can however be more meaningful and more responsive to modern market needs if the natural resources are managed in an appropriate manner and if substantive research and technology are invested in its improvement and development. A combination of initiatives aiming at improved knowledge of local and traditional practices, inventorying and managing resources, and further integrating trees in farming systems can effectively make a difference and have a significant impact on food security in Africa.
(Contributed by Mr El-Hadji Sene, Director, Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department.)
Food from NWFPs in selected countries of English-speaking Africa
Botswana
In Botswana, the majority of animal protein comes from wild animals. Over 50 species of wild animals are hunted for food, providing in some regions 90.7 kg/year/person, equivalent to 40 percent of the human diet. Some animals are sold, thus providing income opportunities for the poorest households.
Ethiopia
Beekeeping is an ancient tradition in Ethiopia. Hive density is estimated to be the highest in Africa. An estimated 4-10 million traditional hives and some 10 000 modern box hives are believed to exist in the country. The main products of the beekeeping industry are honey and wax. Honey is almost exclusively used for local consumption, while a considerable proportion of wax is exported. The annual turnover of the apiculture industry is estimated to vary between US$26 million and 64 million. Honey and beeswax also play a considerable role in the cultural and religious life of the Ethiopians.
The main resource base for beekeeping - forests and woodlands - has become seriously degraded in the course of time. Eucalyptus plantations have been established in some localities and constitute a new and complementary honey resource. In many places the beekeepers themselves have endeavoured to redress the situation by planting good honey plants near their hive colonies, such as Vernonia amygdalina and Salvia spp.
Kenya
In Kenya, vegetables play an important role in food security for the rural population. In the Machakos district, for example, wild leaves represent one-third of all food intake in the rainy season.
Fruit are also consumed seasonally, especially by children. The fruits of Ximenia caffra and Sclerocarya birrea are popular and can be found on farms to a larger extent. In the Kathama area, wild fruits have long been valued as buffer food resources in periods of famine and food shortage. In the semi-arid Pokot region of northern Kenya, Balanites aegyptiaca is highly valued because it produces leaves during the dry season, even in drought years. Wild berries (e.g. gooseberries, raspberries) are not only consumed at the subsistence level, but are also commonly offered for sale and provide some employment for young people.
Most traditional beverages, such as beers and wines, are brewed from fruits of wild or semi-cultivated plants such as Kigelia abyssinica (sausage tree). Wild fruits are also used for other non-alcoholic health beverages and drinks, such as stews and soups.
Wild tubers and roots are locally used as food or for the preparation of health beverages because of their high starch or sugar content.
A wide variety of wildlife products is used for subsistence and commercial purposes in Kenya. Among these are honey and beeswax, bushmeat (small animals, birds) and insects, or feathers claws and skins of birds used as ornamentals and ritual objects.
The beekeeping industry depends heavily on forests for the production of nectar. Honey has multiple uses in traditional and modern lifestyles, in food, drinks, medicines and in trade, and is used by a number of communities in the majority of traditional ceremonies.
Bushmeat is also sold in butcheries as a luxury item. The value of bushmeat is twice that of beef and can be enhanced two or three times by processing it into such luxury products as smoked, dried or sausage products. However, bushmeat markets are not common, since hunting is strictly controlled in Kenya. In 1989, approximately 45 tonnes of bushmeat were produced, while the Kenya Wildlife Service estimates that by 1995 annual demand for bushmeat reached 500 tonnes.
Malawi
Fruit-trees (e.g. Uapaca kirkiana, Tamarindus indica, Strychnos spinosa) are important sources of food supplements. Fruits improve the nutritional content of staple foods and the nutritional status, especially in times of food emergency, and have been used for a long time to supplement dietary needs. They contain vital nutrients and essential vitamins that are especially important for growing children, who often suffer from malnutrition and related diseases. Nutritional studies have shown that Parinari curatellifolia, Strychnos cocculoides and Azanza garkeana contain more than 30 percent fat and about 45 percent crude fibre and total carbohydrates, while Trichilia emetica and Annona senegalensis are important sources of protein. The miombo woodland is an important source of indigenous fruits (Uapaca kirkiana, Parinari curatellifolia, Strychnos cocculoides, Flacourtia indica).
Indigenous fruit-trees of the miombo are also used to generate income (both in cash and barter) through the sale of fruits and fruit products. The same is the case for other fruit, e.g. Uapaca kirkiana that are widely traded and offer a supplementary income-generating activity. Uapaca kirkiana makes a good wine. Most of these fruit-trees are found only in natural stands.
In the Kasungu District, 20 species of fruit-trees have been identified. The Wildlife Society of Malawi (WSM) is implementing a community-based project «Sustainable management of indigenous forests» (SADC/FSTCU-GTZ Project) in east Mwanza. Through this initiative, some local communities are enjoying the benefits derived from the sale to the People Trading Centre (PTC) of juices made from Tamarindus indica and Adansonia digitata fruit. Most of these fruit-trees are found only in natural stands and are threatened by deforestation. Efforts are currently under way to domesticate the most preferred indigenous fruit-tree species.
Mushrooms have always been known to provide supplementary food, especially during the rainy season. The utilization of 60 species of edible mushrooms is documented and these are widely sold along roadsides during the rainy season, particularly by women and children. Most of these wild edible mushrooms grow on dead wood and leaf litter normally found in indigenous woodlands.
A wide range of indigenous vegetables is available in Malawi. Many of these vegetables are rich in vitamins, essential minerals and oils. Young tender leaves of certain trees such as Adansonia digitata and Afzelia quanzensis are cooked and used as relish.
Bushmeat is an important source of food especially in areas close to natural forests. People in northern Malawi, where considerable forest areas exist, do a lot of hunting. However, bushmeat is becoming scarcer as a result of overhunting.
Efforts are under way to try to domesticate wild birds such as guinea fowls. They constitute a good business since a bird can be sold for as much as K 200 (approximately US$4.5-5).
Fourteen species of edible caterpillars are exploited in the Kasungu District. Approximately 170 people participated in the legal harvest of caterpillars during the 1991 season, gathering close to 1 850 kg, which were sold at US$2-7/kg. Each person earned nearly US$50 from the sale of these insects.
Higher termite species (Macrotermes) are a source of useful protein in Malawi. At the onset of the rainy season, alates (locally known as ngumbi or inswa) are trapped in their dispersal flight and are processed and eaten as relish or snacks. However, the quantities consumed or traded are unknown. Termites are obtained from natural forests, plantations and other areas.
Mozambique
Animal products such as bushmeat are the most important NWFPs in Mozambique. Other important NWFPs exploited in the country include honey, beeswax, medicinal plants, and a variety of edible plants and plant products such as mushrooms and edible fruits.
It is estimated that around 80 percent of rural households still depend on wild animal protein as a supplement to their diet - either birds, reptiles, small mammals or amphibians. It is estimated that, together with the inland fish production, wildlife provides up to 30 percent of the protein requirements of the rural population.
Local communities go hunting and sell the bushmeat along the main roads or at the local markets. However, in general, most of the bushmeat is for household consumption, while poachers are market-oriented.
In the hunting concession areas the hunting quota has been increasing drastically. From 1992 to 1994, an increase of 74 percent for residents and 33 percent for non-residents was documented. Although, the legislation states that the permission for hunting requires a licence, in practice this is not the case. There are very few legal hunters. Illegal hunting for meat and trophies and the destruction of wildlife habitats (through grazing and shifting cultivation) has contributed to the extinction of 20-60 percent of the wildlife population.
Edible insects play a significant role in food security in rural areas by providing animal protein. The most common edible insects are caterpillars and termites. Caterpillars feeding on Sclerocarya birrea (Maputo and Gaza provinces), Burkea africana, Erythrophleum africanum (Manica, Sofala and Zambézia) and Colophospermum mopane (Tete provinces) are the most sought-after by rural households. Caterpillars are normally harvested by women and children. They can be dried or cooked fresh.
Termites, dwelling chiefly in the miombo ecosystem, are very common during the rainy season. Since termites are attracted by light, in rural areas the harvesting techniques consist of placing a torch with a container of water in order to capture them; in villages and towns, it is common to see hundreds of children with baskets gathered around the electricity poles to collect the termites during the night. Although every member of the household can gather termites, chiefly during the peak of the termite dispersal, the main harvesting group consists of women and children.
Honey collection from the wild and beekeeping are common practices all over the country. The most important honey trees are from miombo (in the genus Brachystegia) and acacia woodlands. The harvesting process often involves the use of fire. This technique kills many bees and the smoke greatly reduces the quality of honey and beeswax.
The bulk of honey and beeswax is traditionally produced by rural households. The number of traditional beekeepers has been estimated at 20 000 and annual production of honey and beeswax at 360 000 kg and 60 000 kg, respectively. The production from modern beekeepers is estimated at 20 000 and 8 000 kg of honey and beeswax, respectively. In Maputo, the price of honey for domestic consumption has been increasing, from US$3.66-4.16/kg in 1994 to US$5.6/kg in 1999.
At present, there are a growing number of people and organizations involved in beekeeping countrywide. The work carried out by the Programa Nacional de Apicultura from 1978 to 1994 can be referred to as an example of such a growing trend. In addition, there is a woman's beekeeping association in Manica, supported by a local NGO (AMRU), that could also be considered a good example.
Regarding wild foodstuffs, 76 edible wild plant species are used in the rural areas of the coastal plains.
In regulado de Sabranca in southern Mozambique, 41 edible fruit species are recorded. In the north of the country, in a remnant of Miombo in Senhote, 144 tree species with multiple uses are found. Since trees bear fruits in different seasons and even in drought years, such fruits can be considered perhaps the most important wild food from the forest. These fruits can be eaten simple, cooked, roasted (seeds and nuts) or when they are still a flower.
According to the survey carried out by Albano et al. (1998), the most common fruits are Strychnos madagascariensis, S. spinosa, Sclerocarya birrea, Hyphaene coriacea, Phoenix reclinata, Aloe sp., Ficus sycomorus, Ximenia caffra, Boscia albitrunca, Diallium schlecteri, Trichilia emetica, Antidesma venosum, Ziziphus mucronata, Grewia sp., Garcinia livingstonei, Dovyalis longispina, Syzygium cordatum, Mimusops spp., Manilkara discolor, Landolphia kirki, Tabernaemontana elegans, Vangueria infausta, Coffea racemosa.
The preferred fruit species vary according to region. In Maputo the most valuable fruit-trees are Sclerocarya birrea and Strychnos madagascariensis. In the Manica Province, both Uapaca kirkiana and Sclerocarya birrea are known to be of great importance because of their cultural value. The value of Strychnos madagascariensis rests on its by-product called fuma. Fuma can be consumed as it is or with honey as a staple food during the periods when there is a lack of food in the agricultural cycle.
The fruits of Sclerocarya birrea can be used to produce an alcoholic drink called ucanhe or bucanhe. The pulp is said to contain four to eight times as much vitamin C as orange juice. Seventy percent of the people in southern Africa eat these fruits, which are a seasonal staple in local diets. Without this valuable contribution diseases caused by dietary deficiencies would affect many children, who are most vulnerable and the chief consumers.
Edible leaves, mostly of herbaceous plants, contribute significantly to the diet of all rural households in Mozambique. The most common leaves consumed in Mozambique are Adeinia gummifera, Amaranthus sp., Corchorus tridens, Ipomea lapatifolia and Momordica balsamica. These leaves are cooked with peanuts or Sclerocarya birrea nuts and consumed with rice or maize porridge.
Roots and tubers are consumed only on an occasional basis. The most important ones are Commiphora neglecta, Nymphaea capensis, Oxalis semilobata and Scilia hyacinthina.
Mushrooms are one of the most sought-after wild foods in the natural ecosystems, particularly in the miombo ecosystem. The mushroom season starts with the first rains in early November, reaching its peak in January.
Beverages mainly consist of two types of exotic palm wines: sura and utchema. The former is produced from an exotic palm tree (Cocus nucifera), mainly in the Inhambane and Zambézia provinces. The latter is obtained from indigenous palm trees (Hyphaene coriacea and Phoenix reclinata). This is at present the most common and largely produced wine in the country. This activity constitutes a business for the majority of households located along the main roads. Production is continuous throughout the year. In Matutuine, south Mozambique, the peak of production occurs at the beginning of the rainy season with an output of 20 litres of wine per day.
Swaziland
More than 200 species of wild plants are commonly consumed throughout the country. Wild leaves such as those of Grewia sp. are consumed primarily in spring and summer, while fruits are eaten during winter and spring when they are the main source of vitamin C supply. Other forest and bush foods also used seasonally are mushrooms, caterpillars and termite larvae. The top four species of socio-economic significance are: Sclerocarya birrea spp. caffra, Bequaertiodendron megalismontum, Syzgium cordatum and Ximenia caffra. Currently these plant species occur in natural forests and as trees outside forests. Their fruit are picked by children and women for sale on roadsides as a means to generate cash income. In the case of Sclerocarya birrea, a traditional liquor is produced from the ripe fruit, mainly by women, and is sold in rural areas, as well as in towns. The nut, on the other hand, is dried and oil is extracted for domestic consumption.
Tanzania
Honey and beeswax are two of the most important NWFPs in the United Republic of Tanzania. Honey is important as a sweetener and as a source of raw material for alcoholic beverages (honey beer). In addition, it is used in traditional ceremonies. Beeswax is used locally in a wide range of applications.
Honey and beeswax are collected in miombo woodlands, as well as outside the forests in agricultural land in western, central and southern Tanzania. Traditional methods are adopted, without using chemicals and, consequently, negative ecological effects are caused by the utilization of fire and the felling of trees. Most of the honey is consumed locally. Nevertheless, some honey and beeswax are exported and constitute an important source of foreign currency earning. In 1989 and 1991, Tanzania earned US$0.5 and 2.6 million, respectively, from exports with beeswax accounting by far for the larger share. Significant importers of Tanzanian beeswax are Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom. Honey markets are in the Near East and in the United Arab Emirates.
Bushmeat is an important resource at local level.
In some parts of the United Republic of Tanzania cropping of termite colonies of the winged reproductive termites to be sold on local markets as foodstuff is a common practice. Some insects are exported to Uganda.
Uganda
Naluswa (1993) lists 16 vegetables, 17 edible fruits, 7 edible mushrooms and 5 edible grasses that are used in Uganda.
Trade in NWFPs has increased and one example is the sale and export of shea butter obtained from Vitellaria paradoxa. Vitellaria paradoxa is an important multi-purpose tree in northern Uganda. Its nuts are eaten and used for production of food oil (shea butter). Since nuts are collected from wild sources in the "hungry season«, they contribute significantly to the daily nutrient supply. They also represent a source of income for women, who sell shea butter at local markets.
Export of shea butter was started in 1996 by the Shea Project. At the moment, approximately 50 kg of shea butter are exported annually to the United States. Since V. paradoxa seems to be an «underutilized natural resource« in Uganda and yields are higher than those of its West African subspecies, exports are expected to increase. Up to now, no plantations of V. paradoxa have been established because of its slow development (15-20 years before fruiting).
Gender and food security
A new Web site covering the many aspects of gender and food security is now available on FAO's home page. Given equal access to opportunities and resources, both women and men have proved to be efficient, dynamic and indispensable partners in development. Together, on the farm, and at all levels of society, women and men constitute a formidable partnership to achieve food security in the twenty-first century.
www.fao.org/Gender/gender.htm
Abiu - A promising new fruit for the Philippines
Abiu (Pouteria caimito) is a relative of canistel (Pouteria campachiana) and caimito (Chrysophyllum cainito) in the Sapotaceae family. Both canistel and caimito are widespread in the Philippines, whereas Abiu is a new fruit with great economic potential.
Abiu is a native of tropical Brazil and Peru. However, it was introduced in the Philippines as seeds in August 1987 by Dr Roberto R. Coronel, Professor and Project Leader at the Institute of Plant Breeding of the University of Los Baños in the Philippines. The resulting seedling trees started to bear fruits in 1990. Three seedling trees proved to be outstanding in terms of many fruit characteristics and one of these, after three years of evaluation, was submitted for varietal registration, which was approved in July 1995 by the National Seed Industry Council under the variety name «RCF Gold».
Abiu is a small evergreen tree growing up to 8 m tall. Its fruits are large and may weigh up to 500 g, round to oval in shape, with an attractive smooth, bright yellow peel. The flesh is creamy white, smooth, sweet and juicy and encloses, on average, one or two large black oblong seeds. Abiu can be propagated by seed, which germinates in three to four weeks. Trees from seeds can start bearing fruit after about three years. Both inarched and grafted trees can start bearing fruit within two years of planting.
Abiu trees tend to produce several crops a year, but the peak of fruit production occurs during November to January. Fruits are harvested when they are full yellow, at which stage they are slightly soft to the touch. They have a long shelf-life and can be kept in a refrigerator for a month without spoilage.
(Source: Prosea Newsletter, No. 22, April 1999.)
Developing Australian acacia seeds as a human food for the Sahel
A recent article in Unasylva presents research results and methods aimed at developing a potentially important supplemental protein supply. Hunger, famine and malnutrition and their attendant diseases are major public health issues in the West African sub-Saharan semi-arid zone known as the Sahel. With mean rainfall below 600 mm per annum, rural food systems based on rainfed subsistence agriculture are characterized by annual «hungry seasons». This situation is compounded by recurrent droughts, which cause serious failures of the main food crops, millet and sorghum. During such lean times, the rural people have resorted to «famine foods», such as millet chaff and the barks and leaves of non-nutritious trees, but these are insufficient in quantity and quality to prevent malnutrition. However, there are now ongoing efforts to establish another food source, the edible seeds of Australian acacia trees (Acacia coeli), which are likely to be beneficial in supplementing the main
food crops.
At Maradi in Niger, development has reached the point where people can reliably grow this little-known food and safely incorporate it into their diets. A. coeli can easily be obtained locally because of prior introduction of the trees, and the trees themselves exhibit prolific seeding. The research summarized in the article shows how A. coeli can yield about 2 kg seed/tree for at least two to three harvests from age two years onwards, and its seed flour can be safely incorporated into millet- or sorghum-based human diets at rates of up to 25 percent by modifying traditional recipes. This food could be adopted across wide areas of semi-arid Africa and South Asia where climates are suitable for A. coeli and food security is poor. The trees also yield valuable fuelwood and leaf mulch and can provide windbreak protection for food crops.
(Source: Edited and extracted from an article by C. Harwood, T. Rinaudo and S. Adewusi, in Unasylva, 196, Vol. 50, 1999.)
FORESTS FOR FOOD
Women feed their families with food from the forest. In the wooded areas of Thailand, for example, 60 percent of all food comes directly from the forests. Food from trees is sometimes a staple: more frequently, however, it is needed as a supplement for dietary diversity and nutrition.
Leaves are one of the most widely 