<title>Common carp, part 1: Mass production of eggs and early fry</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This is the first part of an illustrated manual on the large-scale propagation of Cyprinus carpio, the common carp. It provides details about the advanced technology which has recently been developed in Hungary for the mass production of carp eggs and early fry through artificial reproduction in a modern hatchery.
The second part of this manual on the common carp covers Mass production of advanced fry and fingerlings in ponds and appears as Volume 9 in the same FAO Training Series.
The text of this book was prepared in Hungary at the Warm-water Fish Hatchery (TEHAG) located at Százhalombatta, in collaboration with the FAO Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the Fishery Resources and Environment Division. The authors are Dr. L. Horváth and Dr.G. Tamás, biologists responsible for hatchery production management at Százhalombatta and Dr. A.G. Coche, Senior Fishery Resources Officer (Aquaculture), Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome.
The illustrations are reproductions of the original water-colors by L. Horváth, father of the senior author. Layout and design are by A. Wolstad.
Intended as a teaching aid, a filmstrip is available separately, consisting of the colour transparencies of the original watercolours.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
1. COMMON CARP, PART 1- MASS PRODUCTION OF EGGS AND EARLY FRY
This is the first part of an illustrated manual on the large-scale propagation of Cyprinus carpio, the common carp. It particularly provides details about the advanced technology which has recently been developed in Hungary for the mass production of sharp eggs and early fry through artificial reproduction in a modern hatchery. Selected data on the reproductive biology of the common carp and on its artificial propagation are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
2. The common carp reproduces in accordance with the biology of its reproductive system.
This manual explains the process and shows how carp may be propagated. The basic principles which are important to understand how and why it reproduces are first presented.
3. Carp may be propagated in natural, semi-artificial or artificial ways, depending on the degree to which the natural environmental factors are modified by the fish culturist. A number of the techniques used in carpiculture are described.
4. The success of the artificial propagation of carp in a large scale hatchery depends much on its efficient organization.
Well-trained staff and adequate support services are essential elements. Up-to-date technology should also be applied.
5. The selection and management of broodstock are among the most important aspects of a large-scale hatchery production system. How to select good broodstock, how to determine when the breeders have reached maturity, how to differentiate between males and females, which management system to apply, are all questions which are examined in this manual.
6. The artificial propagation technique is described in detail. Separate sections are devoted successively to the hormonal treatment and stripping of the spawners, to the artificial fertilization and hardening of the eggs, to their incubation and hatching, and to the initial rearing of carp larvae and production of early fry.
<section>3</section>
Biology of reproduction
7. BIOLOGY OF REPRODUCTION
Fish culture practices are based on the biology of the species under cultivation. Reproduction control is particularly important. Here are some of the basic principles for the common carp.
8. In adult carp (1) the reproduction cycle initiates in the gonads the ovaries of the females and the testes of the males with the development of the sexual products, eggs and spermatozoa. (2)
When spawning takes place, the eggs are fertilized (3) and attach themselves to aquatic vegetation (4). They develop and hatch into carp larvae (5). Within a few days, these larvae start feeding and become early fry (6).
Further development and growth in new environments successively produces advanced fry (7), fingerlings (8) and adults (9).
9. As you may observe in Figures 1-5, the development of the eggs in the ovary goes through several stages during which single cells grow to 800-1000 microns in size at the end of yolk accumulation.
The egg has now reached the resting stage and it may remain in this state for several months: this is a dormant egg, with a micropyle and a central nucleus.
(6) In favourable conditions the dormant egg will start developing again until final ripening or (7) ovulation and (8) spawning. In the absence of favourable conditions, dormant eggs will degenerate and be reabsorbed by the ovary.
10. The presence of favourable spawning conditions stimulates the further development of the dormant eggs in the ovaries.
First, the central nucleus migrates toward the micropyle, and hydration slightly increases the egg size. Then, ovulation occurs during spawning: the membrane of the nucleus disappears and the chromosomes become visible, the first cell division takes place, the egg follicle dissolves liberating the egg from the ovary wall, and the ripe egg is spawned.
Eggs develop independently; eggs at different stages of development are found in the ovary simultaneously.
11. The development of the sexual products in the gonads is mostly determined by water (1) temperature and (4) availability of food. Other factors such as (2)/(3) dissolved oxygen and the diurnal rhythm of light also influence this development.
To produce dormant eggs efficiently female carp need warm water above 17°C and food which is rich in protein.
The production of sperm is far less complicated than that of eggs and, except for water temperature, the environmental requirements are not so rigid.
12. Final ripening of the dormant eggs and spawning are regulated by gonadotropin hormones, formed and stored in the hypophysis or pituitary gland.
Through its sense organs, the female carp gathers information about its environment, such as morning light, water temperature, atmospheric pressure, presence of male carp and vegetation. This information accumulates in the hypothalamus of the brain.
When environmental conditions become suitable, this part of the brain gives the order to the hypophysis to release gonadotropin hormones into the blood stream. When these hormones reach the ovaries they trigger the final ripening of the dormant eggs and spawning. Males also become ready for spawning on gonadotropin command.
13. According to the climate, carp may spawn once or several times a year.
In temperate regions (Figure A), spawning occurs once a year in late spring (1). New eggs start to develop in early summer (2) and by autumn dormant eggs are present in the ovaries (3). They remain in this dormant stage through winter (4) and early spring (1), until suitable spawning conditions occur.
In tropical regions (Figure B), carp may spawn several times a year. High water temperature accelerates the development of new eggs after each spawning and the dormant stage may be reached when suitable spawning conditions still exist. A similar process may be repeated three to four times a year (1-4).
14. In tropical and subtropical regions, carp usually become sexually mature in their first year, but in cooler climates it takes them 3-4 years.
Groups of mature carp naturally spawn in freshly flooded grassy areas along rivers and lakes. The fertilized eggs are very sticky and they adhere firmly to the submerged vegetation.
15. (1) Male and female carp spawn side by side swimming close to the submerged vegetation. (2) As the ripe eggs fall into the water, they are surrounded by a multitude of fast moving sperm. (3) One of them penetrates the micropyle, fertilizing the egg. (4) The micropyle closes as the egg swells and becomes very sticky.
In such conditions some ripe eggs are not fertilized because the high motility of the sperm lasts for only 30-60 seconds and the egg micropyle closes within one minute, after their contact with water.
16. When a ripe egg falls into the water, it becomes round (I) and within a short time begins to swell (2).
Water seeps in between the shell and the cell kernel (nucleus and yolk mass), creating the perivitelline space. If it is fertilized, the egg soon start to develop.
By the time the swelling is complete (3), the animal pole of the kernel rises as a small hillock on the yolk mass. It divides into several cells (4) and reaches successively the morula (5), the blastula (6) and the gastrula (7) stages.
The embryo finally appears with tail, head and eyes (8). It develops into a larva and hatches, breaking out of the egg shell.
17. The newly hatched larva (1) is still very different from the adult carp: it has no mouth and is nourished from the yolk sac.
After about 4 days at 20-24 C, the mouth is formed, the swim bladder is inflated with air, and exogenic feeding starts (2).
This is the beginning of the fry stage. Well-fed carp fry grow rapidly, from 10-12-day-old fry (3) into 30-day-old advanced fry (4).
18. It may be said that the natural reproduction of mature carp is essentially controlled by two kinds of environmental factors: basic and stimulating factors.
(A) The three basic factors are: (1) the water temperature which should preferably range from 18 C to 24°C, (2) the dissolved oxygen content which should be between 5 to 10 mg/l, and (3) the light which should be the same as the light at sunrise.
(B) Among the stimulating factors are (1) specific weather conditions such as a stable atmospheric pressure, (2) the presence of males, and (3) the presence of grassy vegetation.
19. Both semi-artificial and artificial reproduction techniques are commonly practiced in carp culture.
The factors controlling the spawning of females with dormant eggs differ accordingly. Semi-artificial reproduction (orange arrows) is controlled by the same basic (A) and stimulating (B) factors as shown above, except that (4) the injection of gonadotropin hormone becomes a major stimulating factor.
On the other hand, in artificial reproduction (red arrows) where (4) the artificial fertilization of the eggs is carried out after two injections of gonadotropin hormone, two basic factors control its success: (1) water temperature and (2) dissolved oxygen content.
20. Why should artificial fertilization be carried out under dry conditions?
The reason why eggs and sperm should be collected avoiding any contact with water is because (a) as soon as eggs come into contact with water they start to swell and their micropyle closes within a minute; (b) as soon as spermatozoids come into contact with water, they become highly motile, but this activity lasts for only 30-60 seconds.
<section>4</section>
Propagation methods
21. PROPAGATION METHODS
Several methods exist for propagating the common carp. They are all based on its reproduction biology and they may be grouped into these three categories:
Natural propagation, no gonadotropin hormone treatment but environmental manipulation, if necessary.
Semi-artificial propagation, one injection of gonadotropins to induce ovulation/spawning.
Artificial propagation, two injections of gonadotropins, stripping of sexual products, artificial fertilization, incubation of the fertilized eggs and larval rearing.
22. Large ponds with grassy areas may be used for the natural propagation of carp. Kept dry during the cold season, they are filled as the water temperature starts increasing.
Adult fish which have developed dormant eggs are stocked in these ponds at the average rate of 3-4 fish per hectare, 2-3 males for each female.
Breeding success is very dependent on weather conditions which cannot be controlled; over- or understocking of the pond with juveniles may result.
23. The popular Dubisch method induces carp spawning by simulating the decisive natural environmental conditions of warm water temperature (18-22°C), dissolved oxygen saturation, slowly rising water level, grassy substrate and presence of the other sex.
(1) A small pond (100-1000 m²) is specially prepared. A ditch 12 m wide and 60-80 cm deep is dug along the banks of the pond around a central platform covered with short grass. At maximum water level, 30-50 cm water will cover this platform. When the water temperature becomes suitable, the pond ditch is filled with filtered clean water.
(2) One or two sets of breeders each consisting of two females and three males are then stocked. They are kept there for a few days, in a gentle continuous flow of water. (3) Then the water level is slowly raised, flooding the grassy area. This operation usually triggers the breeders into vigorous spawning.
(4) A day later, the breeders are carefully removed from the pond by lowering the water level slightly and netting them in the ditch. The presence of eggs sticking to the submerged grass is confirmed.
(5) After hatching, the larvae are easily observed using a white plate.
When the fry reach 12-15 mm about 10 days later, they are harvested by draining the pond.
24. Another method of propagation consists in catching wild carp while they are actively preparing to spawn
(1). These spawners are immediately stripped (2). The eggs are artificially fertilized (3). They are then transported to a suitable place for incubation and hatching, such as, for example, a nearby hatchery (4).
25. Another method requires the stripped and fertilized eggs (1) to be placed in immersed baskets (2), where protected incubation takes place (3).
The hatched larvae swim freely out into the water (4).
Instead of baskets, other containers such as cloth enclosures (hapas) and wooden boxes covered with mosquito netting may also be used.
26. Semi-artificial propagation involves a single injection of potential spawners with gonadotropin hormones (e.g. 3 mg dry hypophysis/kg) when the water temperature has reached at least 18°C (1).
The injected spawners are then transported (2) and stocked in newly filled grassy ponds (3). Spawning usually takes place one to two days later, depending on the water temperature (4). This technique may be applied, for example, in large ponds or in smaller Dubisch ponds, see preceding methods.
27. In some tropical countries semi-artificial propagation is combined with the use of breeding hapas, 1 x 1 x 2 m cloth enclosures (0.5-1-mm mesh) supported by four poles at the corners (1).
The injected carp breeders are put into the hapas and spawning occurs within a few hours (2). The breeders are then removed (3) and the larvae hatch in the hapas (4).
28. Semi-artificial propagation is also carried out in small spawning ponds (20-40 m²) and in wire-meshed boxes ( 1 x 1 x 2 m), using kakabans as spawning substrates. These are made with long plant fibres (1).
The injected breeders (2 males for each female) are stocked in the spawning ponds or boxes (2).
Spawning takes place and the eggs are found sticking to the kakabans (3). The kakabans are then removed from the spawning ponds and placed for incubation either directly into a pond (4) or first into wire-meshed boxes (5), the larvae being later stocked in ponds (6).
You will require 1-1.5 m² of kakaban per female spawner.
29. Artificial propagation, the principal subject of this manual, is based on (1) the injection of selected spawners with gonadotropin hormones, usually in two phases, (2) the hand stripping of the sexual products, (3) the artificial fertilization of the eggs and the removal of the egg stickiness, egg incubation and hatching under close supervision, and (4) the initial rearing of the newly hatched larvae. (5) All these procedures normally occur in a hatchery building.
As soon as they begin to feed, the early fry are taken away to rearing ponds.
30. (B) The artificial propagation of common carp in a modern hatchery has many advantages over (A) the natural and semi-artificial methods.
(1) The need for male spawners is reduced by 4-6 times.
(2) During incubation, it is possible to protect the eggs against parasites and diseases, (3) bad weather conditions, and (4) predators. (5) The newly hatched larvae may also be better protected against their enemies and (6) their survival is further enhanced through controlled first feeding. (7) The stocking of early fry in well-prepared ponds ensures better growth and better survival.
<section>5</section>
Organization of production in the hatchery
31. ORGANIZATION OF PRODUCTION IN THE HATCHERY
The artificial propagation of carp in the hatchery is only a step in the general scheme of fish production for food. But its success greatly depends on the efficient organization of hatchery production.
32. Good broodstock management (1) produces selected spawners for successful artificial propagation in the hatchery (2).
Here early fry are mass-produced and stocked in well-prepared ponds to produce advanced fry (3). These are moved to larger ponds where they become fingerlings (4).
Stocked in fattening ponds (5), fingerlings grow into marketable fish which are harvested for marketing.
Manual 1 deals with steps (1) and (2).
Manual 2 is concerned with steps (3) and (4).
33. In temperate regions, the production of marketable fish starts in the spring of the second year, with (1) the stocking of fingerlings in fattening ponds.
(2) Well fed until autumn, these fish reach the average weight of 200-300 g.(3) They are harvested and sorted by size. (4) Overwintering proceeds in smaller ponds.
Next spring, the third year starts and progresses similarly until autumn, when the carp average 1-2 kg each. (3) When they have been harvested and sorted by size, some of them are marketed, while (4) the rest are overwintered. (5) The following spring, the adult fish are sorted and marketed, some of them being retained as young broodstock.
In tropical regions, where seasons are not so well marked, the production cycle can be shortened by one year, since the carp grow at a regular pace during most of the year.
34. The staff necessary to carry out the production programme efficiently in a large-scale hatchery work under (1) a Production Manager.
In Hungary, for example, the Production Manager supervises three production sections for (A) eggs and early fry, (B) advanced fry and (C) fingerlings respectively.
Each of these sections is supervised by (2) an experienced technician, with 3-5 years of university background, such as an Agricultural Engineer. Under him, (4) skilled manual workers are supervised by a (3) Fishery Master with a lot of local experience.
35. Support services are essential.
They deal with: (1) administration, (2) fish health, (3) transport, (4) maintenance, (5) security, and (6) stores.
36. This is a summary of the advanced Hungarian technology for the mass production of eggs and early fry of common carp, based on artificial propagation in a modern warm-water hatchery.
The following illustrations deal with each of these subjects in detail:
(1-8) broodstock management and selection, hormonal treatment of the spawners,
(9-11) collection of the sexual products,
(12, 13) egg fertilization and treatment, (14-16) incubation period,
(17, 18) hatching of the larvae,
(19, 20) their first rearing, and finally
(21, 22) their transport from the hatchery building.
<section>6</section>
Broodstock management
37. BROODSTOCK MANAGEMENT
Broodstock management covers three particular aspects of the rearing process:
(a) The selection of fish with desirable hereditary qualities typical of improved strains such as rapid growth potential, higher resistance to dissolved oxygen deficiency and adverse water quality, strong appetite, omnivorous feeding regime. (b) The selection of fish with well-developed sexual organs.
(c) The rearing of these selected fish to produce healthy potential spawners, with dormant eggs well developed in the females.
38. What is the basis on which to select good future breeders?
The selection of future carp breeders should take into account the general shape of the fish body, scale distribution, state of health and development of sexual organs. In particular,
(1) the selected fish should be in good health,
(2) with no body wounds,
(3) no parasites,
(4) a typical scale distribution, and
(5, 6) no fin or body deformation.
(7) The body should possess the required shape and proportions, being neither too fat,
(8) nor too thin.
39. How can the difference between male and female carp be determined?
Male and female breeders may be easily differentiated by the shape of the body and the relative position of the genital papilla. In females, the body is plump and the genital opening is situated above the genital papilla. In males, the body is slender and the genital opening is found behind the genital papilla.
40. What are the external signs of the breeder's maturity?
To check whether a carp breeder has reached maturity (presence of dormant eggs or sperm) and may be selected for artificial propagation, the belly and genital papilla should be examined carefully.
A mature female has a well-rounded and soft or semi-soft belly; its genital papilla is erect and reddish; its anal opening is enlarged and protruding.
A mature male will release milt under a slight abdominal pressure; its belly is not blown up but rather slim; it sometimes has callosities on the head.
41. Broodstock ponds are 0.5-1 train size end 1-2m deep.
The dikes should be protected by vegetation. Water control structures exist at the inlet and outlet of the pond. Access by road and good protection against poaching should be ensured. The stocking rate varies from 100 to 300 breeders per hectare.
42. Broodstock management is one of the most important elements of the hatchery production system.
In temperate climates, the spent spawners leave the hatchery in late spring. They are given a quick salt bath (2-3% salt solution, for 30-40 seconds) against ectoparasites (1) and they are stocked in broodstock ponds where they are well fed during summer and autumn (2).
Overwintering takes place in the same pond. The following spring, the breeders are seined out of the pond (3). They are sorted by qualified personnel who select the good potential breeders and separate them by sex. The other fish are marketed.
The selected breeders receive a quick salt bath and are stored in storage ponds, the sexes being kept well separate (4).
When the reproduction season starts in mid-spring, the breeders are seined out of the storage ponds as necessary; those which are mature are chosen, receive a quick salt bath (5), and are then stored in the hatchery where they will be propagated artificially a few hours later (6).
43. Broodstock management in tropical climates is somewhat different because of the possibility of multiple spawnings during the yearly cycle.
(A) Females and (B) males are preferably kept in separate broodstock ponds.
Two sets of ponds are used for the ripening males and females, and two sets of ponds are used for the spent spawners. This wild prevent wild spawning. It will also enable higher protein feeds to be distributed to the females, and to lower the stocking rates.
44. In the broodstock ponds, it is advisable to include some smaller (100-200 g) carnivorous fish with the carp breeders.
About 200-400 ind/ha is sufficient to control the wild fist which might enter the pond and compete for food with the broodstock.
Similarly, these carnivorous fish will eliminate the juvenile' born from wild spawning.
45. Broodstock feed varies according to the season.
(2) After stripping, when the breeders form new eggs which develop toward the dormant stage, they should eat a mixture of 50% natural food organisms rich in protein and 50% artificial feeds with a high content of carbohydrates, such as maize.
(1) Later, when the dormant eggs have been developed and when the breeders await spawning, they should receive artificial feeds with a 30-40% protein content in order to prevent the accumulation of fat in their gonads.
46. The breeders which are to be propagated artificially on a particular day, are taken from the storage ponds the day before. They are crowded into a corner of the half-drained pond with a seine net.
A skilled worker selects the breeders one by one: mature breeders are brought into the hatchery building (1), immature breeders are put back into the storage pond (2), and unhealthy or invalid fish are sent to the market (3).
This selection process is especially important for the females, whose maturity should be thoroughly checked, to ensure the success of the artificial propagation.
47. It is important to avoid dissolved oxygen deficiency which may damage the sensitive breeders during seining and selection.
During handling, fresh water may be pumped into the crowded enclosure if necessary.
48. It is best to handle carp breeders using a special net with a strong mesh.
It should be open at both ends, the stiffened mouth opening measuring about 30 cm in diameter and the netting 1 m long. A breeder may easily be caught in it (2) and transported with two hands (3). When the end of the net is released, the fish can swim out easily (4).
49. A double hammock (85 x 20 x 16 cm) of waterproof canvas, attached to a solid frame is very useful for the transport of the selected breeders to the hatchery.
Broodstock transport may also be mechanized, using fibreglass containers and compressed oxygen as detailed in the next picture.
50. A fibreglass tank (200 x 100 x 80 cm) may be put on a trailer or on the platform of a lorry. It should contain about 1 m³ of water.
The fish are introduced through the top door and removed through the back door.
Compressed oxygen is delivered in fine bubbles from the bottom of the tank through a perforated plastic tube attached to a metal frame.
In such a tank 20-30 carp breeders per cubic metre of water can be safely transported for journeys of up to several hours.
<section>7</section>
Injection and stripping of spawners
51. INJECTION AND STRIPPING OF SPAWNERS
The advanced technique of the artificial propagation of common carp involves a hormonal treatment prior to hand stripping of the mature spawners to obtain sperm and eggs.
Note 1: How much dried hypophysis do you require?
Females First injection: 0.3 mg/kg
Second injection: 3.5 mg/kg
Males One injection: 2.0 mg/kg
Example: You are planning to treat 34 females (average weight 4 kg) and 17 males (average weight 2.5 kg). You will require the following quantities of dried hypophysis:
(a) for the first injection of the females: 34 fish x 4 kg x 0.3 mg/kg = 40.8 mg
(b) for the second injection of the females: 34 fish x 4 kg x 3.5 mg/kg = 476 mg
(c) for the injection of the males: 17 fish x 2.5 kg x 2 mg/kg = 85 mg
It is good practice to add 10% to these calculated quantities of dried hypophysis to compensate for the losses occurring during the injections. If you know the average weight of one dried hypophysis (about 2.5-3 mg), you may then easily calculate how many hypophysis glands are necessary in each case.
Note 2: How to prepare the 0.65% salt solution?
Dissolve 6.5 g of common kitchen salt in 1 litre of distilled water. You may also use boiled and filtered water.
Note 3: How much salt solution do you require?
Females First injection: 1 ml/fish
Second injection: 1.5 ml/fish
Males One injection: 1.5 ml/fish
Example: For the above example (Note 1), you will require the following volumes of salt solution:
(a) for the first injection of the females: 34 fish x 1 ml =34 ml
(b) for the second injection of the females: 34 fish x 1.5 ml = 51 ml
(c) for the injection of the males: 17 fish x 1.5 ml = 26 ml
It is good practice to add about 10% to these calculated volumes of salt solution to compensate for later losses.
Note 4: The 100 litre anaesthetic solution may be used several times for a full day to save on the high cost of MS 222.
Note 5: Which anaesthetic should be used?
Three chemicals may be used as fish anaesthetics:
(a) MS 222 or tricaine methane-sulphonate (Sandoz, Basel, Switzerland) is a very mild and safe anaesthetic from which fish easily recover. Fish may be kept in it for about 30 minutes at 20-25°C. But it is now thought to be a possible carcinogenic in man; it is rather expensive and must be used sparingly.
(b) Quinaldine or 2-4 methylquinolin is a toxic chemical which should be handled with great care and stored safely. During the treatment of the fish, they should be carefully watched and transferred quickly to well oxygenated water if necessary.
(c) Phenoxyethanol is milder and less effective than MS 222 but is far cheaper.
Note 6: How should anaesthetics be used?
It is advisable to determine the correct dose of anaesthetic to be used by preliminary tests. For common carp for example the following doses are used in Hungary for 24°C water:
MS 222 1:10000 or 10 g dissolved in 100 l water
Quinaldine 1:40000 or 2.5 ml dissolved in 100 l water
Phenoxyethanol 1: 5 000 or 200 ml dissolved in 100 l water
52. Injections of gonadotropin hormones induce the final ripening of the dormant eggs in the selected females.
These injections replace the natural release in the bloodstream of such hormones by the hypophysis, at the command of the hypothalamus.
As seen earlier, only two basic environmental factors have to be at optimum level: water temperature and dissolved oxygen content.
53. The dose of hormones to be injected to the spawners is based on the live weight of each spawner, see Note 1.
As far as possible, it is better to use batches of spawners similar m size to simplify calculations. The spawners are weighed in a netting bag, using weighing scales.
54. The gonadotropin hormones to be injected in the breeders are extracted from dried hypophyses.
Fresh hypophyses are collected, for example, from live sexually mature fish prior to their marketing and then prepared for preservation as further described in the last section of this manual.
(1) The necessary number of hypophyses is calculated on the basis of the dose of hormones to be injected in the breeders brought into the hatchery, see Note 1. (2) The dried glands are carefully ground into a fine powder in a mortar. (3) The resulting fine powder is then well mixed with a certain volume of a 0.65% salt solution which extracts the gonadotropin hormones from the gland tissue, see Notes 2 and 3. (4) It is the supernatant fluid which is used for the injections.
55. This is a summary of the treatment applied in the hatchery to the female spawners to obtain mature eggs, using 24°C water.
(1) Early in the morning, selected mature females are brought in from the storage ponds. They are put into a small mobile tank. At about 8 a.m. they are slightly anaesthetized (2) and receive the first injection of hypophysis extract (3). They are then stored in a large tank with a good water supply (4).
At about 8 p.m., they are anaesthetized again (5), their genital opening is sutured (6) and they receive the second injection of hypophysis extract (7). They are stored in the large tank (8) and a male fish is generally added (9) as an indicator of ovulation. The latter occurs about 10 hours later, at which point the females are anaesthetized (10) and stripped of their eggs (11). More detail on this procedure is given in the following pictures.
56. (1) When the selected female breeders are brought into the hatchery early in the morning, they are placed in a small tank containing 100 litres of water.
(2) They are anaesthetized, using for example MS 222, see Notes 4, 5 and 6.
(3) From now on the anaesthetized breeders should be watched carefully to see if their opercules keep moving. The life of the fish is in danger when this movement stops. In this event the breeder should be immediately removed from the anaesthetic solution and put into well-aerated fresh water.
(4) The anaesthetized fish can be handled very easily.
57. Usually in the morning around 8 a.m., a first injection of 1 ml hypophysis extract is given to each anaesthetized female. It should correspond to an average dose of 0.3 mg dry hypophysis per kilogram of fish.
This is the preparatory injection of gonadotropin hormones which will result in the initial development of the dormant eggs: their nucleus will migrate near to the micropyle and their first hydration will take place.
The type of injection varies according to the presence or absence of scales on the body.
(A) For mirror carps, the injection is intramuscular. It is generally given in the muscles below the tip of the dorsal fin, at a 45' angle. To avoid losing some of the injected solution, a finger should be kept on the punctured skin which should be slowly massaged (1, 2).
(B) For scaly carps, the injection is intraperitoneal. It is generally given into the body cavity from behind the base of the abdominal fin.
58. After being injected, the fem