<title>Livestock & the environment: Finding a balance</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
This study has benefited from a large number of background documents prepared by several scientific institutes and not-affiliated individuals. Contributors to these background reports include Drs. D. Barton, M.A. Conroy, R. Crawshaw, All. Frost, M. Gill, C.R.C. Hendy, U. Kleih, C. O'Reilly, M. Phillips, L. Reynolds, D. Thomas, and R.T. Wilson, of the Natural Resources Institute of the UK; Drs. V. Bruzon, M. Carrière, P. D'Aquino, P. Lhoste, A. Le Masson, J.M. Pierre, and B. Toutain of CIRAD-EMVT of France; Drs. J.F.F.P. Bos, P.J. Brandjes, J. De Wit, L.W. Hulshoff Pol, J.C.M. Jansen, A.J. Nell, H.G. van der Meer, H. Van Keulen, L.A.H.M. Verheijen, P.T. Westra and D. Wiersema of the International Agricultural Center of the Netherlands; Dr. M. Gibbs of the ICF Incorporated of the United States; Drs. R. Conner, W. Hamilton, D. Sheehy, J. Simpson, and J. Stuth of the Grazingland Management Systems Inc. of the United States; Drs. S. Bauer, J.-P. Abresch, A. Schmidt, J. Steinbach,
and C. Willeke-Wetstein, of the University of Giessen, Germany; Carlos Sere; and E.P. Cunningham.
This report has been prepared by a Coordinating Group of the Steering Committee for this Study composed of Cees de Haan (Chair of the Steering Committee, World Bank), Henning Steinfeld (Implementing Agency for the Study, FAO) and Harvey Blackburn (USAID).
Background material was prepared by Clare Narrod (World Bank) and Takuo Sukigara (FAO) and editorial work was undertaken by Christine Ellefson-Tavella (FAO).
Detailed reviews were carried out by a specialized peer review group with Mike Young (CSIRO), C. Ford Runge (University of Minnesota) and Peter Oram (IFPRI, Washington D.C.), in a workshop held as an associated event of the 4th Annual World Bank Conference on Environmentally Sustainable Development in Washington D.C. on September 27 and 28, 1996. The Study was guided by the Steering Committee composed of the representatives of the sponsoring agencies, which, in addition to the Coordinating Group, included Flemming Winther Olsen (Denmark), Michael Dale and Amos Tincani (EU), Christophe Crépin and Laurent Bonneau (France), Hermann Grell and Annette von Lossau (GTZ, Germany), Henri Jorritsma (Netherlands), Guy Freeland (ODA, United Kingdom) Joyce Turk (USAID, USA), Mark Orlic (USEPA, USA) and Ahmed Sidahmed (IFAD).
However, the analysis and conclusions are those of the main authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the reviewers, the donors and the collaborating institutes.
Cover photograph by J. Van Acker, WFP from an Egyptian tomb painting.
All pictures supplied by FAO with the exception of the photographs which appear on pages 9, 41 and 49 which were taken by Michael Pickstock/WRENmedia.
Designed and produced by WRENmedia, Fressingfield, Eye, Suffolk, IP21 5SA, United Kingdom.
<section>2</section>
Preface: Livestock & the environment: Finding a balance
THIS REPORT is intended to contribute to solving one of today's most crucial agricultural dilemmas: how to find a balance between a fast growing global demand for food and the need to sustain the natural resource base of land, water, air and biological diversity. It is a direct response to the concern for food security, as expressed at the World Food Summit, and to the concern expressed for the environment through several international conventions, such as the International Convention on Biological Diversity, the Montreal Protocol on the emission of greenhouse gases and the Convention to Combat Desertification. It is also cast in the light of changes in the global trade environment, following the Uruguay Round Agreement, which may bring about significant changes in the patterns of trade in livestock and livestock products.
Fully aware of these concerns, a group of multi-lateral and bilateral donors and other organizations undertook to identify ways to help the livestock sector to satisfy future demands while at the same time preserving the natural resource base. These are the Commission of the European Union, DANIDA of Denmark, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Ministère de la Cooperation of France, BMZ through GTZ in Germany, the Directorate General of International Cooperation of the Netherlands, the Overseas Development Administration of the United Kingdom, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Agency for International Development of the United States, and the World Bank.
Focussing on livestock production and processing, which often have been associated with negative environmental effects, this report identifies how to alleviate the negative and enhance the positive impact of livestock on the environment and thereby contribute to the sustainable use of the natural resource base. This main report is directed at a technical audience in the domains of agricultural development, livestock production and the environment. In parallel, a shorter version will be published directed mainly at policy makers.
We sincerely hope that this document will contribute to finding practical solutions to these important global issues.
Abdoulaye Sawadogo
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR GENERAL
Agriculture Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
John Lewis
DIRECTOR
Office of Agriculture and Food Security
United States Agency for International Development
Alexander McCalla
DIRECTOR
Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
World Bank
<section>3</section>
Introduction
A changing world
The role of livestock in this changing world
The implications for global natural resources
A changing world
A changing world
ONE OF THE great challenges facing the world over the next decades is to preserve its natural resources while at the same time producing sufficient food to satisfy the demands of a growing human population. World population is expected to grow from 5.5 billion now to about 8 billion in the year 2020. Incomes also continue to grow, especially in the developing world and future projections estimate an annual per capita income growth ranging from about 3 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America to about 6 percent in Asia. Furthermore, there is a strong population move from the rural to the urban areas, again primarily in the developing world. By the year 2000, approximately 44 percent of the world's population is expected to reside in urban areas, up from 30 percent in 1980 (IFPRI, 1995). These trends will have immense consequences on the volume and composition of global food demand, especially in the developing world. Specialists of the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) estimate that the current demand of 1.7 billion tons of cereals and 206 million tons of meat, may rise by the year 2020 to 2.5 to 2.8 billion tons of cereals and at least 275 to 310 million tons of meat.
At the same time, alarming symptoms of deterioration of the resource base are being observed world-wide:
o Land degradation. Although there is substantial discussion on the extent of the problem, between 700 million (Oldeman et al., 1991) and three billion hectares of land (Dregne et al., 1991) are reported degraded because of human activities.
o Water scarcity and pollution. Twenty-two countries suffer severe water scarcity (less than 1000 cubic metres per capita per year) and a further eighteen countries have dangerously low levels (less than 2000 cubic metres per capita per year) (World Bank, 1992). In addition, much of the global fresh water supply is unsafe because of pathogens and industrial pollutants.
o Global warming. Global temperatures have risen by 0.3 °C to 0.6°C over the last century, together with a 26 percent increase in carbon dioxide and 115 percent rise in methane levels of the atmosphere (World Bank, 1992). A further increase of the global temperature by 1.8°C is foreseen over the next 35 years (International Panel on Climate Change, 1990).
o Diminishing biodiversity. About 160 bird and 100 mammalian species are known to have become extinct over the last three centuries and the rate of extinction is increasing (World Bank, 1992). The rate of losses in other animal and plant species may be higher. McNeely et al., (1990) estimates that more than 3,000 plant species and more than 500 animal species are in immediate danger of extinction.
The role of livestock in this changing world
The way livestock are kept and milk and meat is produced will be a key factor in the future health of the planet. Animal agriculture is one of the most important components of global agriculture and livestock is one of the main users of the natural resource base:
o livestock use 3.4 billion hectares of grazing land (Sere and Steinfeld, 1996) and the production from about one-quarter of the world's croplands. In total, livestock make use of more than two-thirds of the world's surface under agriculture, and one-third of the total global land area;
o livestock raising is the sole source of livelihood for at least 20 million pastoral families, and an important, often the main, source of income for at least 200 million smallholder farmer families in Asia, Africa and Latin America;
o livestock provide the power to cultivate at least 320 million hectares of land (FAO, 1994), or one-quarter of the total global cropped area. This would otherwise would have to be cultivated by hand tools resulting in harsh drudgery, especially for women, or by tractor power with an inevitable drain on foreign exchange;
o livestock provide the plant nutrients for large areas of cropland. For example, estimates carried out under this study (Jensen and de Wit, 1996) showed that, for the tropical irrigated areas, manure provides nutrients of an estimated value of US$ 800 million per year;
o finally, livestock are an important asset for investment and insurance for hundreds of millions of rural poor, in situations where banks are often too remote and the banking systems too unreliable for safeguarding any savings a smallholder might accumulate.
Table 1.1: Regional consumption levels of meat and milk (kg capita/year, 1990).
Source: FAO, 1995.
Table 1.2: Regional growth estimates (5) of demand for meat & cereals over the period 1990-2020.
Region
Meat
Cereal
World
Developed
Developing
Sub-Saharan
Latin America
West Asia & North Africa
Rest of Asia
Source: IFPRI, 1995.
The importance of livestock production can be expected to increase over the next decades. While, in the industrial world, demand for meat and milk will probably plateau, or even decline, in the developing world, income growth and urbanization will fuel a strong increase in demand. Current levels of meat and milk consumption in the developing world are only about one-fifth of those in the industrial world (Table 1.1). The surge in demand from present levels of 206 million tons to 275-310 million tons or more per year by 2020, will be especially strong in Asia and Africa where the demand for meat is expected to triple (Table 1.2).
The implications for global natural resources
The challenge will be to satisfy this substantial rise in demand for livestock products at a technological level which the natural resource base can sustain. The pressure will be heavy. Agriculture, including livestock production, already contributes, to a greater or lesser extent, to the degradation and erosion of these resources. Livestock production may specifically contribute to land degradation, the decline and pollution of water resources, the emission of greenhouse gases and the erosion of biodiversity. However, as this paper demonstrates, the negative role attributed to livestock is frequently a result of other pressures and distorted policies. These pressures and distortions should be addressed.
With good management, livestock production can also make a positive contribution to the natural resource base by enhancing soil quality, increasing plant and animal biodiversity and substituting for scarce, nonrenewable resources such as fossil fuels. Wherever possible these win-win (economically and environmentally attractive) scenarios should be promoted, and policies and technologies which do so should be identified. However, as the expected increase in demand referred to above is to be met, it is likely that negative effects of livestock production will continue to emerge. The challenge is thus to identify policies and technologies which mitigate any negative environmental impact but which, at the same time, satisfy the considerable demand for livestock products.
This document takes up the challenge. To maintain a strong focus, it will deal only with some of the socio-ethical issues related to production and livestock products as they affect the natural resource base (Box 1.1).
The document will first provide the analytical framework for this study, by briefly presenting a classification of the main production systems as the key building blocks for understanding livestock-environment interactions. The different potential growth patterns of these production systems will then be analyzed and their environmental impact summarized. Subsequently the organizing principles for the analysis will be described. The major part of this document will consist of an assessment of the main environmental challenges presented by each production system and by those factors which cut across production systems, such as the cultivation of livestock feeds, domestic animal resources, greenhouse gas emissions, and processing waste. Finally, the main conclusions will be presented, and major constraints to their application ("the policy void") described.
Box 1.1 Document framework.
THIS DOCUMENT focuses on livestock-environment interactions. In doing so, it deliberately omits a number of issues related to the subject from the discussion:
o Concern for animal welfare. Often strongly reflected in a parallel concern for the natural resource base, this issue involves, however, a completely different set of standards and mitigating measures and is therefore outside the scope of this paper.
o Indigenous knowledge. This is often regarded as an environmental resource. In this study, although it is used extensively in the search for more sustainable systems, especially in the marginal areas, it is not reviewed as an environmental resource in its own right. This is because the institutional and policy framework to preserve such knowledge was considered outside the scope of this paper.
o Consumption levels of animal products. For the majority of the global population, particularly in the developing countries, animal products are, and will remain, desired foods because of their taste and nutritional value. Respecting this, and the developing needs of the majority of countries, this study does not adopt an ego-centric approach but takes an anthropocentric approach to development and to the use and preservation of the environment. For the industrialized world, where consumption of meat and other livestock products causes medical problems such as cardiovascular diseases and high blood pressure, attention is given to education to reduce consumption as one option of mitigating the negative aspects of livestock production.
The implications for global natural resources
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: The framework
Livestock production systems and the main environmental challenges
The changing importance of different production systems
The conceptual models: Driving force state-response and induced innovation frameworks
Cows
LIVESTOCK RAISING is carried out in many forms, usually referred to as production systems or agro-ecosystems. Production systems evolve as a result of agro-ecological potential, the relative availability of land, labour and capital and the demand for livestock products. Many production systems are currently at a sustainable equilibrium, with livestock being produced in harmony with nature and in environmentally sound systems. However, over the last decades, several production systems have lost this equilibrium because of the pressure caused by growing human populations and increased demand for animal products. This chapter first provides an overview of the main production systems, the relative changes in the importance of these production systems and how these changes will affect the resource base in the future. It then presents the framework used to understand the nature and causes of livestock-natural resource interactions, and the policy changes and technology innovations
which can be used to influence these interactions.
Livestock production systems and the main environmental challenges
Based on the degree of integration with crops and its relation to land, the world's livestock sector has been classified in this study into three broad livestock production systems (Sere and Steinfeld, 1996), i.e. grazing, mixed farming and industrial systems. For land-based production forms, i.e. grazing and mixed farming systems, a sub-division is then required to allow for differences caused by agro-ecological conditions and the ways in which livestock affect the natural resource base. The broad categories are:
Grazing systems. These are systems based almost exclusively on livestock production, with little or no integration with crops. They are mainly based on native grassland. In terms of total production, grazing systems are of lesser importance because they supply only 9 percent of global meat production. Of this, three-quarters comes from Central and South America and of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Livestock interact in these systems with land, water and plant and animal biodiversity, especially wildlife. Agro-ecological conditions strongly define the nature and scope of livestock-environment interactions in grazing systems. The study therefore distinguishes between arid, semiarid and sub humid, humid and temperate grazing systems. In principle, grazing systems are closed systems, where the waste product (manure) is used within the system and does not present a burden on the environment. Resource degradation, especially of land and
biodiversity, is now developing in many of the world's grazing areas. For the most part this is occurring where, as a result of external pressures, traditionally well-managed common lands are becoming open access areas. In such open access situations, the interests of individual users conflict with those of the community, causing what economists call "market failures". In these "free for all" situations, degradation is most severe. On the other hand, the grazing systems also offer potential for biodiversity enhancement. Identifying institutions and incentives to correct the market failures and enhance the livestock-environment synergies is thus one of the biggest challenges in this system.
Mixed farming systems. In mixed farming systems, crops and livestock production are integrated on the same farm. Globally, mixed farming systems produce the largest share of total meat (54 percent), and milk (90 percent). Regionally, the mixed farming systems of the OECD countries and Asia provide by far the largest share of these products, but also in sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia and North Africa (WANA) and Central and South America, mixed farming is the main system for smallholder farmers. Resource use in mixed farming is often highly self-reliant as nutrients and energy flow from crops to livestock and back. By definition, such a closed system offers positive incentives to compensate for environmental effects ("internalize the environmental costs"), making them less damaging or more beneficial to natural resource base. Because of the completely different approaches needed to address the environmental effects of mixed farming, this study distinguishes between mixed
farming in the developing and in the industrial world. The main challenge is to identify those policies and technologies which allow these systems to grow while sustaining their environmental equilibrium.
Industrial systems. These systems cover industrial types of production and small-scale urban or pert-urban production in developing countries. Both monogastric (pig and poultry) and ruminant production systems exist. They provide 37 percent of the total global meat production. These systems are open both in physical and economic terms. They depend on outside supplies of feed, energy and other inputs. These systems are strongly market driven, making them less resilient to market upheavals than other systems. Because of their many interfaces with the outside world, these systems, if not properly controlled, offer many opportunities to neglect ("externalize") their environmental costs. The challenge is to identify the regulations and incentives which force the polluter to internalize the environmental costs, at a minimum cost to the consumer.
Global overlays. In addition to the site-specific and production system related impacts of livestock, such as land degradation in the arid zones, deforestation in the humid zones or livestock-wildlife interactions in the savannas, there are a number of effects which transcend the specificity of production systems. These are the global overlays, which include the environmental aspects of feed production, the emission of greenhouse gases, the erosion of wild and domestic genetic resources, and the management of waste. As in the industrial system, some of these impacts (for example, processing waste) can be traced to one polluter (called "point source pollution"), and can therefore be controlled with appropriate regulation at the source. The other impacts cannot easily be traced to one polluter ("non-source pollution"), and the challenge is then to find the incentives to encourage all producers to reduce these emissions.
The changing importance of different production systems
The rapid increase in demand for meat and milk over the next decades is likely to cause a dramatic shift in the relative importance of the main production systems in their contribution to global meat and milk supply:
o The growth potential for extensive grazing and roughage production is limited. In response to increased population pressure, good pasture land is being converted into cropland, leaving increasingly poorer land for grazing and mixed farming. Industrial production from pigs, poultry and beef is therefore likely to increase relative to production from grazing and mixed farming systems. Past trends and future projections (Table 1.3) clearly point in that direction. One relatively unknown factor in this discussion is the effect of global trade reform combined with a strongly growing demand for feed grains. The first projections of the effect of trade reforms (Alexandratos, 1995) show that cereal prices will increase more than milk and meat prices. This, combined with the increased demand for feed grains, will certainly lead to higher feed prices. Although this would seem to favour grass-based production, the limited growth potential of grazing and mixed farming systems,
combined with significant potential for improvements in feed conversion efficiency, will probably result in continued strong growth of the industrial system;
o Pork and broiler (poultry) meat production will increase, relative to beef production (Table 1.3). This is a direct result of the better feed efficiency of pigs and poultry;
o Livestock production is therefore likely to become more crop-based. Furthermore, as it is generally less expensive to transport and store grain than the corresponding amount of meat, intensive livestock production will move nearer to urban centres;
o Growth will be mainly in Asia and Africa (Table 1.2). In Asia growth will be very fast as meat demand almost triples till the year 2020;
o For various reasons, including higher energy prices and less stringent pollution controls, livestock production in the industrial world is likely to move to warmer areas. For example, over the last decade, pig and poultry production has grown faster in Mediterranean countries than in northern Europe, and in the southern rather than the northern United States of America;
o In the developing world, aided by the recent availability of better disease control technologies, there has been a strong shift in production from the arid zones and the highlands to the more humid zones. For example, over the last two decades, millions of cattle were moved into the more humid savannas in Africa, Latin America and India.
Table 1.3: Past and expected growth of different types of meat.
Product
World Annual Growth Rate (%) over 1983-1993
Developing World Total Growth (%) over 1990-2020
Developed World Total Growth (%) over 1990-2020
Beef
Pork
Poultry meat
Source: Sere and Steinfeld, 1996 and IFPRI, 1995
These changes will have a major effect on the nature and degree of the livestock-environment interactions. Implications are:
o a shift from relatively closed systems, in which its waste products are being used within the system, to a more open system in which its waste products are not returned; and
o a move from systems with good opportunities for synergies and win-win situations, such as the conservation and use of indigenous livestock breeds, nutrient recycling and livestock-wild life integration, to systems where the opportunities for such win-win situations are much more limited.
The conceptual models: Driving force state-response and induced innovation frameworks
Driving forces
State
Societal response: Technology and policy options
Induced innovation
Two interlinked frameworks are used as the central organizing concepts for this study. The Driving Force-State-Response (DSR) framework is based on the environmental impact assessment model developed by the OECD (1996). This model consists of three major components which are described below: Driving forces, state and societal response, as detailed below and in Annex 2.
The Induced Innovation model holds that, over time, technological innovations and institutional changes are guided so as to make the most of abundant resources and economize on scarce resources. The model is a logical sequence to DSR, as the societal response (through policy changes) changes the relative abundance of the resources. For example, the introduction of a grazing fee in communally-owned rangelands, will increase the price of land and feed, and will therefore lead to more efficient feed use (earlier off-take, greater use of byproducts). More examples will be given in the following chapters.
Driving forces
Driving forces cause changes to the natural resource base (OECD, 1996). In the case of livestock production, this can be a direct (or on-site) force such as increasing the number of grazing animals which may lead to trampling, depletion and pollution of water, the emission of greenhouse gases, and the loss of plant and animal genetic resources. Livestock production can also have an indirect (or off-site) force such as the expansion and intensification of cropland to satisfy the increasing demand for feed concentrates and this, in turn, may lead to erosion and pollution. A beneficial force may be the use of organic manure for fertilizer, or the use of livestock for traction, thereby reducing consumption of nonrenewable resources.
While it is important to measure the impact of these forces, it is even more important to understand the underlying causes or the 'driving forces' themselves. Some of the causes are fundamental and inherent in the structure of a society, and go beyond the traditional domain of livestock policy (Young, 1996). Demographic pressure and food consumption habits clearly fall into this category. Other forces are more directly related to livestock production and are easier to change. Incentive policies for inputs used in livestock production (feed, water, energy), pricing of meat and milk and infrastructure development for livestock, fall into this category. They are called amendable forces. For example, infrastructure investments, credit and land tenure policies are important forces causing livestock pressure on tropical forests, and the differential tariffs for cassava in the European Union (KU) are significantly contributing to nutrient loading of soil and water in the
Netherlands and northern Germany through increased intensive pig production. An analysis of the underlying pressures is thus of critical importance in understanding changes in the natural resource base.
State
The state of the natural resource base refers to the changes in environmental conditions that may arise from various driving forces. It is, in essence, an inventory of the existing condition of land, water, air and biodiversity. Pressures described in the previous section affect the state. The substantial void in objective and precise assessments of the current state of the resource ecosystem in which it is set. It is essential that, as the livestock sector grows and develops, adequate base, as affected by livestock use, is one of the main reasons for the conjecture which surrounds the livestock-environment debate. This lack of accurate data has contributed to some costly investment blunders in international development aid. For example, the overestimation of the degree of land degradation in the arid areas, has led to excessive investments in "desertification control", at the expense of the much more serious, but under-estimated, land degradation in semi-arid and sub-humid
areas.
Box 1.2 Impact assessment.
Much of the controversy about the impact of livestock on the environment is due to a lack of quantitative information to describe not only the livestock production system but also the ecosystem in which it is set. It is essential that, as the livestock sector grows and develops, adequate measurements are taken over time. Environmental impact assessments for livestock development can show if livestock are improving or degrading the environment. In this respect impact assessment should provide users not only with a picture of the current status but also a mechanism to project future trends. The economic cost of impact assessments are of concern to some decision makers. Although start-up costs may be high these costs reduce over time and costs will continue to decrease as more governments and research organizations develop and use impact assessment. Furthermore, as global databases are built, allowing a number of users to share data, the costs will reduce even further.
Selection of environmental impact indicators is an important and evolving process. It is essential that indicators have a certain universality in meaning and application. Furthermore, they must have the ability to be extrapolated directly or indirectly to larger geographic areas, rather than be specific to the site of data collection. Because indicator selection is an evolving process it will be some time before the most useful parameters are identified. In Annex 3 various indicators which can be used to measure the interaction between livestock and the environment are presented. At present they should be considered as a starting place from which a robust set of indicators can eventually be developed.
The aggregate environmental pressure of industrial production systems is probably over estimated in the public perception, especially if some of the positive indirect impacts (for example, reducing pressure on more fragile environments) are taken into account. However, the public perception of the excessive environmental pressure exerted by the industrial system has made this system the "scapegoat" of many environmentalists and has directed investment away from this system. Some of the issues related to the environmental assessment of livestock production systems are presented in Box 1.2 and Annex 3, while more detailed information is provided in Bauer et al., (1995).
Societal response: Technology and policy options
Response refers to the reaction to actual and perceived changes in the environment. This can be through changes in farmer behaviour, i.e., through changes in input use and farm management practices and changes in food consumption patterns by consumers (OECD, 1996). Above all, these changes can be brought about through government action with the following instruments (Young, 1996):
o Education and motivation are essential to any environmental package. They are most appropriate for mobilizing public opinion and bringing about pressure on degraders. For example, pressure for change is more likely to be applied if public opinion is informed of the health problems associated with the increased nitrate levels which result from excessive manure production;
o Financial policies are more effective when costs external to the production system have to be reduced. They incl