<title>Livestock &amp; the Environment - Meeting the challenge. Livestock & the Environment : Meeting the challenge</title>
<section>1</section>
Livestock & the environment
Demand for meat, milk and meat is soaring, and the world's livestock sector is growing at an unprecedented rate. This puts great pressure on the global natural resource base and, as demand continues to soar. ways must be found by which livestock production can be increased without damaging the environment in which that production has to take place. Moreover, for hundreds of millions of small, poor farmers, animal draught power and nutrient recycling through manure compensates for unattainable access to tractors and fertilizer. Livestock are often also the only capital reserve of farming households, to be sold when times are hard. Livestock, in one way or another, are critical to sustaining poor farmers. Here it is upon the many environmental benefits of keeping livestock that policies must be based. Livestock policies must, in future, ensure that the environment is not jeopardized. We ignore at our peril the interaction between livestock and the world in which we live, its
natural resources and the environment on which we depend for our survival.
Livestock provide the draught power to cultivate more than one quarter of the world's arable land. 1
Livestock provide the draught power to cultivate more than one quarter of the world's arable land. 2
The consumption of livestock products is growing even faster than the increase in world population. Rising affluence, particularly in the developing countries where average real incomes have doubled since the early 60's, means that more people can afford the high-value protein that livestock products offer. Demand is soaring because there are more people with more disposable income to spend on the food they desire and, in ever greater numbers, those people are living in towns and cities. Over 80 percent of the world's population growth occurs in the cities of the developing countries, and urban populations consume more animal products than those based in rural areas.
One-fifth of the world's arable land is used for growing cereals for livestock feed.
Where animal concentrations are high, waste poses an enormous environmental hazard.
What effect is this demand for meat, milk and eggs going to have on the environment? The best way to judge this is to see what is happening now, both good and bad, and see what action could be taken to encourage extra productivity in ways that limit the had effects and enhance the good. What is certain is that the option that was available in the past, to expand the land area used for livestock to meet increased demand, is, in most situations, no longer available. Land and other resources are finite and, unless they are safeguarded, the hope of being able to increase livestock production, and thereby to satisfy the aspirations of billions of people, will fade.
<section>2</section>
Some facts
About one-quarter of the world's total land area is used for grazing livestock. In addition, about one fifth of the world's arable land is used for growing cereals for livestock feed. Livestock production is the world's largest land user and may soon be its most important agricultural activity in terms of economic output. Livestock produce thirteen billion tons of waste each year. A large part of this is recycled but, where animal concentrations are high, waste poses an environmental hazard. Water, already scarce in many parts of the world, can he greatly affected by livestock production. Water is required not only for animals' drinking but to grow feed crops and for waste disposal. Pollution of land and water is another concern as is the impact by livestock, directly or indirectly, on biodiversity. Greenhouse gases, of which about 5-10 percent is produced by livestock and livestock waste, contribute to global warming. The interaction between livestock and the environment
cannot be ignored but mythical misrepresentations must he overturned in favour of reality.
If, as a result of livestock production, forests are cut down, rivers become polluted or soil becomes overloaded with nitrates, it is not the animals who are the culprits. Livestock do not destroy the environment, people do. Ignorance, indifference and policies which misguide resource use are responsible for environmental degradation.
Individual livestock owners, particularly in developing countries, often have very few options. It is up to policy makers to ensure that these options are environmentally sound. This overview provides examples where livestock and environment interactions are particularly critical, i.e. environmental "hotspots".
<section>3</section>
Livestock on grazing lands
About 60 percent of the world's agricultural land is grazing land, supporting about 360 million cattle and over 600 million sheep and goats. Grazing animals supply about 10 percent of the world's production of beef and about 30 percent of the world's production of sheep and goat meat. For an estimated 100 million people in arid areas, and probably a similar number in other zones, grazing livestock is the only possible source of livelihood.
Arid rangelands are a dynamic and highly resilient ecosystem provided that the number of people and animals which the land supports remains in balance with their environment.
The great advantage of grazing livestock is that they convert to a useful product resources which would otherwise be wasted. Indeed, grazing animals can improve the diversity of grasses by dispersing seeds with their hooves and in their manure. By trampling the soil they also break up the crust and stimulate the growth of grass. Arid rangelands are a dynamic and highly resilient ecosystem provided that the number of people and animals which the land supports remains in balance with their environment. Indeed, the ability to recover after drought is one of the main indicators of long term environmental and social sustainability of arid grazing systems.
HOTSPOT: OVERGRAZING AND DEGRADATION. Many of the world's grazing areas are threatened with degradation, especially in the semi-arid and sub-humid zones. As a result of population pressure, and policies which favour cropping, much of the best pasture is being turned over to crops, to which it is not well suited. When, after a few years, the land is exhausted and returned to fallow, it does not revert to good pasture. Furthermore, it is only by herding animals between grazing lands that pastoralists make best use of the resources. Not only is the area of grazing reduced by increased cropping but moving between grazing lands may also be restricted or even prevented. This means that animals are kept for too long in one place and the land becomes degraded.
Policies which have been introduced for social or economic reasons, but whose environmental impact has either been ignored or not recognized, are indirectly degrading the environment:
o Fuel and fertilizer subsidies, especially in the Middle East and North Africa, have often encouraged the conversion of pasture to marginal cropping land.
o Development of water points often opens up arid lands and upsets the ecosystem by encouraging higher animal and human population densities.
o Bringing in feed grains in times of drought, in order to sustain livestock density at the very time when it should be reduced to allow the vegetation to recover, may be harmful in the longer term.
o Many countries have pursued a policy of attempting to settle pastoralists. Even now, as the state farms of the Middle East and Central Asia are being privatized, pastoralists are being prevented from following their traditional way of life.
o Land ownership policies, which prevent livestock farmers from owning the land they use, can be very damaging. Farmers are naturally unwilling to improve land unless they are sure that they can reap the benefits. Customary land use practices have been replaced by "free for all" access to communal lands. This has overturned what once was a highly regulated system that helped to ensure a sustainable balance between livestock and the environment.
Sugarcane can be used as an alternative to cereals for animal feed. Here draught animals are being used to crush the canes. The juice can be fed to pigs and the tops can be given to ruminants. Sugarcane can be grown in the humid and sub-humid tropics where feed cereals may be in short supply and, because it is a perennial, it has the further advantage of reducing soil erosion.
What could be done:
Those people who are most closely involved in the use of land must have more say and more responsibility in its management. This would encourage stewardship of natural resources and regulate access.
Not only is the area of grazing reduced by increased cropping but access between grazing lands may also be restricted or even prevented.
This needs normally to be followed by another series of policy or institutional measures, such as:
o increasing the cost of rangeland grazing. Although difficult to achieve, especially on communal lands, this would encourage owners to sell their animals at a younger age than they would have been sold had it been possible to keep them for longer at little extra cost. In a similar vein, charging realistic prices for water and animal health services would also encourage quicker turnover.
o introducing, where appropriate, the right to own land.
HOTSPOT: DEFORESTATION. Since 1950, 200 million hectares of rainforest and its associated biodiversity has been lost, with livestock apparently being an important cause, especially in Latin America. But again the causes are complex and are often more the results of policy distortions than livestock production.
o In many countries, before land can be registered to an owner, it must be shown to be under agricultural use.
o Subsidized credit and other tax advantages favoured ranch development.
o Land speculation linked to road construction and government finance colonization schemes.
Land speculation linked to road construction and government-financed incentives, has been the main reason for deforestation.
What could be done:
Many of these inappropriate incentives have now been removed. Land use is now governed by the demand for food of a growing population, with ranching being introduced after soil fertility is depleted by crops. Intensification, through a combination of fiscal incentives (land taxation) and research and extension will be the main avenue to reduce deforestation.
HOTSPOT: WILDLIFE AND LIVESTOCK INTERACTION. Often, in particular in Africa, livestock and wildlife are grazing the same lands, and a large part of wildlife is living outside the protected areas. Traditionally, attitudes towards the protection of wild animals has been unimaginative, and the benefits of wildlife, through tourism or trophy hunting, have not been shared with the local populations that have had to cope with the damage. This is in the form of many important diseases transmitted by wildlife (such as Foot-and-Mouth Disease, rinderpest, trypanosomiasis and tick-borne diseases), livestock loss to predators and damage to crops.
What could be done:
Making greater efforts to encourage local management of wildlife, in combination with livestock production, is already raising the income of pastoralists and ranchers as well as resulting in greater biodiversity. Livestock-wildlife combinations do not usually mean that livestock numbers must be greatly reduced. In many cases, a reduction of only 20 percent of the cattle stocking rate is enough to create a niche for most wildlife species to prosper. This is a classic example of how both livestock owners and the environment can benefit.
<section>4</section>
Livestock in crop land
Most farming in the world is carried out as mixed crop-livestock farming, covering about 2.5 billion hectares of land. Important not only for meat, milk and hides, livestock provide the draught power to cultivate more than one-quarter of the world's arable land. Throughout the world, animal numbers are growing but it is in the humid and sub-humid regions that growth is most rapid. Irrigated mixed farming systems, especially in the humid regions of Asia, have shown the greatest increase in productivity.
In many cases, a reduction of only 20 percent of the cattle stocking rate is enough to create the niche for most wildlife species to prosper.
Mixed farming offers the best opportunity for intensifying agricultural production without causing environmental harm. Crop residues feed the animals and the animals' manure fertilizes the soil. By keeping livestock, arable farmers are able to add value to low value or surplus food, they can use labour more efficiently and diversify risk. By adding manure to the herds, not only are nutrients recycled but the improved soil structure helps water to infiltrate rather than run off and this in turn reduces soil erosion. Less often recognized is the benefit to biodiversity of more varied land use. Fodder trees, grass strips and other landscape features provide a diversity of habitats for many kinds of wildlife including micro-fauna and flora.
HOTSPOT: UPSETTING THE BALANCE BETWEEN CROPS AND LIVESTOCK. The delicate balance between crops and livestock can be easily upset, leading to land degradation. In many highland areas of the tropics, high human population densities have been sustained by complex mixed farming systems. As each generation needs land, farm sizes become smaller and smaller until a point is reached when the system collapses. Livestock, often large ruminants, can no longer be maintained on the farm, thus depriving the farming household of draught power and the soil of recycled nutrients. Furthermore, as natural resources become ever more degraded, coupled with increasing poverty, human tensions develop.
Livestock may provide the only regular source of income, especially for the poor on marginal land.
What could be done:
The way forward here is to increase access to outside inputs, such as animal feed and fertilizer, to maintain the nutrient balance.
In other areas, policies may favour crop production and thereby discourage integration of crops and livestock:
o Many countries, for example in the Near East, impose high import duties to protect domestic cereal production but this policy has encouraged farmers to grow crops on marginal land that had previously been used for livestock grazing.
o Cheap, subsidized inorganic fertilizer and fuel have placed farm manure and animal traction at a disadvantage and cheap feed has favoured the development of industrial forms of livestock production, supplanting mixed farming as has happened in rapidly growing Southeast and East Asia. Mixed farming makes more efficient use of natural resources and any policies which discourage mixed farming should therefore be looked at carefully.
With the removal of subsidies on feed, fertilizer and mechanization, better use would be made of home-grown feed, animal draught and manure. Even in developed countries, where mixed farming is more intensive and therefore more likely to be suffering from a surplus than a shortage of nutrients, removal of subsidies on feed and fertilizer would help to alleviate damage to the environment.
But for the most part, mixed farming has been the means by which, in the past, agricultural productivity has been raised and continues to offer the best hope for the future. However, with meat production from the mixed system growing at little more than 2 percent per year globally over the last 15 years, and overall demand at more than 4 percent, it has not been able fully to meet demand and there has been an ever increasing gap which has been filled by industrial livestock production of pork and chicken, in particular.
Straw from cereals grown on-farm can be fed directly to animals or treated with urea to improve the nutritional quality.
In the developed countries mixed farming is, with some notable exceptions such as organic farming, much more intensive and this has led to problems associated with manure management and pollution.
Specialized, commercial enterprises, which are more intensive in nature but based in rural areas rather than concentrated in a pert-urban setting, would help stimulate rural development by providing employment in both the primary and secondary agro-processing industries. The challenge will be to achieve higher production through intensification rather than through concentration - a subtle difference but one which has a profound impact upon the environment. Integration should then be sought at the watershed rather than at on-farm level.
Annual growth of meat production from different forms of production.
Mixed farming probably offers the best opportunity for intensifying production without causing environmental harm.
<section>5</section>
Industrial livestock production
Industrial production of pork, poultry, beef and mutton is growing faster than any other system. From 37 percent of world meat production in 1991-3 to 43 percent in 1996, more than half the world's pork and poultry, one-tenth of its beef and mutton and more than two-thirds of its egg supply have come from industrial production. As might be anticipated, the developed countries dominate the intensive pig and poultry industries.
HOTSPOT: SOIL AND WATER POLLUTION BECAUSE OF EXCESS NUTRIENTS. Industrial production can create enormous pollution problems because it brings in large quantities of nutrients in the form of concentrate feed and then has to dispose of the manure to nearby land which quickly becomes saturated. As a result, land and groundwater are polluted.
Industrial production of pork, poultry, beef and mutton is growing faster than grazing and mixed farming.
Key forces encouraging this trend are poor infrastructure and weak regulations. Where roads are inadequate and transport costs high, industrial units are usually based close to urban dfghjkl;. This has happened in Asia, for example, where industrial livestock production has developed very quickly and where a weak regulatory structure compounds the risks to human health, especially those associated with inadequately regulated slaughterhouses and processing industries.
What could be done:
The challenge is to obtain higher efficiencies without concentrating livestock in certain areas. With improvements in transport and storage it will be possible to produce livestock products closer to feed production, allowing also for the waste not only to be absorbed, hut to return the nutrients that were taken away. While economic realities will force livestock production to specialize in order to make use of efficient technologies, livestock production needs to be brought back to rural areas. Clearly, urban livestock production which we see mushrooming, particularly in the fast developing countries, is not sustainable in the long run. Institutional and infrastructure development, together with a higher appreciation of environmental values vis-à-vis food commodities, will mean that agriculture in the future will look like a large mixed farm composed of specialized entreprises.
For millions of smallholder farmers, animal draught power and nutrient recycling through manure compensate for lack of access to tractors and fertilizer.
The challenge will be to achieve higher production through intensification rather than through concentration.
<section>6</section>
Wider considerations
GREENHOUSE GASES: Livestock and livestock waste produce gases. Some are local, such as ammonia, whereas others, such as carhop-dioxide, methane and nitrous oxides, affect the world's atmosphere by contributing to global warming. Livestock's contribution to that effect can he estimated at between 5 and 10 percent.
Biogas in China
In China more than 5.3 million rural biogas systems are in place, producing 1.25 million m^3 annually. Biogas is used for household heating and cooking, poultry hatching, tea drying, grain and fruit storage. The slurry is used for fertilizer, fish farming and for feeding pigs which show good result in the semi-intensive production system.
Limiting the emission of greenhouse gases, particularly nitrous oxides and methane, is a major concern hut technical solutions arc available. For example, methane can be recovered from lagoons and used directly as fuel or to generate electricity. The trend to intensive production of pigs and poultry has changed the ratio of monogastrics to ruminants. This has helped to keen livestock emissions of greenhouse gases steady because, unlike ruminants, pigs and poultry do not emit significant amounts of methane as part of the digestion as ruminants do. Virtually all efforts that improve animal productivity will reduce methane emissions.
Thus, livestock emissions are stagnating despite a strong overall increase in production. The challenge will be to ensure that the rapid expansion of intensive production in developing countries does not result in damaging pollution. As the West has found to its cost, once present this is very difficult to deal with.
Methane can be recovered and used directly as fuel or to generate electricity. 1
Methane can be recovered and used directly as fuel or to generate electricity. 2
FEED PRODUCTION: Production of animal feed affects land use through deforestation and change of habitats. There are also direct effects of cropping on soils, water and air, and indirect effects as a result of the production and use of inputs and machinery. More important, however, is the fact that feed production areas are not directly linked with livestock feed use, leading to a transfer of nutrients from feed producing areas to areas of high livestock concentration. The result is infertile soil in farmers' fields and pollution problems for livestock producers.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL DIVERSITY: Industrial livestock production uses a very limited range of animal breeds and this has led to the extinction of some local livestock breeds and the genetic erosion of others. These local breeds sometimes have a specific genetically determined capacity to cope with the climatic, nutritional and disease challenges in a given environment. These traits may be lost for future generations. There are currently 600 breeds at risk of extinction, representing about 20 percent of the total global livestock breeds. The trend of breed erosion has been fostered by development policies favouring exotic breed (subsidized imports and multiplication of exotic genetic material) and technologies (subsidized mechanization, replacing traditional draught animals).
<section>7</section>
Conclusions
The interactions between livestock and the environment are many and complex - a challenge for policy makers who have social and economic factors to consider which are likely to be far more pressing and politically sensitive. Putting the environment into the forefront does not mean that only environmental objectives count. On the contrary, environmental goals can only be effectively tackled if accompanied by sound economic policies.
Measures that tackle only the superficial effects of environmental damage will never he as effective as a policy which attacks the underlying causes. Those causes are often deeply entrenched in what has become an almost universal fact: those who gain benefits from over-exploitation and degradation of the environment have not paid the full cost. Those who preserve natural resources, or who pay the cost of conservation, gain few of the benefits. How can this he reversed? By making sure that the price of livestock products has not been artificially subsidized by ignoring the environmental costs incurred in its production. This difficult task will fall to policy makers who, by a combination of reducing subsidies and imposing taxes and regulations, will have to encourage the use of environmentally-friendly livestock production technologies. They will be confronted by powerful interest lobbies, not least consumers who may well be reluctant to pay more for animal products in the
shops in order to protect an environment in which they take little interest. And strategies might differ according to the stage of development of a country. Lower income countries, for whom increased food production is the over-riding priority, cannot be expected to impose regulations and tax in a way that richer countries could afford. Still, with better information, the public is more likely to be sympathetic to environmental concerns.
The technological opportunities, and therefore the scope, for increasing livestock production, while simultaneously reducing the use of natural resources per unit of product, is enormous. What is required is a willingness to safeguard the natural resource base, and then introduce the necessary policies and institutions which will encourage the use of those technologies.
The scope for increasing livestock production, while simultaneously reducing the use of natural resources per unit of product, is enormous.
<section>8</section>
What we will do...
This brochure is based on a multi-donor study on livestock-environment interactions, conducted between 1994 and 1996. Its results were summarized in two publications released in 1997. Subsequently, there was a consultation on livestock-environment interactions conducted by ILRI using electronic means, face-to-face interviews and round table discussions involving more than 1,000 participants in over 80 countries worldwide. In June 1997, an International Conference was held in the Netherlands where a first attempt was made to formulate recommendations for policy making and to design technology at regional and production levels. These consultations considerably broadened the debate and brought it closer to the ground.
This multi-donor initiative on livestock and the environment realizes that much more is needed to turn a recognition of the issues into common practice. It is therefore launching a number of activities, notably:
o information gathering and exchange on livestock-environment interactions, focusing on the environmental hotspots. This will be done using electronic communication and will gradually evolve to become a Virtual Centre for Research and Development;
o the provision of decision support on livestock-environment issues through the development of menus of policies and technology options, and the methodology to select the most appropriate options for each local situation. This will help livestock-environment issues to be systematically incorporated in local and national plans, and into bilateral and international development programmes and projects.
Improved management of the world's natural resources is essential if they are to continue to provide the basis for life support and human well-being. Only with improved management can the dual objectives of sustainable agricultural production be fulfilled - to feed the world's growing population while sustaining its natural resource base. Livestock production is the largest land user and is about to become the most important agricultural activity in terms of economic output. Left to uncontrolled growth, not only would the environment suffer but human welfare would also be compromised. However, this is unlikely to happen. The opportunities to tap the immense development potential that livestock offer, while nevertheless minimizing environmental damage are many. Awareness, political will and readiness to act are growing among all those involved and should ensure that the problems are no longer denied but effectively tackled. We hope that this continuing initiative will be a
useful contribution to this endeavour.
What we will do...
Environmental "HOTSPOTS" 1
Environmental "HOTSPOTS" 2
The designation employed and the presentation of material in this publications do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Sponsors:
Commission of the European Communities
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Development Research Centre (Canada)
World Bank
and the governments of:
Denmark:
International Development Agency
France:
Ministère de la Coopération
Germany:
BMZ, German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation via GTZ, (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit)
Netherlands:
Directorate General of International Cooperation
United Kingdom:
Overseas Development Administration
United States:
Environmental Protection Agency and the Agency for International Development
